                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                     
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)     
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-05190
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Greg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns regarding foreign influence and foreign
preference. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of Case
On September 7, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOD adjudicators could not
make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security
clearance. DOD recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether
a security  clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
2
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September
1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 26, 2012, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on November 26, 2012. The case was
scheduled for hearing on December 5, 2012. A hearing was held as scheduled. At
hearing, the Government's case consisted of two exhibits (GEs 1-2); Applicant relied on
two witnesses (including himself) and no exhibits (AEs). The transcript (Tr.) was
received December 13, 2012.  
Besides its two exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of ten
documents: Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial
Espionage 2009-2011, Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive (October
2011); Unclassified Statement for the Record on the Worldwide Threat Assessment of
the US Intelligence Community for the House Select Comm. on Intelligence (February
2012); Press Release, Ten Alleged Secret Agents Arrested in the United States, U.S.
Department of Justice (June 2010); Press Release, Ten Russian Agents Plead Guilty
and are to be Removed from the United States, U.S. Department of Justice (July 2010);
Press Release, Imprisoned Spy Sentenced to 8 More Years Incarceration for
Conspiracy to Act as an Agent of the Russian Government and Money Laundering, U.S.
Attorneys Office, District of Oregon (January 2011); Annual Threat Assessment before
the Senate Armed Services Committee, Defense Intelligence Agency (March 2009);
Unclassified Statement for the Record on Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S.
Intelligence Community for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Director of
National Intelligence (February 2012); Worldwide Threat Assessment, Statement before
the Committee on Armed Services of U.S. Senate, Director of Defense Intelligence
Agency (March 2011); Background Note: Russia, U.S. Department of State (March
2012);  2011 Human rights Report-Russia, U.S. Department of State (May 2012). 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007).
Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are well
known.  See Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good
cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the above-named
background reports addressing the geopolitical situation in Russia and other security
concerns. Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves, consistent
with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.  This notice did not foreclose Applicant
from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the reports
addressing Russia’s current status.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly has parents and a grandfather who are
citizens and residents of Russia. Under Guideline C, Applicant allegedly exercised dual
citizenship with Russia by continuing to maintain and renew valid Russian international
and internal passports after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen.
3
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations. He explained
that his Russian internal passport is a form of identification (ID) in Russia. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 32-year-old avionics technician of a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.  
 
Background
Applicant was born and raised in Russia. He immigrated to the United States in
1998 to pursue technical training, and he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in
November 2010. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 42-44) Before he could apply for U.S. citizenship, he
was required to hold a green card for at least five years. (Tr. 44, 46-47) He obtained his
green card in 2006 and held it for five years before he applied for U.S. citizenship. (Tr.
47-48) Applicant received a U.S. passport in the same month he received his certificate
of naturalization. (GE 1; Tr. 47, 50)
Applicant completed two years at a local community college and earned an
associate of arts degree in December 2003. (GE 1) He earned additional state
university credits from an accredited university in 2007. (GE 1; Tr. 45) He has never
served in the military of the United States and has no foreign military experience. (GE 1)
In July 2011, Applicant became employed as a field engineer with his current
employer and has worked continuously with this firm since his starting date. (GE 2; Tr.
50) He married his first spouse in January 2003 and divorced her in August 2007. (GEs
1 and 2; Tr. 45-46) He has no children from this marriage. Applicant married his current
wife in August 2008 and has no children from this marriage. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 53) His
current wife was born and raised in the Philippines and is a naturalized U.S. citizen.
(GE 2; Tr.  70)
After becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant continued to hold Russian citizenship
and maintain valid Russian passports, both international and internal passports. (GE 2;
Tr. 51-52) Applicant and his wife traveled to Russia in August 2009 (using their
respective Russian and U.S. passports) to visit his family and tour local sites. (GE 2; Tr.
53-54, 71) Now that Applicant is a U.S. citizen, he can travel to Russia on his U.S.
passport. Still, he continues to hold both his U.S. and Russian passports and needs his
Russian passports to travel to Russia without the need of a visa. (Tr. 62)
To date, Applicant has not renounced his Russian citizenship, because to do so
would require his travel to Russia and his completion of a lengthy process. (GE 2; Tr.
60-62) Further, to renounce his Russian citizenship and surrender his Russian
passports could endanger his parents and grandfather. (Tr. 61-62, 80-81) 
4
Applicant renewed his internal Russian passport in August 2009. (GE 2) An
internal passport is required for travel within Russia and serves as a form of ID. (Tr. 54-
58) It is not required to enter and exit Russia. (Tr. 55-56) He keeps his internal Russian
passport with his mother for his personal use should he travel to Russia. (Tr. 55)
Applicant obtained a Russian international passport in 1998 in anticipation of his
immigration to the United States. (GE 2) He renewed it in October 2006 and again in
November 2011. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 50-5). Passport renewal is required of all Russian
citizens. (Tr. 55-57, 60) Applicant expressed a willingness to surrender his Russian
passports to his facility security officer (FSO) as a condition to his obtaining a security
clearance. (Tr. 59-60) However, he is not willing to surrender them permanently and
would expect to have them returned to him should he encounter a family emergency in
Russia. (Tr. 59-60)
Applicant has no connections with any agents of the Russian government. (Tr. 40)
He has no interest in Russian or U.S. politics. However, he did have limited contact with
the Russian consulate of a major U.S. city in 2009 when he applied for a visa for his wife
to accompany him to Russia to see his family. (GE 2) And he had contact with the same
consulate in August 2011 to initiate the process of renewing his Russian international
passport.  (GE 2; Tr. 51-52) 
Family and personal interests 
Applicant has immediate family members who reside in Russia. His mother,
father, and grandfather are all citizens and residents of Russia. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 61-62,
80-8) Applicant desires to retain his Russian citizenship and passports out of the respect
he holds for his family as well as for travel convenience. (Tr.62-63, 73-85) He
communicates frequently with his mother (weekly or biweekly) and not at all with his
father, who is separated from his mother. (Tr. 64-66) His mother works for a children’s
health clinic. (Tr. 65) He maintains annual contact with his grandfather. (Tr. 66) Both his
father and grandfather served in the Russian military. (Tr. 66-67) Applicant has no
contacts with old friends who served in Russia’s military service.  
Applicant has no property interests or inheritance expectancies in Russia. (Tr. 63-
64) By contrast, he owns a home in the United States, which he purchased in 2008. (Tr.
68) He has a mortgage on the home of approximately $115,000. (Tr. 69) He has a 401(k)
retirement account worth approximately $40,000. (Tr. 68) And he maintains a U.S.
checking account. (Tr. 70) Applicant is registered with the Selective Service and is willing
to take up arms for the United States wherever the need and whoever the adversary
might be. (Tr. 72)
Russian background information 
The Russian Federation is a vast and diverse nation that is composed of 21
republics and covers almost twice the area of the United States. (Background Note:
Russia, supra, at 2-3) It has a population base of 143 million people, which is
multinational in scope and encompasses more than 100 ethnic groups. (id.) 
5
Historical antecedents
Russia enjoyed its first burst of modernization and European influence under
Peter the Great’s reign (1689-1725) Peter created Western-style military forces,
reformed government institutions, and established the beginning of an enlightened
education system. (Background Note: Russia, supra, at 5) Catherine the Great continued
Peter’s expansionist policies and established Russia as a formidable European power.
She is credited with consolidating political power during her reign (1762-1796).  Known
for her interest in art and literature, her reign became known as a period of
enlightenment in Russian culture. (id.) 
By the turn of the 19  century, the reigns of the Alexanders had left Russia inth
imperial decline. (Background Note: Russia, supra, at 5-6) The Russian revolution of
1905 forced Tsar Nicholas II (1894-1917) to approve a constitution and introduce limited
democratic reforms. (id., at 6) 
The lingering after effects of WW I, combined with internal pressures, sparked the
March 2017 uprising that led to Tzar Nicholas II’s abdication of the throne and
subsequent murders of him and his family. ((Background Note: Russia, supra, at 6-7)
The Bolshevik revolution (led by Vladimer Lenin) that ensued ended with the Bolshevik’s
seizure of control of Russia in November 1917 and ushered in civil war in 1918 between
Lenin’s Red Army and the various White forces. (id., at 6) With the Bolshevik’s
empowerment came Russia’s assimilation of its neighboring Baltic states and the
formation of the USSR in 1922. (id.) 
With growing pressures from the West after WW II and internal demands from the
Russian people for reforms, the old Soviet Union collapsed in 1991 and was replaced by
a Russian Federation. (Background Note: Russia, supra, at 7-8) Following a series of
structural changes that were instituted, a Russian constitution was created in 1993. See
id., at 10; 2011 Human Rights Report-Russia, supra, at 1. 
Today’s Russia is a federation that disburses power between the central
government and still evolving regional and local autonomies. Under its 1993 constitution,
a centralized political system was created that concentrates executive power in a
president and a prime minister. (Background Note: Russia, supra, at 8-9;  2011 Human
Rights Report-Russia, supra, at 1-2) Its federal assembly consists of a lower house
(State Duma) and an upper house (Federation Council) Russia’s judiciary is generally
considered to be weak and lacking in the independence typically found in Western-style
democracies. Russia retains a powerful military and remains a nuclear superpower.
Administration of justice and human rights issues
Russia’s human rights record remains uneven and poor by Western standards.
(Background Note: Russia, supra, at 10;  2011 Human Rights Report-Russia, supra, at
5-7; Administrative Notice, supra, at 3) Although Russia recognizes the legitimacy of
internationally recognized human rights standards, implementation of procedures to
6
safeguard these standards in Russia have been slow to gain traction. (id.) Prison
conditions in Russia entail extreme over crowding and harsh treatment of prisoners.
Prisoners generally enjoy poor nutrition and deficient access to quality health and
medical care. These conditions have only recently been addressed with the use of prison
monitors and to date have produced mixed results. (id.) 
Under Russia’s political system, security forces generally report to civilian
authorities. But because of the violence and civil unrest in areas of the Northern
Caucasus, problems occurred with civilian-controlled security forces in this area. (id.)
Respect for the rule of law is particularly lacking in the North Caucasus, which are
marked by conflicts between government forces and insurgents, Islamist militants, and
criminal forces. Conflicts between these groups have resulted in widespread human
rights abuses by security forces and insurgents alike. Issued reports allege killing,
torture, physical abuse, and politically motivated abductions by these forces. (2011
Human Rights Report-Russia, supra, at 1-5)
Although there is a general risk of U.S. citizens being subjected to indiscriminate
acts of terror in Russia, there is no current indication that Americans are singled out as
targets. See Background Note, Russia, supra, at 10. Terrorist activity in Russia includes
suicide bombings and hostage taking, especially in connection with the Chechen conflict.
See Human rights Report-Russia, supra, at 14-15.  Russian human rights abuses in the
Chechen conflict included torture, summary executions, use of indiscriminate force, and
arbitrary detentions. 
Besides problematic behavior in the Chechen conflict, Russian authorities engage
in electronic surveillance, arbitrary arrest and detention, as well as torture and abuse to
gain confessions. (2011 Human Rights Report-Russia, supra, at 2-14)  Officials have
illegally employed electronic surveillance, monitored internet, telephone, and email
communications, and entered residences without a warrant. (id.) Other reported human
rights problems in Russia include Government pressure and censoring of the media,
restrictions on freedom of expression, violence against women and children, trafficking in
persons, hate crimes, and civil intimidation. (id., at 2, 17-33)
There is widespread government corruption in Russia, which complicates
sustaining efforts to improve Russia’s justice system and promote respect for the rule of
law. (2011 Human rights Report-Russia, supra, at 26-27) To its credit, the Russian
legislature has passed a series of reforms in Russian criminal procedure laws, making
their law more consistent with Western standards. Russian human rights practice has
improved in some areas, but not in others. It’s overall human rights record remains poor.
(id., at 1-2) 
Russian collection practices
By 2005, Russia and China were recognized as the two most aggressive
collectors of sensitive and protected U.S. proprietary technology and accounted for the
bulk of foreign collection practices. Russia has an active, ongoing collection program
7
targeting sensitive U.S. industrial and military technology as well as commercial and
dual-use technology. See Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and
Industrial Espionage, 2009-2011, supra, at 1-2. Russia remains one of the top three
most aggressive and capable collectors of sensitive U.S. economic information and
technologies, especially in cyberspace. See id.; Worldwide Threat Assessment of the
U.S. Intelligence Community, supra, at 8; Worldwide Threat Assessment, Statement
before the Committee on Armed Services of U.S. Senate, supra, at 11; and
Administrative Notice, supra, at 1-2. Russia also targets national security and
environmental researchers as well as signal intelligence. Russia provides technology to
other countries that has the potential for use in the construction of weapons of mass
destruction, biotechnology, and missiles. See Annual Threat Assessment, supra, at 19,
22, and 29-30.
In June 2010, the U.S. Department of Justice announced the arrest of ten alleged
secret service agents for carrying out long-term, deep-covered assignments on behalf of
Russia. The defendants in the criminal case arising from the arrest pled guilty and were
immediately expelled from the United States.  See DOJ Press Release covering guilty
pleas of ten Russian agents, supra. In January 2011, a convicted spy and former CIA
employee was sentenced to an additional prison term because of money laundering and
conspiracy to act as a Russian agent for passing information to the Russian government
between 2006 and 2008. See U.S. Attorney’s Press Release, supra.
U.S.-Russia relations
By the end of 2008, in the wake of the Russian-Georgian war, U.S.-Russia
relations were at a ten-year low and were characterized by mutual distrust and
adversarial drift. (Background Note, supra, at 18) The resetting of U.S. relations in 2009
offered opportunities for the creation of a new START treaty, which was completed and
entered into force in February 2011. (id.) The Bilateral Presidential Commission
established in July 2009 offered fresh reset opportunities as well: Its aims were directed
at improving coordination between the two countries in a number of important areas of
strategic interest. (id.)  And the two countries continue to work closely on initiatives
designed to address threats of nuclear terrorism. See id., and Worldwide Threat
Assessment, Statement before the Committee on Armed Services of U.S. Senate, supra,
at 7-8.  
Since gaining its independence in 1991, Russia has worked together with the
United States more frequently to promote global trade liberalism. (Background Note,
supra, at 14) Russia has demonstrated vital interests in U.S. economic, trade, and
investment policies, and has worked closely with the United States to gain ascension in
the World Trade Organization (WTO) and other pursuits in promoting their trade
liberalization agendas. (GE 7)
To be sure, commercial transactions in Russia are complex and protracted.
Some of this is due to its body of overlapping, rapidly changing laws, decrees, and
regulations. (id.)  And some is due to uneven implementation of these laws, decrees, and
8
regulations in the regional and local courts that lack independence and are subject to
political pressures and corrupting influences. (id.)
After hitting trade lows in 2009, trade has picked up between the United States
and Russia and grew to $31.7 billion in 2010. (Background Note, supra, at 16) Increased
imports from Russia in 2009-2010 can be attributable to nascent economic recovery in
the United States and the rising price of oil and other commodities in both countries. Oil
represents over two-thirds of the value of U.S. imports from Russia (id.) Anchored by a
bilateral Russia-U.S. World Trade Organization (WTO) agreement completed in 2006,
Russia and the United States have worked on a range of liberalizing trade reforms
designed to streamline and promote their trade liberalization agendas. (GE 7;
Background Note: Russia, supra) 
Negotiations over meeting WTO ascension requirements have been difficult and
required the assimilation of restrictive Russian trade policies into alignment with
internationally accepted trade policy practices. (id.) Successful Russian ascension into
the WTO will enable Russia to lower its import duties and limit its export fees, and
increase access to U.S. and European companies. Still, there is much groundwork to
complete before Russia and the United States can claim the full benefits of liberalized
trade. Russia must clamp down on corruption, reduce bureaucracy, and improve its
demonstrated respect for the rule of law. (Id.) 
Russia and the United States are frequently aligned on political initiatives and
have joined in numerous international agreements, including efforts to resolve
international political problems at the United Nations. Russia and the United States are
allies in the war on terrorism, and both seek to suppress the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Both countries have specially emphasized the reduction of strategic
arsenals. Since 1992, the United States has spent over $7 billion in Cooperative Threat
Reduction (CTR) (or Nunn-Lugar) funds and related programs to help Russia dismantle
nuclear weapons and ensure the security of its nuclear weapons, weapons grade
material, other weapons of mass destruction, and related technical know-how. (id.) The
CRT program was renewed in 2006 for seven years and comes up for reassessment in
2013. 
Still, there continues to be profound policy differences between the United States
and Russia. (Background Note, supra, at 18-19) Unresolved conflicts of the Caucasus
and the fragility of some Central Asian states represent the most likely flash points in the
Eurasia region. Russian occupation and military presence and expanded economic ties
to Georgia’s separatist regions of South Ossetia and Abjkazia continue to create
tensions between the United States and Russia. 
Russia and China continue developing systems technologies that can interfere
with or disable vital U.S. space-based navigation, communication, and intelligence
collection satellites. (Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community,
supra, at 20). Cyber attacks against the United States continue to increase in number
and sophistication, and Russia remains a primary sponsor of cyber attacks against U.S.
military installations and interests. (Worldwide Threat Assessment, Statement before the
9
Committee on Armed Services of U.S. Senate, supra, at 1) Russian intelligence and
security services continue to target DOD interests in support of Russian security and
foreign policy. (id.) And Russia is not expected to support additional sanctions against
Iran. (Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community, supra, at 20)
Travel restrictions in Russia
U.S. citizens visiting Russia must always possess a valid passport. (2011 Human
rights Report-Russia, supra, at 22;  GE 2) U.S. citizens who are former Russian citizens
may be viewed by Russian authorities as Russian citizens and not allowed to exit Russia
except on a Russian passport. Males who are considered Russian citizens may
encounter problems if they did not satisfy Russian military requirements prior to leaving
for the United States.  (Id.)
Endorsements
Applicant is well regarded by his supervisor who knows him and has had the
opportunity to work with him. (Tr. 29) His supervisor holds a security clearance and has
Air Force military experience. (Tr. 31) He characterizes Applicant as conscientious,
reliable, and trustworthy. (Tr. 30-32)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in reaching at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial, commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk.  When evaluating an applicant’s
conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be considered together with the following AG ¶
2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
10
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of
the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
      Foreign Preference
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate preference  for
a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.  See
AG ¶  9.
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the
foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target
United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.   See AG ¶ 6.
Burden of Proof
Under the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an applicant's request for
security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly
consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires administrative
judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in
large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all adversarial
proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and
logical basis from the evidence of record. Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual
inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR; and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
11
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or his security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.  Because Executive Order 10865 requires that all
security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
Analysis
Applicant is a well regarded avionics technician who immigrated to the United
States in 1998 and acquired U.S. citizenship in November 2010. When he became a
U.S. citizen he acquired a U.S. passport. However, he retained his Russian passports
and declines to surrender it unconditionally to his FSO or authorized authorities of the
Government. Nor does he express any intention of renouncing his Russian citizenship,
citing bureaucratic inconvenience and concerns for his family members who could be
subjected to government oversight should Applicant initiate Russian citizenship
renunciation procedures.  
Trust concerns relate to foreign preference based on Applicant’s dual citizenship
status with Russia and foreign influence relative to his having immediate family members
who are citizens and residents of Russia.
Foreign Preference 
Dual citizenship concerns necessarily entail allegiance assessments and invite
critical considerations of acts indicating a preference for the interests of the foreign
country (Russia) over the interests of the United States. By electing to retain his dual
Russian citizenship and passports after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen with a U.S.
passport for personal and business travel, he shows a split preference for Russia and
the United States
Since becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant has taken several actions
and exercised foreign privileges that reflect active indicia of dual citizenship. He has
declined to surrender his Russian passports since acquiring his U.S. passport and he
expressed no intention to renounce or consider renouncing his Russian citizenship.
Applicant’s retaining his Russian passports and citizenship in these circumstances
represents material indicia of a preference for Russia that cannot be easily reconciled
with the split preference he has shown for many years for his adopted home country of
the United States.  
Preference questions require predictive judgments about how an applicant can be
trusted in the future to honor his fiduciary responsibilities to the Government.  Applicant
12
has worked in the defense industry now for several years and is implicitly aware of the
potential risks of working for a U.S. defense contractor while contemporaneously holding
dual citizenship and passports. While his choices are understandable, considering his
circumstances and presented travel difficulties to Russia without Russian passports and
Russian citizenship to support his passports. They also reflect a current and ongoing
split preference for the United States and Russia.  
Because Applicant elected to retain his Russian passports (both his international
and internal ones) while he still holds dual U.S. citizenship and a U.S. passport, the
Government may apply certain provisions of disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 10(a) of AG ¶
9, “exercise of any right, privilege or obligations of foreign citizenship after becoming a
U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  This DC includes but
is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such           
         benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another     
          country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
Specifically, DC ¶ 10(a)(1) applies to the established facts and circumstances
herein. By retaining his Russian passports, Applicant is able to achieve travel privileges
and conveniences not available to other U.S. citizens. 
Were Applicant to elect to renounce his Russian and surrender his Russian
passports unconditionally, he risks attracting attention to himself and potentially his
family members residing in Russia by Russian authorities. This creates a dilemma for
Applicant who would like to avoid any bureaucratic exchanges with Russian authorities
and retain his Russian passports should he choose to travel to Russia. 
Applicant’s election to retain both his Russian citizenship and his Russian
passports makes good practical sense and reflects entirely rational and understandable
choices on his part. But his elections also reflect split preferences for his newly adopted
country of the United States and his birth country of Russia. 
13
Because Applicant’s dual citizenship status is  based on his parent’s citizenship,
he may claim the benefits of MC ¶ 11(a), “dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s
citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” However, he has declined to surrender his
Russian passports unconditionally in accordance with established procedures for
surrendering a foreign passport to a cognizant security authority of the Russian
government. As a result, he may not claim the benefits of MC  ¶ 11(e), “the passport has
been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise
invalidated.” None of the other covered mitigating conditions are available to Applicant
under the facts presented.
Whole-person precepts are certainly helpful to Applicant in surmounting the
Government’s preference concerns herein. The positive trust impressions he has forged
with his supervisor, who has worked with him for the past year, add support to his claims
that during his years of steady employment with U.S. firms he has demonstrated loyalty
and preference for the United States.
Overall, though, Applicant is not able to persuade that his current preference is
solely with the United States. Because he made considerable use of Russian privileges
associated with his renewing his Russian passports, he manifested some preference for
Russia under the criteria as established by the Appeal Board. Applicant fails to absolve
himself of foreign preference concerns associated with the presented issue of whether
he retains a preference or split preference for his birth country (Russia), or his adopted
country (the United States). Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b of Guideline C.
Foreign Influence 
Applicant and his family have deep roots in Russia. Determined to make a new
life for himself in the United States, he immigrated to the United States and became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in November 2010. Still, he is committed to retaining his Russian
citizenship and Russian passports. And his mother, father, and grandfather are Russian
citizens and residents. He maintains close contact with his mother and grandfather, but
not his father. On balance, his contacts with his family members residing in Russia
remain close. 
Historically, Russia has a mixed record as a sometimes ally and sometimes
adversary of the United States. Since gaining its independence in 1991 with the collapse
of the old Soviet Union, Russia has increased its trade relationships with the United
States. With its ascension to the WTO, Russia promises to increase its investment and
trade opportunities for the United States and its investors. But Russia has a checkered
human rights record that includes torture, use of indiscriminate force, and arbitrary
detentions. Russian authorities have employed illegally employed electronic surveillance,
monitored internet, telephone and email communications, and entered residences
without a warrant. (id.) Other reported human rights problems in Russia include
Government pressure and censoring of the media, restrictions on freedom of expression,
violence against women and children, trafficking in persons, hate crimes, and civil
14
intimidation. And there is widespread government corruption in Russia as well as a
history of aggressive collection practices against public and private U.S. institutions. 
The Government urges trust concerns over risks that Applicant’s family members
in Russia could be subjected to pressures or compromise to enlist their help in eliciting
classified information from Applicant. Because Applicant has dual Russian citizenship
and Russian passports, he can freely travel to Russia. And he possesses special skills
and experience that could conceivably place himself and his Russian family members in
harm’s way. Both he and his family might be subject to undue foreign influence and
pressure by Russian authorities to access sensitive proprietary information in Applicant’s
possession or control. As such, he presents  a potential heightened security risk covered
by disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” of the AGs for foreign influence. 
Applicant’s special access through his holding of Russian citizenship and Russian
passports, combined with his own demonstrated split-preference for the country, pose
some potential concerns for him because of the risks of undue foreign influence that
could potentially affect his relationships with his family members in Russia. Considering
Russia’s poor human rights record and history of aggressive collection practices,
Applicant’s family members residing in Russia could pose heightened security risks.
Because of the considerable contacts Applicant maintains with two of his family
members residing in Russia (both his mother and grandfather), consideration of DC ¶
7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a
potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information,” is warranted herein.
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of foreign
countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another. While foreign influence cases must by practical necessity be
weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing in the supplied
materials and country information about Russia. The AGs do take into account the
country’s demonstrated relations with the United States as an important consideration in
gauging whether the particular relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create
a heightened security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign
regime involved do matter. 
Based on his case-specific circumstances, MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the
persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.”  is
15
not fully available to Applicant. For so long as he retains his Russian citizenship and
passports, Applicant’s family members pose some risk that could subject him to potential
pressures and influence from Russian government and military officials. 
Nor is MC ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in
the United States, that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in
favor of the U.S. interest,” fully available to Applicant. Despite his assured loyalties and
commitments to the United States, Applicant’s family ties and own ties to Russia are still
too strong to enable him to neutralize all security concerns associated with his Russian
family relationships.  
 MC ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create risk for foreign influence or
exploitation,” has little application to Applicant’s situation. MC ¶ 8(f), “the value or routine
nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interests is such that they are
unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate,
or pressure the individual,” has some application. Applicant has no property or financial
interests in Russia and no inheritance expectancy in that country that could expose him
to potential conflicts.
Unavailable to Applicant is MC ¶ 8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with
existing agency requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats
from persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country.” Applicant has had no
contracts or business interests in Russia to report to his FSO or cognizant U.S. officials.
All told, Applicant’s family links and contacts in Russia are still considerable and
pose heightened risks of pressure, coercion, and  influence that could be brought to bear
on Applicant and his family members residing in Russia. Despite encouraging bilateral
trade and investment relationships between the United States and Russia, Russia still
presents heightened security risks that cannot be mitigated at this time.
Whole-person assessment is available to minimize Applicant’s exposure to any
potential conflicts of interests with Russian government officials. His supervisor who has
worked closely with him, considers him very reliable and trustworthy. But he
acknowledges potential risks to these family members should he initiate citizenship
renunciation and passport surrender. 
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's having family
members residing in Russia are insufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive
judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand any Russian risks of undue influence.
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline B.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in AG ¶ 2(a).
16
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 1.a Against Applicant
GUIDELINE C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 2.a and 2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
17
