 
1 
 
 
                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                      )  ISCR Case No. 12-09336 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
   
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence. His eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                                   Statement of the Case 
 
On June 30, 2010, Applicant signed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 21, 2012, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On September 16, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
without a hearing. The Government then requested a hearing in the matter under 
 
2 
 
 
Paragraph E3.1.7. of Enclosure 3 of the Directive.1 The case was assigned to me on 
December 3, 2012. I convened a hearing on January 15, 2013, to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses, introduced six exhibits (Ex. 1 through 
Ex. 6), and offered a summary of facts found in ten official U.S. Government source 
documents for administrative notice. The summary of facts and the ten source 
documents were identified as HE II. HE II was admitted for administrative notice without 
objection.  
 
Applicant testified and offered six exhibits, which I marked and identified as Exs. 
A through F and admitted without objection. Applicant also provided two sets of 
documents for administrative notice. These documents were marked as HE III and HE 
IV; they were admitted for administrative notice without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on January 22, 2013. 
                                                    
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations of security concerns under AG B, Foreign 
Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all 
five allegations. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including witness testimony, 
exhibits, relevant policies, and the applicable adjudicative guideline, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He was born and raised in Pakistan. He earned a 
university degree in statistics and economics in Pakistan, and, as a young man, he 
worked in his family’s auto parts import business in Pakistan. (Ex. 1; Tr. 35-38.) 
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 1999 on a tourist and business visa. His 
visa expired in October 1999, and he was undocumented and in the United States 
illegally until 2002. He married a U.S. citizen in 2002, and applied for permanent 
residency. His application was not acted upon. Applicant and his first wife divorced in 
2004; no children were born to the marriage. In 2004, he married for a second time, and 
applied for, and was granted, permanent resident status. His second wife, a U.S. 
citizen, supported his application for U.S. citizenship. Applicant became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 2009. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 63-67.) 
 
 Applicant adopted his second wife’s child from a former relationship. He and his 
wife are also the parents of three children born during their marriage. Applicant and his 
wife have owned and resided in a home in a U.S. city for eight years. (Ex. 1; 39-40, 55.) 
 
                                            
1 Department Counsel provided the written communications between him and Applicant regarding the 
Government’s request for a hearing and the procedures for preparing for a hearing. These documents are 
provided for the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.   
 
3 
 
 
 When Applicant first immigrated to the United States, he worked as a taxi driver. 
In 2007, he established a company that sold automobiles to people in Afghanistan and 
Dubai. He continued the company, in partnership with his second wife, until 2010. He 
stopped working in the company because it was not bringing in enough business. (Ex. 
1; Ex. 2.) 
 
 In 2010, Applicant, who speaks six Middle Eastern languages and dialects, 
accepted employment as a linguist with a government contractor. He seeks a security 
clearance for the first time. As a government contractor linguist, he has been deployed 
in a war zone for approximately two and one-half years. He trains other linguists, and he 
accompanies U.S. military to remote villages and outposts. He carries out his work in a 
dangerous environment. He has been fired upon twice, and his base has been 
frequently attacked with rockets and mortar. (Tr. 40-46, 73.)  
 
 Before becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant held passports from the government of 
Pakistan. He acquired his most recent Pakistani passport in March 2007. The passport 
expired in March 2012. In April 2011, Applicant relinquished his Pakistani passport to 
his employer’s facility security officer. At that time, he also provided an affidavit, dated 
April 5, 2011, in which he stated he had tried to renounce his Pakistani citizenship by 
filing a Form X with the Consulate General of Pakistan. However, his renunciation was 
not accepted. In his affidavit, Applicant affirmatively renounced his Pakistani citizenship. 
(Ex. D.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother, who is approximately 72 years old and in poor health, is a 
citizen and resident of Pakistan. She travels to the United States to visit Applicant and 
his family. She also travels to the United Arab Emirates (UAE)2 to visit two of Applicant’s 
brothers. When he is not deployed, Applicant contacts his mother by telephone daily or 
several times a week to inquire about her health. He also on occasion provides his 
mother with financial support. When he is deployed, he is unable to contact his mother 
for two or three months. The citizenship and residency of Applicant’s mother is alleged 
at SOR ¶ 1.a. (Ex. 1; Ex. 3; Tr. 47-48, 53, 56.) 
 
 Applicant has four brothers and one sister. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.b. that 
Applicant has three brothers and one sister who are citizens and residents of Pakistan. 
The SOR also alleges at ¶ 1.c. that Applicant has one brother who is a citizen of 
Pakistan and a resident of the UAE. At his hearing, Applicant explained that two of his 
brothers who are citizens of Pakistan now reside in the UAE. His other two brothers and 
his sister, who are citizens of Pakistan, reside in Pakistan. Applicant’s four brothers 
work in a family auto parts business carried out in Pakistan and the UAE. His sister, 
who is married to a physician, does not work outside the home. (Ex. 1; Ex. 3; Tr. 48-50.)  
 
 Before he was deployed, Applicant spoke with three of his brothers by telephone 
about once a month. He spoke with his fourth brother about every three months. 
                                            
2 Neither party provided facts for administrative notice on the UAE. 
 
4 
 
 
Because his sister is their mother’s caregiver when she is in Pakistan, he spoke with her 
frequently before he was deployed. (Ex. 3; Tr. 50, 78-79.) 
 
 Applicant has one brother-in-law and three sisters-in-law who are citizens and 
residents of Pakistan. Applicant’s brother-in-law is a physician who practices medicine 
in a clinic he owns. Applicant’s three sisters-in-law are housewives and do not work 
outside their homes. The citizenship and residency of Applicant’s brother-in-law and 
sisters-in-law are alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. (Ex. 3; Tr. 50-51, 79-80.) 
 
 Applicant has a family friend who is a citizen and resident of Pakistan. The friend 
owns large farms which produce fruit and vegetable crops for sale within Pakistan. In 
the past, Applicant communicated with his friend two or three times every six months. 
Since taking his job as a government contractor in September 2010, Applicant has 
spoken with his friend about twice. (Ex. 3; Tr. 51-53.)    
 
 Between 2005 and 2010, Applicant traveled to Pakistan six times. Two of the 
visits were for business, and the other four were to visit his family in Pakistan. 
Applicant’s last trip to Pakistan occurred in March 2010, when he escorted his mother 
back to the United States to stay with his family. Since his deployment, he has not 
traveled to Pakistan. (Ex. 4; Tr. 56-57.) 
 
 Since his deployment, Applicant traveled on authorized leave in 2011 to the UAE 
to meet his mother, who was visiting his brothers in business there. His mother then 
accompanied him to the United States. In 2012, when Applicant again took authorized 
leave from his deployment, his wife, children, mother, and sister-in-law3 met him in the 
UAE. His mother had planned to accompany him and his family to the United States, 
but, instead, she returned to Pakistan to attend to her brother, who was ill. (Ex. 6; Tr. 
73-75.)  
 
 Applicant has 22 immediate family members who are citizens of Pakistan.4 At his 
hearing, he stated that he intends eventually to sponsor all of them for U.S. permanent 
residency. The first person he intends to sponsor is his mother, who each year spends 
six months in the United States, two months in the UAE, and four months in Pakistan. 
(Tr. 60-61, 73-74, 84-87.) 
  
 Applicant provided letters of character reference from individuals with whom he 
had worked. During his deployment, Applicant served as a translator for a military 
officer, who called Applicant a leader and “an unparalleled professional” who was 
“respectful to others, levelheaded, wise, and genuine.” The officer also stated: “Due to 
operational hazards, [Applicant’s] superior performance has come with significant 
personal risk. Such dangers, however, have never slowed his ambition or performance. 
                                            
3 Applicant explained that the sister-in-law in the travel group was his wife’s sister, a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 78.)  
 
4 The SOR alleges 11 close relationships with citizens of Pakistan. When Applicant spoke of 22 family 
members, he included nieces and nephews who are the children of his five siblings. (Tr. 84-87.) 
 
5 
 
 
He has, on numerous occasions, left the [security] wire to meet with district governors, 
[omitted] national security force personnel, and local nationals in one of the most volatile 
districts [in the war zone].” The officer went on to describe how Applicant, without 
hesitation, joined U.S. military in foot patrols through streets, markets, and 
neighborhoods that had been identified as targets for enemy attacks and suicide 
bombings. (Ex. A.) 
 
 A social scientist who is assigned to assist the combat operation praised 
Applicant’s linguistic abilities and his resilience in carrying out his duties in harsh and 
difficult circumstances. In these circumstances, the social scientist stated, Applicant was 
often the linguist that commanders in the field turned to when other interpreters 
provided limited or inferior assistance. She noted that Applicant’s linguistic abilities, 
knowledge of local religious practices and customs, and strong analytic skills made him 
a valued member of the combat operation group. (Ex. B.) 
 
 A retired lieutenant colonel who leads Applicant’s team provided the following 
observations: 
 
I have spent over thirty-two years in the armed forces of the United States. 
. . . [Applicant] is one of those rare individuals that I have encountered 
[who] is not satisfied with the status quo. His high degree of enthusiasm 
and energy has allowed for the facilitation of many of our key leader and 
tribal engagements. Many of [the team’s] research projects would not 
have resulted in success if we had not had [Applicant] as a member of the 
team. He is truly a pleasure to have around and a valued member of the . . 
.  team. I would gladly and willingly seek out this individual to continue to 
provide linguistic services for the . . . team. He is a true patriot and a credit 
to our country. (Ex. C.) 
 
 In November 2011, the commanding officer of the regimental combat team 
awarded Applicant a certificate of commendation, which noted, in part, that 
 
[Applicant] assisted in the execution of six major research plans, 300 local 
national interviews, and 50 key leader engagements, producing critically 
important, previously unavailable information that became instrumental in 
providing a more complete picture of the regimental battlespace. His 
knowledge of the . . . people, culture and customs was critical in the day-
to-day effectiveness of his team and the regimental combat team . . . staff. 
[Applicant’s] outstanding motivation and dedication to duty reflected credit 
upon him and were in keeping with the highest standards of [the U.S. 
military]. (Ex. E.)  
 
 In October 2012, Applicant’s government contractor employer awarded him a 
certificate of merit and appreciation in which it recognized his “selfless service” and 
“exceptional performance and dedication . . . for the past two years.” The award 
identified Applicant as an exceptional employee and praised his “can-do attitude, 
 
6 
 
 
eagerness to participate, contributions to the team as well as [his] willingness to accept 
greater responsibility.”  (Ex. F.) 
 
   I take administrative notice of facts about Pakistan. The facts in the following 
summary were provided by Department Counsel to Applicant and to me.  
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary republic in South Asia with a population of 
over 170 million people. Pakistan is a low-income country, with a 
population that is 97% Muslim. Pakistan has extreme poverty and is 
underdeveloped. Its economy remains vulnerable to internal security 
concerns.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the U.S. in 
counterterrorism efforts and made a commitment to eliminate terrorist 
camps on its territory. Despite these efforts, members of the Taliban are 
known to be in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of 
Pakistan, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (Kpk) (formerly known as the 
Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP)), and in the Balochistan Province, 
which borders Iran and Afghanistan. The Pakistani Taliban (Tehrik-i-
Taliban “TTP”), al-Qa’ida extremists, foreign insurgents, and Pakistani 
militants have re-exerted their hold over areas in the FATA and NWFP, 
and the Pakistani Taliban also used the FATA to plan attacks against 
civilian and military targets across Pakistan. Al-Qa’ida leadership in 
Pakistan supported militants in conducting attacks in Afghanistan and 
provided funding, training, and personnel to facilitate terrorist and 
insurgent operations. 
 
In addition to the Taliban, the FATA in Pakistan continues to be a vital 
sanctuary to al-Qa’ida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based 
extremist groups. Al-Qa’ida and other Afghan extremist groups exploit that 
operating environment to plan operations, direct propaganda, recruit and 
train operatives, and raise funds with relative impunity. 
 
Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency efforts, but its record 
with dealing with militants has been mixed. Pakistan has demonstrated 
determination and persistence in combating militants it perceives to be 
dangerous to Pakistan’s interests, particularly those involved in attacks in 
settled areas, but it maintains its historical support to the Taliban, has not 
consistently pursued militants focused on Afghanistan, and still considers 
militant groups to be important to its efforts to counter India’s military and 
economic advantages. 
 
The U.S. Department of State has defined terrorist safe havens as 
ungoverned, under-governed, or ill-governed areas of a country and non-
physical areas where terrorist groups that constitute a threat to U.S. 
national security interests are able to organize, plan, raise funds, 
 
7 
 
 
communicate, recruit, train, and operate in relative security because of 
inadequate governance capacity, political will, or both. The U.S. 
Department of State has concluded that, despite increased efforts by 
Pakistani security forces, al-Qa’ida terrorists, Afghan militants, foreign 
insurgents, and Pakistani militants continue to find safe haven in portions 
of Pakistan’s FATA, NWFP, and Baluchistan, and have operated in those 
areas to organize, train, and plan attacks against the United States and its 
allies in Afghanistan, India, and Europe. 
 
On May 1, 2011, U.S. special forces personnel raided a large al-Qa’ida 
compound located in a residential neighborhood in Pakistan and shot and 
killed al Qa’ida leader Osama bin Laden. 
 
The Department of State warns U.S, citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of the threat of terrorist activity, specifically the presence 
of al-Qa’ida, Taliban elements, and indigenous militant sectarian groups 
that pose a danger to American citizens. Terrorists and their sympathizers 
have demonstrated their willingness and capability to attack targets where 
Americans are known to congregate or visit. Suicide bombings and 
attacks occur throughout Pakistan on a regular basis. Also, since 2007, 
several American citizens throughout Pakistan have been kidnapped. 
 
The human rights situation in Pakistan remains poor. Major problems 
include extrajudicial killings, torture and disappearances. Additional 
problems include poor prison conditions, arbitrary arrest, widespread 
government corruption, rape, honor crimes, and widespread trafficking in 
persons. The military operations in the FATA and NWFP resulted in the 
deaths of approximately 1,150 civilians, and militant attacks in the FATA 
and NWFP killed 825 more civilians. The Pakistani government also 
maintains several domestic intelligence services that monitor politicians, 
political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. Credible reports indicated that authorities routinely 
used wiretaps and intercepted and opened mail without the requisite court 
approval, as well as monitoring mobile phones and electronic messages. 
 
In addition to al-Qa’ida, the Taliban, and other insurgents and militants, 
the foreign terrorist organization Lashkar e-Tayyiba (LT) also operates out 
of Pakistan. The LT is the prime suspect for the November 2008 Mumbai 
attacks and is one of the largest and most proficient of the traditionally 
Kashmiri-focused militant groups. The Haqqani Network, an extremist 
organization operating as a strategic arm of Pakistan’s Inter-Services 
Intelligence Agency, is also operating from Pakistan with impunity. On 
September 7, 2012, the United States formally declared the Haqqani 
Network a Foreign Terrorist Organization.  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                            Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
9 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 Analysis 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 A Guideline B decision assessing the security worthiness of a U.S. citizen with 
Pakistani contacts must take into consideration Pakistan’s continuing human rights 
problems and the country’s unstable political situation in which terrorist groups target 
U.S. interests with impunity. Under these circumstances, American citizens with 
immediate family members who are citizens or residents of Pakistan could be 
vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the foreign influence 
guideline. The facts of Applicant’s case raise potential security concerns under 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign 
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a 
citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: 
“connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential 
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information.”   
 
 AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. However, 
the facts must demonstrate a risk higher than normally occurs when a family member 
lives under a foreign government. The activities of al-Qa’ida, Taliban, and other militant 
 
10 
 
 
groups in Pakistan, Pakistan’s mixed record of dealing with these groups, and recent 
tensions between the United States and Pakistan are sufficient to establish the 
“heightened risk” required in AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
 Applicant’s mother, sister, four brothers, three sisters-in-law, one brother-in-law, 
and one of his close friends are citizens of Pakistan. Applicant’s mother resides in 
Pakistan and also resides part-time in the United States and the UAE. Two of 
Applicant’s brothers reside in the UAE and conduct business there. With the exception 
of Applicant’s mother and two brothers in the UAE, all other family members who are 
citizens of Pakistan reside full-time in Pakistan. Applicant’s friend who is a citizen of 
Pakistan also resides in Pakistan. When family ties to a foreign country are alleged, the 
totality of an applicant’s family ties as well as each individual family connection must be 
considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). Applicant’s close 
relationships and contacts with his family members and a friend who are citizens of 
Pakistan, a country with a poor human rights record and a high risk of terrorism, are 
sufficient to establish AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b).  
 
Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply.  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply in mitigation to the facts of this case. Applicant has ten 
immediate family members and a long-time friend who are citizens of Pakistan. Eight of 
those individuals are residents of Pakistan. Two of Applicant’s brothers are citizens of 
Pakistan who reside in the UAE. His elderly mother, with whom he has a close and 
solicitous relationship, resides in Pakistan for about four months each year.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b), on the other hand, does apply in mitigation to the facts of this case. 
While Applicant’s loyalty and sense of obligation to his family members is not minimal, 
he has also shown by his actions as a contract linguist in a combat zone that his fidelity 
to the United States is deep and enduring. Applicant renounced his Pakistani 
citizenship. His spouse and children are U.S. citizens, and he owns and has resided in a 
home in the United States for eight years. I am satisfied that he would resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States.  
 
 
11 
 
 
 When Applicant was deployed to a war zone, he complied with requirements 
that he minimize or cease contacts with his family members and friends in Pakistan. 
Since assuming his current responsibilities as a linguist, he has not traveled to Pakistan. 
As a linguist, he provided invaluable assistance to commanders in the field for two and 
one-half years, and he distinguished himself by undertaking numerous dangerous 
assignments and risks to support the mission.5 
 
The Appeal Board has recognized that individuals who serve in combat zones 
should be evaluated in the context of the high-risk environment in which they work. The 
Appeal Board has stated: 
 
As a general rule, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security 
procedures and regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative 
value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security 
concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying conduct 
or circumstances. However, the Board has recognized an exception to 
that general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has 
established by credible, independent evidence that his compliance with 
security procedures and regulations occurred in the context of high-risk 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution 
to the national security. The presence of such circumstances can give 
credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to 
recognize, resist, and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or 
exploitation. 
 
ISCR Case No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 During his two and one-half years of service in a war zone, Applicant has not 
held a security clearance. Nevertheless, he has occupied a sensitive position and dealt 
with information of security significance. He has assisted military commanders in the 
execution of six major research plans, 300 local national interviews, and 50 key leader 
engagements. His translations and interpretations elicited critically important information 
that enabled commanders to better assess battlefield conditions. As letters of character 
reference in the record establish, Applicant has a long track record of reliability under 
stressful conditions, and he is valued for his outstanding leadership and performance.  
 
Applicant is also a concerned and involved family member. His commitments to 
his family members are admirable. His relationships with his family members, especially 
his mother, are filial and consistent. He failed to overcome the rebuttable presumption 
that his contacts with his family members and his friend in Pakistan are not casual. 
Accordingly AG ¶ 8(c) is not applicable. 
 
                                            
5 The Appeal Board has also recognized the merit of demonstrated service when an applicant “has a 
previous track record of complying with security regulations and procedures in the context of dangerous, 
high-risk circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the national security.” ISCR Case 
No. 07-06030 at 3 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008.)  
 
12 
 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole-person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant is a talented and valued employee of a U.S. government contractor. His 
colleagues and managers speak highly of his character, his professional skills as a 
linguist, and his bravery in dangerous war-zone situations. He became a U.S. citizen in 
2009. He seeks a security clearance for the first time.  
 
A retired lieutenant colonel with 32 years of military experience led the team to 
which Applicant was assigned. He stated that Applicant’s strong linguistic skills and 
personal abilities enhanced the work of the team. The officer concluded that Applicant 
“is a true patriot and a credit to our country.” 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to decide close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR  APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.e.:   For Applicant 
 
                                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                               
 
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
 
