 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 12-04179 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
B, foreign influence, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 3, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 23, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 15, 2013. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on January 17, 
2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 5, 2013. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant did not object and they were admitted into 
the record. The Government requested administrative notice be taken of Hearing 
Exhibits I, II, and III. There being no objection, I granted the request. Applicant testified 
on his own behalf. He offered exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted into the 
record without objection. The record was held open until February 12, 2013, to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documents, which he did. They were marked as AE F 
through J and were admitted into record without objections.1 DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 13, 2013.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR and add 
allegations under Guideline E, personal conduct, as described in HE V. The motion was 
granted. Applicant was advised that the hearing would be continued to allow him time to 
answer and prepare his response. Applicant chose to proceed immediately and not 
postpone the hearing. He admitted the new allegations. A written copy of the allegations 
was provided to him on February 11, 2013.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations and the amended allegations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He was born in Jordan and became a naturalized 
citizen of the United States in 2006. He is not married and has worked for his present 
employer, a government contractor, since 2011.3  
 
 Applicant’s uncle, his father’s brother, sponsored his father, Applicant, and his 
twin sister in 1998 to come to the United States. They applied for permanent resident 
status and traveled back and forth to Jordan so Applicant could continue to attend 
school in Jordan. In 2002, Applicant and his sister returned to the United States. His 
father did not return. Applicant and his sister lived with a brother who resided in the 
United States with his wife and two children. His brother is a U.S. citizen and is now 
divorced, but still lives in the United States. Applicant lived with his brother for three 
years while attending college. His sister is also a naturalized U.S. citizen. She returned 
                                                          
1 HE IV is Department Counsel’s memorandum.  
 
2 Tr. 124-132; HE V. 
 
3 Tr. 44. 
 
 
3 
 
 
to Jordan sometime around 2007. She is a manager of a retail store in Jordan. She 
visits the United States about once a year.4 
 
Applicant earned his bachelor’s degree in 2012. From 2002 to 2006, Applicant 
stated he returned to Jordan every two years and stayed for no more than 20 days at a 
time. Applicant has a U.S. passport. He retained his Jordanian passport, but stated he 
never traveled on it after becoming a U.S. citizen. It is now expired and he surrendered 
it to his facility security officer. Applicant does not have assets in Jordan and has about 
$5,000 to $6,000 in the United States.5 
 
Applicant’s mother came to the United States in 1999 and applied for permanent 
resident status. His parents traveled back and forth to Jordan. His mother is a 
homemaker and his father is in the real estate business. He also owns real estate and 
owns many supermarkets in Jordan. At some point, his parents became U.S. citizens, 
but reside in Jordan. They visit the United States about once a year. They maintain two 
passports and are duals citizens of Jordan and the United States.  
 
Applicant has three sisters and three brothers. He has a brother who is 45 years 
old and unmarried. The brother has health issues. His brother has permanent resident 
status in the United States, but is unable to obtain health insurance in the United States. 
His brother lives with his parents in Jordan and works at one of his father’s stores.6 
 
 Two of Applicant’s sisters are dual citizens of Jordan and the United States and 
reside in Jordan. His twin sister lives in Jordan with her husband who owns a business 
there. They have been married about a year and a half and she is pregnant with their 
first child. His brother-in-law’s family lives in Jordan. Applicant stated his sister’s 
husband is applying for U.S. permanent residence through his sister. No specific 
information was provided as to the status of his application.7  
 
 Applicant’s other sister lives with their parents in Jordan. She is a secretary who 
works with students in a cultural exchange program. Applicant is unsure if her position is 
part of a government agency. Applicant has contact with her about once a month.8  
 
 Applicant’s third sister is a citizen of Jordan and resides in Bahrain. Her husband 
works for a private company in Bahrain. They have four children and have lived in 
Bahrain for three to four years. Applicant stated his parents are sponsoring his sister 
                                                          
4 Tr. 25-38, 49, 71. 
 
5 Tr. 31-35, 49-52. 
 
6 Tr. 22, 38-44, 53-56; AE C. 
 
7 Tr. 56-58; AE B. 
 
8 Tr. 59-61, 68; AE B. 
 
 
4 
 
 
and her family for U.S. permanent residence. Applicant is in contact with his sister about 
every two to three months.9  
 
 Applicant’s brother is a dual citizen of Jordan and Canada and resides in Qatar. 
He works for a bank in Qatar. He is married to a Jordanian citizen who also holds dual 
citizenship with Canada. Applicant does not know if she works. They have three 
children. Applicant has contact with this brother about once a month. He last visited 
them in 2008 in Canada. They moved to Qatar in 2009. Applicant stated that he has 
contact with all of his siblings about once or twice a month.10 
 
 Applicant has a friend who is a citizen and resident of Jordan. He indicated his 
only contact with this friend is by Facebook.11 
 
On his security clearance application (SCA) dated February 17, 2011, Applicant 
listed he had two sisters and a brother.12 He only listed those siblings who are citizens 
of the United States. Specifically, he listed his one brother who is a citizen and resident 
of the United States, and two sisters who are citizens of the United States residing in 
Jordan. He failed to list his two other brothers, both of whom are citizens of Jordan and 
one who resides in Jordan and the other in Qatar. He also failed to list his sister who is 
a citizen of Jordan and resides in Bahrain. He disclosed his siblings and their 
citizenships during his March 17, 2011, background investigation interview. On his 
December 21, 2011 SCA, Applicant listed all of his siblings.13 During his background 
investigation interview on February 3, 2012, he disclosed all of his siblings. However, 
the summary of interview is void of the information about the citizenship of the two 
brothers who are citizens of Jordan and his sister who is also a citizen of Jordan and 
resides in Bahrain. It only lists their occupations.14 
 
Applicant failed to disclose in his SCA dated February 17, 2011, all of his foreign 
travel in the past seven years. He listed that he took four trips to Jordan lasting four 
days each in 2009. During his March 17, 2011 interview, he disclosed he also traveled 
to Egypt for four days in August 2009. In his December 21, 2011 SCA, he listed that he 
traveled to Jordan in 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, and 2011. There is no reference to these 
trips in his March 2011 interview. He did not disclose any other foreign travel in his 
SCA.15 During his background investigation interview on February 3, 2012, he disclosed 
                                                          
9 Tr. 24, 61-65; AE D. 
 
10 Tr. 21, 65-69. 
 
11 Tr. 70-71. 
 
12 GE 3. 
 
13 GE 1. 
 
14 Tr. 119-121. 
 
15 GE 1, 3.  
 
5 
 
 
to the government investigator that he traveled in 2011 to his brother’s wedding in 
Jordan, to the Bahamas in August 2009, and to Canada in 2006. In his March 17, 2011, 
interview he stated he traveled to his brother’s wedding in Jordan in 2010. He also 
disclosed he was detained and questioned at the Canadian border after traveling there, 
for about four hours, before being released. He told the investigator he failed to disclose 
this information due to an oversight and he did not think of Canada as a foreign country. 
He was also detained by U.S. Customs at the airport in 2011 because of a name mix 
up. He indicated to the investigator he had no other foreign travel in the past seven 
years, other than what was previously listed.16 
 
During his hearing, Applicant admitted that while taking trips to Jordan from 2003 
to 2009, on three to four occasions, he also traveled to Israel for about three days each 
trip. He stated he went to visit relatives there. He also admitted that during one of his 
trips to Jordan from 2005 to 2009, he went to Egypt for a few days. Applicant claimed 
that after his background investigation interview he sent all of his travel information to 
his facility security officer. He stated he provided this information shortly after submitting 
his SCA. He did not remember if he included information about his travel to Israel. 
Applicant did not know why he did not list all of his foreign travel. Applicant was asked 
at his hearing if he has had any additional foreign travel since his background 
investigation and he disclosed he traveled to Jordan in October 2012 and also to Israel.  
Applicant’s testimony was inconsistent and not credible. He did not have a reasonable 
explanation for why he did not list his foreign travel on his second SCA and second 
interviews after he was aware that he was required to disclose it.17  
 
Applicant did not disclose on his February 17, 2011 SCA and his December 21, 
2011 SCA that he had been fired from a retail job. He disclosed this information during 
his background investigation interview on March 17, 2011, but said he was told to resign 
or be fired. During his February 3, 2012 background investigation interview, he 
explained to the investigator that he did not disclose the information because he did not 
have any contact information for his period of employment and he wanted to forget 
about this experience of being fired. At his hearing, he stated he had been fired on the 
spot. Applicant’s testimony was inconsistent and not believable.18 
 
Applicant’s explanation for the missing information on his SCAs is that he 
misunderstood and did not think he had to put all of the information requested. He did 
not ask for help from his facility security officer. He considers himself a top employee at 
his company and his superiors are happy with his work.19  
 
                                                          
16 Tr. 75-105. 
 
17 Tr. 75-105. 
 
18 Tr. 114-118; GE 1, 2, 3, 4. 
 
19 Tr. 132-133. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant provided character letters that describe him as an employee in good 
standing who is tremendously vital to his employer’s business and development. His 
personal and professional character traits are impeccable and an asset to the 
organization. He has incredible initiative and is dedicated to the mission. He works well 
with everyone and is a trusted member of his team. His cultural experience is relied 
upon. He is considered outstanding in his field of expertise. He has demonstrated 
unwavering commitment to the higher goals of the United States.20 
 
Jordan 
 
 The Kingdom of Jordan is a constitutional monarchy. The U.S. Department of 
State’s 2011 Human Rights Report lists Jordan’s three most significant human rights 
problems as their citizens’ inability to peaceably change their government; abuses 
committed with impunity by security forces; and violence against women. Other human 
rights problems were arbitrary deprivation of life; torture or mistreatment; poor prison 
conditions, arbitrary arrest and denial of due process through administrative detention; 
prolonged detention and external interference with judicial decisions; infringement on 
citizens’ privacy rights; and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly, and 
association.  
 
 Legal and societal discrimination against Jordanians of Palestinian origin remains 
widespread. Such persons are subject to arbitrary withdrawal of their citizenship without 
due process; exclusion from services such as access to public assistance, education 
and medical services; and exclusion from the political process.  
 
 The Government of Jordan considers dual Jordanian-American citizens to be 
Jordanian citizens. Jordanian authorities may not inform the U.S. embassy of arrests, 
detentions, or accidents involving dual Jordanian–American citizens. Jordanian law 
subjects dual citizens to certain obligations; for example, males under the age of 37 are 
required to register for service in the Jordanian military.  
 
 Under Jordanian law, any adult male may prevent a female or child relative from 
leaving the country by registering a hold on their travel with Jordanian authorities. This 
is possible even if the child or woman only holds U.S. citizenship. Jordanian authorities 
consider such disputes to be family matters and the U.S. embassy has a limited ability 
to intervene. 
 
Bahrain 
 
 The Kingdom of Bahrain is a hereditary, constitutional monarchy. The country’s 
citizenry of 1.25 million persons is nearly 100% Muslim, with a minority of the Muslim 
population, including the royal family, the governing class and the majority of the military 
and the business elite being Sunni Muslims. The vast majority of the country is Shi’a. 
                                                          
20 AE G, H, I. 
 
7 
 
 
Bahrain has close relationships with other Sunni countries in the Gulf region, but has 
had difficulties with Iran, a Shi’a dominated country.  
 
 The royal family in Bahrain has ruled it since 1783. In 1970, Bahrain’s 
independence from Iran was endorsed by the U.N. Security Council and formally 
accepted by Iran, ending more than a century of disputed claims over Bahrainian 
sovereignty.  
 
 The government of Bahrain is closely allied with the United States. In 1991, the 
two countries signed a Defense Cooperation Agreement granting U.S. forces access to 
Bahraini facilities. Bahrain is the headquarters of the U.S. Navy’s Fifth Fleet. The United 
States designated Bahrain a “major Non-NATO Ally” in October 2001. Notwithstanding 
the shared interests of the two governments, elements within Bahrain raise concerns 
about the future relationship. 
 
 In February and March 2011, there were numerous spontaneous, anti-
government demonstrations and often violent clashes between Bahraini security forces 
and protestors, inspired by the uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt. As of May 2011, armed 
government presence, including tanks and armored personnel carriers, patrol the 
streets of the capital, Manama. Active security operations continue in parts of this small 
country with government-established checkpoints manned by armed police or 
personnel. The potential for civil and political unrest continues.  
 
 Bahrain remains concerned that Iran is supporting Shiite opposition movements, 
possibly in an effort to install a Shiite led, pro-Iranian government.  
 
 Bahrain has a number of human rights issues. During 2011, the country 
experienced a period of sustained unrest, including mass protests calling for political 
reform. There were 52 confirmed deaths as a result of the unrest, including five who 
died of torture by the security services. There were also problems with arbitrary arrests 
and detentions of large numbers of persons, including medical personnel, human rights 
activists, and political figures. There is also a problem with discrimination on the basis of 
gender, religion, nationality, and sect, especially against the Shi’a majority population.  
 
Qatar 
 
 The United States and Qatar coordinate on increasing the security in the Persian 
Gulf. However, the State Department remains concerned about the security in the 
Middle East region, including Qatar, as attacks against Western targets have occurred. 
The possibility of terrorist’s strikes against Western targets by al-Qa’ida and affiliated 
organizations continue. Security at official facilities has increased. The U.S. embassy 
strongly encourages U.S. citizens to avoid large crowds.  
 
 Human rights abuses occur in Qatar. Despite the constitutional prohibition 
against arbitrary detention, society protection and antiterrorism laws provide for 
exceptions. Recent human rights abuses include the inability to peacefully change the 
 
8 
 
 
government, restrictions of fundamental liberties, and a pervasive denial of workers’ 
rights. 
 
 Journalists under political pressure censor their own reports related to 
government policies. Although the Doha-based Al-Jazeera satellite television channel is 
touted as independent, it is state-owned and subsidized, and the government controls 
its content.  
 
 Qatar does not recognize dual nationality and requires Qatari citizens to only 
hold Qatari citizenship, and to enter and exit the country only on a Qatari passport. 
Authorities have confiscated the passports of U.S. citizens who have acquired Qatari 
citizenship through marriage to a Qatari national. Qatar law enforcement authorities do 
not routinely notify the U.S. embassy in Doha of U.S. citizens’ arrest and, for more 
serious crimes, the authorities may not allow a U.S. embassy official to visit an arrested 
U.S. citizen until the initial interrogation has been completed. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
 
9 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
Applicant repeatedly failed to disclose required information on his SCAs. He 
failed to provide information about his family members, his foreign travel, and that he 
was fired from a job. I find his actions were deliberate and intentional. I find both of the 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the personal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
17. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
 
10 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant initially only disclosed those siblings who were U.S. citizens. The SCA 
is quite clear as far as what information is required to be disclosed. He initially only 
disclosed some of his trips to Jordan. He failed to initially disclose he was fired from a 
job. He completed two SCAs and had two interviews and a hearing. New information, 
that he was required to disclose, was learned each time he was interviewed or in each 
SCA. At his hearing, it was learned that when he traveled to Jordan he would also on 
occasion take trips to Israel or Egypt. This was information Applicant repeatedly did not 
disclose even when thoroughly questioned by the investigator about his foreign travel. I 
find Applicant was intentionally concealing his trips. The government relies on 
applicants to provide accurate and complete information upfront to make a 
determination about their honesty and trustworthiness. Applicant’s repeated actions cast 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He failed to make prompt, 
good-faith efforts to correct his omissions, concealments, and falsifications. Rather, it 
was only when he was re-interviewed or at his hearing that he finally disclosed the 
accurate information. I find the above mitigating conditions do not apply. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
11 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The 
totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie 
must be considered.  
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”21 
 
 Jordan is a country with significant human rights issues. Specifically, its citizens’ 
inability to peaceably change their government; abuses committed with impunity by 
security forces; and violence against women. Another area of concern is its treatment of 
dual citizens of Jordan, requiring them to comply with certain Jordanian obligations. 
These issues raise heightened security concerns. I find Applicant’s ties to Bahrain and 
Qatar are minimal. Although he has family members who live in these countries, their 
ties are also minimal. It is their ultimate ties to Jordan that remain a concern. 
 
 Applicant has close ties with his many family members in Jordan. His parents 
and two sisters are dual citizens of the United States and Jordan and reside in Jordan. 
They obtained their U.S. citizenship, but their home and work remain in Jordan. 
Applicant’s parents’ home is in Jordan and his father has substantial business interests 
there. His brother is a citizen and resident of Jordan. He works for Applicant’s father in 
one of his stores. He has medical needs that are addressed in Jordan. Applicant has 
other siblings who are Jordanian citizens but live in Bahrain and Qatar. His brother is a 
dual citizen of Canada. Applicant visits Jordan regularly. Applicant has strong ties to 
Jordan. I find Applicant’s family connections to Jordan create a heightened security 
concern. This concern is increased because Applicant failed to disclose all of his foreign 
travel to Jordan, Egypt, and Israel. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply.  
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
                                                          
21 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
12 
 
 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 Applicant has regular contact with his family members in Jordan. He visits the 
country at least every other year. He maintains close contact with his parents and 
siblings. I find AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply as his family contact is not casual or infrequent.  
 
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government or the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. Applicant 
has been a citizen of the United States since 2006. His family remains in Jordan where 
he maintains close ties. He visits regularly. I am not convinced, based on all of the 
evidence, including Applicant’s failure to be truthful about his foreign travel, that there is 
no conflict of interest. I cannot conclude at this time that Applicant could be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. I find AG ¶ 8(b) does not 
apply. I also find AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply because Applicant’s relationship with his 
family and Jordan’s human rights record do not indicate that it is unlikely Applicant 
would be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his family 
and the interests of the United States.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
13 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen with close ties to Jordan. His loyalty and devotion 
to his family creates a heightened security risk and a conflict of interest that is not 
mitigated. Applicant’s failure to be honest and truthful and his concealment of 
information throughout the whole investigative process raise serious security concerns. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for foreign influence and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
