 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09417 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations and Guideline B, foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 24, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. On 
December 7, 2012, DOD issued Applicant an amended SOR detailing additional 
security concerns under Guideline B. The actions were taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 4, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. He answered the amended SOR on December 15, 
2012. The case was assigned to me on January 3, 2013. Applicant requested the 
hearing be held during a ten-day period to accommodate his schedule. His request was 
granted. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 14, 2013. The hearing was to be 
held on January 23, 2013, but was postponed until January 24, 2013, due to a travel 
delay. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and they were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through D, 
and they were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on February 1, 2013.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel submitted a request that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts relating to Egypt. Applicant did not object and the request was approved. 
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR and amended SOR allegations. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He has never been married and has no children. He is 
engaged to an American citizen. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2011. He 
is a linguist serving in a foreign country. He was born in Egypt and earned his college 
degree there in 2002.1 
 
 In 1999, Applicant’s mother was selected in an immigration lottery that permitted 
her and her family to immigrate to the United States. Applicant moved with his parents, 
but traveled back and forth to Egypt to continue his college studies. His brother also 
attended college in Egypt and traveled back and forth. His parents would travel back 
and forth to the United States twice a year to maintain their permanent resident status in 
the United States until 2004 when they permanently moved to the United States. They 
applied for U.S. citizenship in November 2012 and are waiting for their application to be 
approved.2  
 
 Applicant’s father was a travel agent in Egypt. He was working for an 
international company before moving to the United States. He retired in 1999 and 
received a lump-sum pension that he took with him when he moved to the United 
States. Applicant’s mother did not work outside the home. Both parents reside with 
Applicant, who pays all of their living expenses. His mother has two brothers who are 
citizens and residents of the United States. She has a third brother, Applicant’s uncle, 
                                                          
1 Tr. 27, 91. 
 
2 Tr. 68-70, 73-80. 
 
3 
 
 
who is a citizen and resident of Egypt. Applicant has minimal contact with his uncle, 
talking with him once or twice a year. He last visited his uncle in 2006. Applicant sends 
his uncle $50 a month to give to a church as a charitable donation to support a child 
from the church. Applicant’s father has no contact with any family in Egypt. Neither 
parent has any contact with the government of Egypt.3 
 
 Applicant applied for U.S. citizenship in 2002, but was denied. He believed it was 
because he did not earn enough money. He reapplied and became a naturalized citizen 
in 2009. His brother became a naturalized citizen in approximately 2005. His brother 
married in 2006. He met his wife in the church choir. His brother’s wife is a permanent 
resident of the United States and a citizen of Egypt. She works for an American 
company in the United States, where they reside. Applicant has regular contact with his 
brother and sister-in-law.4  
 
 Applicant and his brother were not conscripted into the Egyptian armed forces 
because they moved from Egypt before they met the age requirement and then they 
were exempted because they were attending college. Applicant noted that it was difficult 
to have a career in the Egyptian military because members of his religion were 
discriminated against and they could not serve in any leadership capacity.5  
 
Applicant’s parents own an apartment in Egypt. It has been vacant for about six 
to eight years. Applicant lived there when he was attending college in Egypt. His uncle 
checks on the property occasionally. Applicant estimated the apartment’s worth to be 
around $100,000. His parents do not want to give up the apartment. They do not intend 
to return to Egypt.6 
 
 Applicant has a college friend who is Egyptian. He last saw him in 2006 when the 
friend visited Applicant in the United States. They exchange occasional text messages. 
His friend used to work in Cairo for a foreign airline, but he does not know where he 
works today.7  
 
 In 2003, Applicant purchased a house as an investment. In 2005, Applicant 
began investing in real estate to make a living. He used his savings to purchase two 
houses. He was able to sell them. He retained the first house he purchased in 2003. He 
was able to obtain loan modifications on this property after the interest rates rose. He is 
                                                          
3 Tr. 31, 57, 64-65, 81, 83-86, 99-100. 
 
4 Tr. 70-73, 79, 81-83, 98. 
 
5 Tr. 87-89. 
 
6 Tr. 65-68, 83. 
 
7 Tr. 86-87. 
 
 
4 
 
 
current with all of his payments since the modifications were approved. He rents the 
house and the rent covers the mortgage.8 
 
Applicant next obtained a loan to purchase undeveloped property to build a 
house. The housing market collapsed before the house was completed. Applicant’s first 
mortgage on the property was $189,400 (SOR ¶ 1.b) and the second was for $53,576 
(SOR ¶ 1.a). When the house was completed, Applicant unsuccessfully tried to sell it, 
so he tried to rent it. He had an adjustable interest rate on the mortgage and it 
increased. He could not get enough rent to cover the mortgage. He was unable to get a 
loan modification because the house was not his primary residence. He made payments 
on the house for about three years, at which point he was unable to pay the mortgage 
and defaulted. He did not pay the mortgage for about 11 months. The house was 
foreclosed in January 2009, and the creditor resold the property.9 Applicant received an 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Tax Form that required he claim the amount forgiven as 
earned income. It does not appear he owes a deficiency on the first mortgage. He filed 
the IRS form with his federal income tax return. He paid the amount that he owed.10 The 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is resolved. 
 
 In the past, Applicant attempted to negotiate a settlement on the second 
mortgage debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, but the creditor wanted more than Applicant could afford at 
the time. Recently, the creditor agreed to settle the debt. Applicant is to pay $8,037 in 
three increments. He made the initial $4,000 payment on December 21, 2012. He is 
required to make payments on January 30, 2013, and February 27, 2012, of $2,037 and 
$2,000 respectively.11 This debt is being resolved. 
 
Because of the foreclosure, Applicant became a financial risk and two of his 
credit cards that had been current were closed. Applicant contacted the creditors and 
was told he had to pay the cards in full. He was unable to do so, which caused the 
accounts to go to collection. Applicant made arrangements to settle the accounts and 
paid them off in late 2010.12  
 
Applicant earns a salary of approximately $175,000 and has about $95,000 in 
savings. He is meeting all of his financial obligations. Applicant owns his own home and 
is current on his mortgage. He stated he has learned his lesson about taking financial 
risks.13 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 33. 
 
9 Tr. 44-50; AE A. 
 
10 Tr. 23-27, 30, 37-43, 96-97. 
 
11 Tr. 21-23 43-44, 57-63; AE B, C, D. 
 
12 Tr. 94; GE 1. 
 
13 Tr. 28-30, 32-36. 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from an Army chaplain serving with him 
during his overseas employment. She served with him for eight months where he 
translated and helped with numerous humanitarian missions. She considered him a 
reliable partner, willingly giving his time and energy to the mission, even when it 
required overtime hours and extra work. He is considered the “go to” linguist and has 
assisted many soldiers and commanders. The chaplain believes Applicant to have 
impeccable character and is a thoughtful peer. He is a friend to soldiers and civilians in 
the camp. He is a true colleague and professional.14  
 
Egypt 
 
 The United States and Egyptian relationship has entered a period of uncertainty, 
in the wake of President Mubarak’s resignation in 2011, after 29 years in office. The 
Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF), consisting of military officers in leading 
positions under Mubarak, at one point exercised executive authority, but it has officially 
ceded power to newly elected President Muhammad Morsi. He has consolidated his 
power around his administration and a broader network of Muslim Brotherhood 
supporters at the expense of the military.  
 
 In the past, the United States and Egypt have enjoyed a strong and friendly 
relationship based on mutual interest in Middle East peace and stability, revitalizing the 
Egyptian economy, strengthening trade relations, and promoting regional security. 
However, U.S.-Egyptian opportunities for diplomacy may be overshadowed by 
disruptive trends that have been unleashed by the “Arab Spring” allowing for more anti-
Americanism, radical Islamist politics, and antipathy toward Israel and sectarianism.  
 
 There are instances of instability and public disorder in Egypt. There have been 
demonstrations that have degenerated into violent clashes between police and 
protesters, with numerous deaths and injuries. There is ongoing and increased 
sectarian violence against religious minorities that have resulted in deaths and 
instability. Egypt has suffered numerous terrorist attacks over the years where 
foreigners have been killed, injured, and kidnapped. Some victims were Americans. In 
April 2011, Egypt released 16 members of a terrorist cell with ties to al-Qa’ida, which 
was formed to target tourists and Christians.  
 
 Egypt’s Northern Sinai region remains a base for smuggling arms and explosives 
into Gaza. In addition, the smuggling of humans, weapons, cash, and other contraband 
through the Sinai into Israel and the Gaza Strip has created criminal networks that may 
be associated with terrorist groups in the region. Human rights violations and abuse of 
power was prevalent during the 2011 uprising.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
14 Answer. 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contacts creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
Applicant’s parents, who live with him, are citizens of Egypt and permanent 
residents of the United States. His sister-in-law is an Egyptian citizen and a permanent 
resident of the United States. His uncle and a friend are citizens and residents of Egypt. 
His relationships could potentially create a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
 
8 
 
 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government or the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. 
Applicant’s parents and sister-in-law are citizens of Egypt who live in the United States 
and are permanent residents. His uncle and friend are citizens and residents of Egypt. It 
is clear that Egypt has numerous terrorist organizations that target U.S. citizens. Egypt’s 
human rights record is poor.  
 
Applicant’s parents immigrated to the United States in 1999, and there is no 
evidence that they intend to return to Egypt. They live with and are financially supported 
by Applicant. They continue to own an apartment in Egypt, but there is no evidence that 
Applicant’s parents have contact with the Egyptian government. They have applied for 
citizenship in the United States. Their sons and daughter-in-law live in the United 
States. Applicant is obviously close to his parents. The residence in the United States 
and support by Applicant make it highly unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of his parents and those of the 
United States. Considering the strong familial ties in the United States, it is highly 
unlikely that even with an apartment in Egypt that this could be used to exploit Applicant 
or his parents. Applicant’s sister-in-law also has strong ties in the United States. 
Although she is an Egyptian citizen, she is a permanent resident of the United States. 
Her husband, Applicant’s brother, is a U.S. citizen. It is unlikely Applicant would be in a 
position to be exploited because of his relationship with his parents or his sister-in-law. I 
find AG ¶ 8(a) applies to both Applicant’s parents and sister-in-law. I conclude AG ¶¶ 
8(b) and 8(c) do not apply because Applicant has more than a casual relationship with 
his parents and sister-in-law, and his sense of loyalty to them is not considered minimal.  
 
With regards to Applicant’s relationship with his uncle in Egypt and his friend, I 
find AG ¶ 8(c) applies. Applicant has minimal contact with both persons. He uses his 
uncle as a conduit to donate money to a charity and he occasionally sends text 
messages to his friend. These relationships are not sufficiently close to be exploited. 
 
9 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had two delinquent debts relating to a house he owned that was 
foreclosed due to nonpayment. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Applicant was involved in purchasing houses and reselling them for profit. When 
interest rates rose and the real estate market became unstable, he was unable to pay 
the mortgages on his investment. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was resolved through the sale 
of the house and Applicant was issued an IRS form, which he filed and paid the 
required taxes. He recently negotiated a settlement agreement for the delinquent 
second mortgage in SOR ¶ 1.b. He has made one payment and has the resources to 
complete the payment plan. Because he is still making payments, I find AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply as the debt is recent and being resolved.  
 
 Applicant assumed the risk when he entered the real estate market as a 
business to buy and sell homes. When the market was good, he made money. When 
the market had a downturn he was overextended and could not meet his payments. He 
had adjustable rate mortgages. Although he could not anticipate the economic future at 
that time, as an investor and not just a person buying a primary residence, he was 
aware that the adjustable interest rates had a possibility of going up. He did not plan for 
that possibility, which is the risk one takes with this type of mortgage. I find AG ¶ 20(b) 
does not apply because Applicant was in the real estate business and was aware of the 
potential risk with this type of financing.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant sought financial counseling. He has resolved the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.b when the house was sold and he filed and paid the resulting taxes. 
He has settled and is in a payment plan regarding the remaining debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. He 
has the resources to complete the payment plan within the next month. Applicant also 
showed good faith when he resolved other debts that were not part of the SOR and 
were a consequence of his financial difficulties. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
11 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has sufficiently mitigated the security concerns raised by his family 
connections to Egypt. Applicant had financial problems when he was unable to make 
mortgage payments on his real estate investments. He has resolved his financial 
difficulties. Applicant has met his burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising under the foreign influence and financial considerations guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
