 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04157 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 3, 2012, the Defense of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B. This action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On October 24, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was originally assigned to another judge and scheduled for a hearing that was 
later canceled. The case was reassigned to me on January 4, 2013. The Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a second notice of hearing on January 22, 
2013, and the hearing was convened as rescheduled on February 7, 2012. At that 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 that were 
 
2 
 
admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel submitted documents 
requesting administrative notice of facts concerning India that were marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant had no objection to the administrative notice request, and the 
request was granted. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through 
F that were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until 
February 11, 2013, for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant later 
submitted an email with attachments that were marked as AE G through L that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. HE II is Department Counsel’s email indicating 
she had no objection to the post-hearing submission. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on February 15, 2013. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Two SOR allegations were identified as ¶ 1.b. To correct this administrative error, 
the second of those allegations was re-lettered as ¶ 1.c and the remaining two 
allegations were re-lettered in order as ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. Applicant and Department 
Counsel had no objection to the re-lettering of the allegations.1 
 
Findings of Facts 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted four of the five SOR allegations 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.d). His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 39 years old. He was born in India. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
1996 and a master’s degree in 1998. Both degrees were obtained from Indian 
educational institutions. He immigrated to the United States in November 1999 and 
became a U.S. citizen in October 2009. He is a software engineer who is employed by a 
defense contractor. He has worked for his current employer for ten years. This is the 
first time that he has applied for a security clearance.2  
 
Applicant is married. His wife was born in India. They married in India in 
December 1999. She immigrated to the United States in December 2000 and became a 
U.S. citizen in October 2009. Applicant and his wife have two children, ages 3 and 6, 
who were both born in the United States. She currently is a housewife but expects to 
work again as a software engineer in the future. Their children only speak English.3 
 
Applicant’s father and mother are citizens and residents of India. His father is 74 
years old. He is retired and receives a pension. He had previously worked for a private 
bank. He never served in the military or worked for the Indian government. He has 
authored books in the past and is currently writing one on spiritualism. Applicant’s 
mother is 70 years old. She is a housewife and never worked for the Indian government. 
                                                          
1 Tr. 9-10. 
 
2 Tr. 5, 33-35, 57-58, 60-61; GE 1, 2. 
3 Tr.  35-36, 40-42, 47, 49-50, 54-59, 61; GE 1, 2; AE A-E. 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s parents are financially independent. They have visited him twice in the 
United States. He talks to them on the telephone about twice a month.4 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of India. 
His father-in-law is 74 years old. He worked for a private bank, but is now retired. His 
mother-in-law is about 65 years old and is a housewife. Neither of them worked for the 
Indian government. Applicant’s wife talks to her parents on the telephone about once a 
week.5 
 
Applicant’s brother is his only sibling. His brother is 43 years old and is a citizen 
of India and resident of the United States. He is a software engineer who works for a 
U.S. government contractor. He is married and has two children. His wife is a 
housewife. He is a lawful permanent resident of the United States, and he and his wife 
expect to obtain their U.S. citizenship in the near future.6 
 
Applicant’s sister-in-law (wife’s sister) and her husband are citizens and residents 
of India. They are both dentists and have their own dental practice. Neither has worked 
for the Indian government. They have two children. Applicant’s wife talks to her sister 
about twice a month.7 
 
Since immigrating to the United States, Applicant has visited India twice. He 
returned once to get married in 1999. At that time, he was an Indian citizen and traveled 
on an Indian passport. In 2010, he returned again to visit relatives. India does not 
recognize dual citizenship. When he returned as U.S. citizen, he traveled on his U.S. 
passport.8 
 
Applicant has no property in India. His wife has a bank account in India with a 
balance of about $1,000. She used that account while she lived there. Applicant and his 
wife own three houses in the United States. The total value of the three houses is about 
$896,000. One property has no mortgage. The other two have mortgages totaling about 
$308,000. His retirement accounts total about $250,000. He has a savings account with 
a balance of about $57,000. Applicant coaches his son’s soccer team. He is also 
actively involved in his church.9 
 
The president of Applicant’s company indicated that Applicant has demonstrated 
honesty, loyalty, and support to the United States in the ten years that he has known 
                                                          
4 Tr. 12, 37, 42-46, 54-55, 62-64; GE 1, 2. 
5 Tr. 38-39, 46-47, 54-55, 64-65; GE 1, 2. 
6 Tr. 36-37, 49, 64-55, 64; GE 1, 2. 
7 Tr. 39-40, 47-49, 54-55, 57, 61-62, 65; GE 2. 
8 Tr. 40-44, 65; GE 2; HE I. 
9 Tr. 14, 50-54, 55-57, 65-67; GE 2, AE G-L. 
 
4 
 
him. He described him as a trusted U.S. citizen. The information technology manager of 
the company stated that Applicant is very respectfully of privacy, sensitive information, 
rules, and restrictions. A number of other co-workers indicated that Applicant is diligent 
worker who possesses impeccable character.10 
 
India11 
 
India is a multiparty, federal parliamentary democracy with a bicameral 
parliament and has a population of approximately 1.2 billion people.  
 
The Indian Government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but serious 
problems exist. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial killings of 
persons in custody, disappearance, torture, and rape. The lack of accountability 
permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere in which human 
rights violations went unpunished. A number of violent attacks were committed in recent 
years by separatist and terrorist groups. In November 2008, terrorists coordinated an 
attack at a hotel in Mumbai, frequented by westerners.  
 
The United States recognizes India as key to strategic interests and has sought 
to strengthen its relationship with India. The two countries are the world’s largest 
democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by representative 
government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, in fighting 
terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia. However, differences over India’s 
nuclear weapons program and pace of economic reform exist. 
 
As of 2000, India was listed as one of many countries actively engaged in 
economic intelligence collection and industrial espionage directed at the United States, 
although there is no evidence that India then or now tortures or abuses its citizens to 
extract economic intelligence. The United States has also had longstanding economic 
issues with India regarding protection of intellectual property rights and trade in dual-use 
technology. As of 2008, there had been several incidents of international businesses 
illegally exporting, or attempting to export, restricted, dual-use technology from the 
United States to India. There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted 
illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including technology and 
equipment which were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to 
programs for the development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of 
delivery. Foreign government and private entities, including intelligence organizations 
and security services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. 
technology.  
 
The United States views India as a growing world power with which it shares 
common strategic interests. There is a strong partnership between the two countries 
and they are expected to continue addressing differences and shaping a dynamic and 
                                                          
10 AE F.  
11  HE I.  
 
5 
 
collaborative future. The United States and India seek to elevate the strategic 
partnership further to include cooperation in counter-terrorism, defense, education, and 
joint democracy promotion. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two are potentially applicable here: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk of greater than the normal risk inherent in having a 
family member living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign 
country. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”12 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
7 
 
security.”13 Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, 
the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerability to coercion from the government, terrorist organizations, or 
other groups.14 
 
 Applicant has close family ties in India. His parents and in-laws are citizens and 
residents of India. Because India was listed as a country actively engaged in economic 
intelligence collection directed at the United States and has human rights and terrorism 
concerns, Applicant’s close family members in India create a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Those family contacts could also 
create a potential conflict of interest with his obligation to protect sensitive information. 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Three are potentially applicable in this case. 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
Applicant’s contacts with his parents and in-laws cannot be characterized as 
causal or infrequent. Even though none of Applicant’s relatives in India work for 
governmental entities, the risk of intelligence collection, terrorism, or human rights 
abuses against his immediate family members could place Applicant in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of those family members and the interests of the 
United States, AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply. 
 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
14 See generally, ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where family members resided.) 
 
8 
 
Thirteen years ago, Applicant came to the United States at the age of 26. He 
became a U.S. citizen in 2009. His wife and children are U.S. citizens. His children 
speak only English. His professional future and all of his property interests, including 
three homes, are in the United States. He is actively involved in the local community. He 
gave up Indian citizenship by becoming a U.S. citizen. Based on Applicant’s deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, he can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable to all 
of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has developed deep roots in the United States. His coworkers attest to 
his reliability, trustworthiness, and high moral character. Since becoming a U.S. citizen, 
Applicant has only used his U.S. passport to travel overseas. Whatever potential 
conflicts that may arise from him having family members in India are more than 
counterbalanced by his interests, responsibilities, and loyalties to the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Considering all the 
evidence, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for foreign influence. 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
