 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04061 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Konrad B. Jarzyna, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 21, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 15, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 4, 2012. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 11, 2012, scheduling the hearing for January 7, 2013. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted into 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through E, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on January 15, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2007. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1987 
until he was honorably discharged in 1995. He served in the National Guard from 2006 
until he was honorably discharged in 2004. He held a security clearance in the military, 
but it lapsed upon his discharge. He has not held a clearance while working for his 
current employer. He attended technical school for a short period, but did not obtain a 
degree. He has been married for more than 20 years, and he has a 20-year-old child.1 
  
 Applicant has suffered chronic shoulder pain since about 1992. He has been in 
therapy for bipolar disorder and depression for several years, and he is on medication. 
Applicant’s chronic pain added to his depression. In about 2008, Applicant had a 
reunion with other military veterans and several of the veterans told him they used 
marijuana for their pain. Applicant started smoking marijuana as self-medication for his 
pain in about December 2009. He would smoke the marijuana at home in the evenings 
to assist in alleviating his pain and to help him sleep. The marijuana also helped him 
with the side effects of his bipolar medication. He also occasionally smoked marijuana 
at the home of the person from whom he bought the marijuana. Applicant always 
purchased his marijuana from the same individual. In the fall of 2011, the individual was 
going through a custody case. He told Applicant that he was going to kill his ex-wife. 
Applicant reported the information to the police. Applicant was not required to testify at 
criminal proceedings, but the ex-wife subpoenaed him to testify at the custody hearing. 
Applicant has not had a relationship with the individual since he reported the individual 
to the police.2 
 
 Applicant last smoked marijuana in December 2011. His company wanted him to 
apply for a security clearance, and he realized that using illegal drugs was inappropriate 
and inconsistent with holding a security clearance. Applicant had severe pain in January 
2012. His family physician was on vacation, so he went to the hospital emergency room. 
The hospital doctor noted that the pain appeared to be emanating from the vertebrae in 
the neck, as opposed to the shoulder. The doctor recommended an MRI, acupuncture, 
and chiropractic care. He was also prescribed pain medication. The MRI revealed that 
his problem was not his shoulder, but the neck and spine. The subsequent treatment, 
focusing on the neck, has been successful, and Applicant has not had significant pain in 
six to seven months. He has not had to take prescription pain medication during that 
period.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 15-17, 31-34, 50-51; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 18-23, 29-36, 39-43, 49-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A, E. 
 
3 Tr. at 21, 42-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant revealed his marijuana use when he submitted his Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) in January 2012. He also discussed it with the 
investigator during his background interview in February 2012.4  
 
 Applicant sees a psychiatrist every three months and a therapist once a month 
for his bipolar disorder and depression. The psychiatrist has adjusted his medication, 
and Applicant feels better. He has not received substance abuse counseling, but he has 
discussed his marijuana use with his therapist.5 
 
 Applicant is aware that his marijuana use was wrong, against his employer’s 
policy, and illegal. He credibly testified that he will not use illegal drugs again. He no 
longer associates with the person who sold him the marijuana or, to his knowledge, 
anyone else who uses illegal drugs. He is willing to sign a statement of intent that he will 
not use marijuana in the future, with automatic revocation of his clearance for any 
violation.6 
 
 Applicant served in Operation Desert Storm while he was in the military, and he 
also deployed to Bosnia for peacekeeping operations. He submitted several letters and 
documents attesting to his excellent job performance, dedication, reliability, 
professionalism, work ethic, trustworthiness, leadership, and integrity.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
4 GE 1-2. 
 
5 Tr. at 26-27, 33-34, 38-39, 46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 27-28, 37-38, 43, 47-50, 56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 16, 51-52; AE B-D. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;8 and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
                                                          
8 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s possession and use of marijuana are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 25(a) 
and 25(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana as self-medication for his chronic pain and to help 
him with the side effects of his bipolar medication. His company wanted him to apply for 
a security clearance, and he realized that using illegal drugs was inappropriate while 
holding a security clearance. At about the same time, he reported his marijuana supplier 
to the police for making death threats against the supplier’s ex-wife. He has not used 
illegal drugs since December 2011. His pain is under control, and his bipolar medication 
has been adjusted. He clearly, unequivocally, and credibly committed to remaining 
drug-free. He is willing to sign a statement of intent that he will not use marijuana in the 
future, with automatic revocation of his clearance for any violation. I find that he 
demonstrated an appropriate period of abstinence and that illegal drug use is unlikely to 
recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I have considered Applicant’s honorable military service and his favorable 
character evidence. Applicant exhibited poor judgment and a disregard for the law when 
he used illegal drugs. However, I am convinced that he has put his inappropriate and 
illegal behavior behind him and it will not recur.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated drug involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
