 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05863 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jason Perry, Esq. and Arthur Draper, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 3, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B. The 
actions was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 29, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 3, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
 
2 
 
 
17, 2013. The hearing was held as scheduled on February 7, 2013. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, and they were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant and three witnesses testified. He offered Exhibits (AE) A through N, 
and they were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until 
February 14, 2013, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He timely 
submitted an additional document, marked as AE O. Department Counsel had no 
objection, and it was admitted into evidence, and the record closed.1 DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 15, 2013.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel submitted a request that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts relating to Syria, Turkey, and Jordan.2 Applicant did not object and the 
request was approved. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of 
Fact, below.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He was born in Syria and lived with his parents. In 
2001 he married a U.S. citizen he met in Syria. He moved to the United States in 2005, 
and she sponsored him for permanent residence. He became a U.S. citizen in October 
2010 and obtained an American passport the same month. His Syrian passport expired 
in September 2010, and he has not renewed it. He gave it to his facility security officer 
to destroy. He and his wife had no children and divorced in 2007. Applicant remarried in 
January 2012 and divorced in August 2012. His second wife was a U.S. citizen. He has 
an infant son from the marriage who was born in the United States.3  
 
 Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree from 1996 to 2001, while living in Syria. He 
was awarded a prestigious scholarship from Britain and earned his master’s degree 
there. He has no financial obligations to the school. He does not stay in contact with 
anyone from either institution.4  
 
 Applicant explained that he did not formally renounce his Syrian citizenship 
because he was told by friends if he sent a letter to the Syrian embassy to renounce his 
citizenship it would raise a red flag that he was working for the U.S. Government. He 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit IV is Department Counsel’s memorandum. 
 
2 Hearing Exhibits I, II, III are the supporting documents to the Government’s request for administrative 
notice.  
 
3 Tr. 52-60, 66-67, 147 161, 163-165; AE M is a letter from the facility security officer confirming 
destruction of Applicant’s Syrian passport. 
 
4 Tr. 53, 70-75. 
 
3 
 
 
does not consider himself to be a dual citizen, but if the U.S. Government wants him to 
send a letter of renunciation he will do so. He has never worked for the Syrian 
government and has never voted in a Syrian election. He does not intend to ever return 
to Syria.5  
 
 A background check was done on Applicant by the FBI in 2006, and he was 
granted eligibility for a public trust position in 2009. He has held a secret clearance 
since 2011.6  
 
 Applicant has held steady employment in his field of expertise. He has worked in 
various mediums. From May 2008 to August 2008, Applicant worked for a foreign 
embassy in the United States (SOR ¶ 1.d). He wanted to improve his resume and 
increase his employment opportunities. He has no affiliation or allegiance to the country. 
He took the job to obtain experience in his field of expertise. At the time he was a 
permanent resident of the United States. He was not involved in any military issues. The 
job lasted for three months until the embassy terminated the position. He has had no 
contact with any embassy personnel, and he never developed any friendships while 
working there.7  
 
 Since 2008, Applicant has worked on a contractual basis with another 
government agency to provide simultaneous interpretation. He is often called upon by 
the agency for specific assignments. His current employer is aware of his part-time 
employment and supports him. Applicant was also employed for one semester as a 
part-time college instructor. He has been at his present job since June 2011.8  
 
 Applicant’s parents left Syria recently and went to Turkey. They left Turkey a few 
weeks ago and were in Jordan temporarily. Applicant had applied for visas for his 
parents and they were granted visa interviews in Jordan.9 His mother had her interview 
immediately and shortly thereafter received her visa for entry into the United States. 
Applicant stated that his mother is waiting for the issuance of a permanent residency 
card, which was supposed to take ten days. Applicant’s mother now lives with him in the 
United States. Applicant intends to provide her support and does not believe she ever 
intends to return to Syria. Applicant stated his mother intends to apply for U.S. 
citizenship when eligible. His mother has never worked for the Syrian government. 
Applicant acknowledged it is too dangerous to remain in Syria.10 
                                                          
5 Tr. 61-64. 
 
6 Tr. 64. 
 
7 Tr. 73-93, 139, 145, 161-162. 
 
8 Tr. 73-93. 
 
9 AE A, B, C, D, K. 
 
10 Tr. 95-112. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s father had his interview in Jordan and was advised that the process 
could take from 2 to 60 days. He was told his visa was not denied, but it is just taking 
longer for processing. At this point, Applicant’s father remains in Jordan waiting for his 
visa to be approved. Once it is approved he will move to the United States and live with 
Applicant. His father intends to apply to become a U.S. citizen when eligible. Applicant’s 
parents’ decision to move to the United States was made before the civil war in Syria. 
Applicant’s father is 71 years old and he retired three years ago. He was an accountant 
at a candy store. He has also worked as a mechanic. He served in the Syrian military 
when he was 18. Other than his mandatory military service, he has never worked for the 
Syrian government. He owns a house and land in Syria, but due to the conflict there, 
Applicant speculated it is not worth much. Applicant maintains contact with his father as 
he awaits issuance of his visa.11  
 
 Applicant has three brothers and a sister. His eldest brother is 43 years old. He is 
a teacher who is married with three children. He has never worked for the Syrian 
government. He fled to Turkey and lives with another brother there. His brother and his 
family do not intend to return to Syria. Their hope is to immigrate through the United 
Nations refugee program to either the United States or Canada. Applicant has minimal 
contact with his brother. When he does, it is an annual phone call or he hears news 
about him through his mother.12  
 
Applicant’s second brother is 40 years old. He owned a clothing store and is a 
tailor. He has never worked for the Syrian government. He moved to Turkey because of 
the war in Syria. Applicant stated his brother does not intend to return to Syria. He is 
married and has two children who are with him. He and his family are refugees. They 
intend to apply for immigration through the United Nations refugee program and hope to 
move to the United States or Canada. Applicant does not intend to sponsor him for 
immigration. Applicant stated he is not close to this brother. Since 2004, he has spoken 
to him once by telephone.13  
 
 Applicant’s third brother is 32 years old. He is a partner with his second brother in 
the clothing store business. He has never worked for the Syrian government. He and his 
family are refugees in Turkey and they live with the third brother. He is married and has 
one child. Applicant has minimal contact with this brother. His brother also intends to 
immigrate through the United Nations refugee program.14  
 
 Applicant’s sister is a teacher. She has never worked for the Syrian government. 
She is married and has four children. Applicant has not had any contact with his sister in 
two to three years. Her husband owns a satellite dish store. Applicant provided a 
                                                          
11 Tr. 95-112, 157-159. 
 
12 Tr. 112, 124-127; AE I are the rental agreement documents for Applicant’s family living in Turkey. They 
are listed as refugees on the documents.  
 
13 Tr. 113-119. 
 
14 Tr. 119-124. 
 
5 
 
 
document from his mother that explains Applicant’s sister is now in Turkey with her 
family.15  
 
 Applicant recently had contact with his siblings because he was arranging for his 
parents’ move to the United States.  
 
 Applicant traveled to Syria in 2005. He went there to have dental work because 
he did not have insurance, and he could not afford to have it done in the United States. 
He also visited family while there. Applicant returned to Syria in October 2008 to visit his 
mother who had health issues. He also visited other family members while there. 
Applicant used his Syrian passport for these visits because he was not yet a U.S. 
citizen. In March 2011 he returned to Syria to visit his parents. He was a U.S. citizen 
and traveled on his American passport.16  
 
 Applicant has no assets in Syria. He is financially solvent and has approximately 
$380,000 in assets in the United States.17  
 
 Three witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant. An Army captain, who works 
with Applicant and has oversight over his work performance, considers him a great 
person. Applicant is able to use his knowledge to make outstanding contributions to the 
mission. Having worked with Applicant, he is confident of his dedication to the 
mission.18  
 
 Applicant’s program manager testified on his behalf. She considers Applicant’s 
work performance to be outstanding, and he is a wonderful employee. She has no 
hesitation in recommending him for a security clearance.19  
 
 Applicant’s team leader testified on his behalf. He is Applicant’s immediate 
supervisor. He considers Applicant one of the most motivated members of the team. He 
understands the nature of their mission. He considers Applicant a responsible person. 
He has no hesitation in recommending Applicant for a Top Secret clearance.20  
 
Syria 
 
 Syria is ruled by an authoritarian regime. The U.S. State Department has 
designated Syria as a state sponsor of terrorism. Syria provides safe-haven as well as 
                                                          
15 Tr. 127-130; AE O. 
 
16 Tr. 131-138. 
 
17 Tr. 67-68. 
 
18 Tr. 22-33. 
 
19 Tr. 33-41. 
 
20 Tr. 41-50. 
 
6 
 
 
political and other support to a number of designated Palestinian terrorist groups. The 
operational leadership provided by many of these groups is headquartered or sheltered 
in Syria, and the Syrian government allows such groups to receive and ship goods, 
including weapons, in and out of the country. It also provided diplomatic, political and 
material support to Hizballah in Lebanon and allowed Iran to supply this organization 
with weapons.  
 
 Syria has maintained its ties with its strategic ally, and fellow state sponsor of 
terrorism, Iran.  
 
 Since the transfer of sovereignty in Iraq in June 2004, Syria extended qualified 
support to the Iraqi government and pledged to cooperate in the areas of border 
security, repatriation of Iraqi assets, and eventual restoration of formal diplomatic 
relations.  
 
 Due to the government of Syria’s support of terrorism, continuing its occupation 
of Lebanon, pursuing weapons of mass destruction and missile programs, undermining 
U.S. and international efforts with respect to the stabilization and reconstruction of Iraq, 
both Presidents Bush and Obama determined Syria’s actions constituted an unusual 
and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the 
United States and declared a national emergency to deal with that threat. Executive 
orders were signed to block property of certain persons and prohibiting the export of 
certain goods to Syria. The executive orders remain in effect.  
 
 Syria has a poor human rights record. The three most egregious human rights 
violations are the right to peaceable change the government; massive attacks and 
strategic use of citizen killings as a means of intimidation and control; and denial of civil 
liberties.  
 
 Dual citizens and U.S. citizens of Syrian origin may be subject to compulsory 
military service in Syria, unless they receive an exemption prior to their entry into Syria.  
 
 The Syrian government conducts intense physical and electronic surveillance of 
both its citizens and foreign citizens.  
 
 In December 2011 the White House Press Secretary issued a statement that the 
United States is deeply disturbed by credible reports that the Assad regime continues to 
indiscriminately kill scores of civilians and army defectors, while destroying homes and 
shops and arresting protesters without due process.  
 
Turkey 
 
 Turkey is a strategically significant country because of its location straddling 
Europe and Asia, and with borders to the Middle East.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 There have been violent attacks throughout Turkey and there is a continuing 
threat of terrorist actions and violence against U.S. citizens and interest throughout the 
country. Domestic and transnational terrorist groups have targeted Turkish citizens and 
foreigners in Turkey for more than 40 years. The attacks have included bombings of 
both security and civilian targets in urban areas and there have been more than 30,000 
deaths of Turkish citizens.  
 
 Terrorist bombings over the last eight years, some causing significant numbers of 
casualties, have struck religious, government, government-owned, political, tourist and 
business targets in Turkey. Terrorists do not distinguish between official and civilian 
targets.  
 
 There are reports of human rights abuses in Turkey. Security forces committed 
unlawful killings. Other abuses continue with respect to deficiencies in effective access 
to justice, lengthy pre-trial detention and lack of transparency in judicial processing.  
 
 There is concern with the government’s interference with freedom of speech and 
the press. A disproportionate use of anti-terror law led to the arrest and prosecution of a 
number of journalists, writers, and political activist. 
 
 The law prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention; however, the Turkish 
government at times did not observe these prohibitions. Overcrowding in prisons 
remains a serious problem. Attorney access to detainees varied widely and in some 
instances police intimidated detainees who requested an attorney. The penal code 
contains multiple articles that directly restrict freedom of the press and speech. The 
laws and enforcement of them do not protect victims. Violence against women, 
including spousal abuse, is a serious and widespread problem. Honor killings of women 
continue to be a widespread problem. Honor killings of girls by immediate family 
members, sometimes by juvenile male relatives, occurred.  
 
Jordan 
 
 The Kingdom of Jordan is a constitutional monarchy. The U.S. Department of 
State’s 2011 Human Rights Report lists Jordan’s three most significant human rights 
problems as their citizens’ inability to peaceably change their government; abuses 
committed with impunity by security forces; and violence against women. Other human 
rights problems were arbitrary deprivation of life; torture or mistreatment; poor prison 
conditions, arbitrary arrest and denial of due process through administrative detention; 
prolonged detention and external interference with judicial decisions; infringement on 
citizens’ privacy rights; and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly, and 
association.  
 
 Legal and societal discrimination against Jordanians of Palestinian origin remains 
widespread. Such persons are subject to arbitrary withdrawal of their citizenship without 
due process; exclusion from services such as access to public assistance, education 
and medical services; and exclusion from the political process.  
 
8 
 
 
 
 The Government of Jordan considers dual Jordanian-American citizens to be 
Jordanian citizens. Jordanian authorities may not inform the U.S. embassy of arrests, 
detentions, or accidents involving dual Jordanian–American citizens. Jordanian law 
subjects dual citizens to certain obligations; for example, males under the age of 37 are 
required to register for service in the Jordanian military.  
 
 Under Jordanian law, any adult male may prevent a female or child relative from 
leaving the country by registering a hold on their travel with Jordanian authorities. This 
is possible even if the child or woman only holds U.S. citizenship. Jordanian authorities 
consider such disputes to be family matters and the U.S. embassy has a limited ability 
to intervene. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
9 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contacts creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
 
10 
 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government or owning property in a 
foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”21 
 
Applicant worked for about three months for a foreign embassy in the United 
States. He had no affiliation with that country. The job was terminated and he has no 
contact with any people from the embassy. I find none of the above disqualifying 
conditions apply to facts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. I find in favor of Applicant on this 
allegation.  
 
Applicant’s parents and siblings are citizens of Syria. His mother has been 
granted a visa and lives with Applicant in the United States. His father is in Jordan 
awaiting approval of his visa to also move to the United States and live with Applicant. 
All of Applicant’s siblings are refugees in Turkey having fled Syria. Applicant’s family 
relationships could potentially create a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
                                                          
21 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
11 
 
 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government or the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. 
 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen of Syria who lives in the United States. His father is 
waiting in Jordan for his visa to be approved to come to the United States and live with 
Applicant. Although Jordan has human rights issues, it is unlikely that his father’s 
temporary residence there will place Applicant in a position of having to choose 
between his father’s interests and that of the United States. I find it is unlikely that 
Applicant’s relationship with his parents would place him in a position of having to 
choose between their interests and that of the United States. I find AG ¶ 8(a) applies to 
Applicant’s relationship with his parents. 
 
Applicant’s siblings are refugees living in Turkey. They do not intend on returning 
to Syria, but hope to immigrate to the United States or Canada. There is no indication 
that any of the siblings have ties to the Syrian government or the Turkish government. 
Turkey has some human rights issues. Applicant has no ties to Turkey other than that it 
is the place his siblings now live. Applicant has minimal contact with his siblings, but 
due to his familial ties, it cannot be characterized as casual. I find that Applicant’s ties to 
Turkey and his siblings’ ties to Turkey are such that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between his siblings and the interests of the United 
States. I find AG ¶ 8(a) applies to Applicant’s relationship with his siblings.  
 
Applicant’s family fled Syria. Applicant has strong ties to the United States. All of 
his financial interests are in the United States. He has a child born and living in the 
United States. His mother now lives with him and he is hopeful his father will join him 
soon. His siblings are refugees hoping to immigrate to the United States or Canada. 
Applicant’s loyalties in the United States are such that he can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in its favor. I find AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
12 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s demeanor and candor during his hearing. I considered 
all of the character evidence. Applicant has no ties to any foreign government. His 
family has fled Syria and they intend to immigrate to the United States or Canada. I find 
Applicant has established his deep and committed relationship with the United States 
and has met his burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under 
the foreign influence guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
