 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-09294 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement, 
personal conduct, and financial considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 15, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on April 
10, 2012.2 On an unspecified date, the DOD issued him another set of interrogatories. 
He responded to those interrogatories on April 10, 2012.3 On an unspecified date, the 
DOD issued him another set of interrogatories. He responded to those interrogatories 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 ((SF 86), dated December 15, 2010). 
 
2
 GE 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated April 10, 2012). 
 
3
 GE 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated April 10, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
on April 10, 2012.4 On May 21, 2012, the DOD issued him another set of 
interrogatories. He responded to those interrogatories on June 12, 2012.5 The DOD 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him on August 10, 2012, under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and 
modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all 
adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 
1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and 
detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR. It is equally unclear when he 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. However, Applicant responded to 
the SOR on September 10, 2012. Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
prepared to proceed on December 13, 2012, and the case was assigned to me on 
January 4, 2013. A Notice of Hearing was issued on January 18, 2013, and I convened 
the hearing, as scheduled, on February 12, 2013. 
 
 During the hearing, ten Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 10) and three 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE C) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant and one other witness testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on February 
22, 2013. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it, but Applicant did 
not take advantage of that opportunity.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted two factual allegations (¶¶ 1.a. and 
1.b.) pertaining to drug involvement; one factual allegation (¶ 2.b.) pertaining to 
personal conduct; as well as nine factual allegations (¶¶ 3.a., 3.b., 3.f., 3.h., 3.j., and 
3.m. through 3.p.) pertaining to financial considerations of the SOR. He denied the 
remaining allegations. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since January 
1980, has served in a number of different positions, including the structures assembly 
line, in the mail room, and as a plant service worker (janitor). He has no military 
service.6 He was previously granted a secret security clearance in 2003,7 but does not 
                                                          
4
 GE 4 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated April 10, 2012). 
 
5
 GE 5 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated June 5, 2012). 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
currently have a security clearance.8 In his SF 86, Applicant indicated that, as of 
December 2010, it had been over 24 months since he had held a security clearance.9 
 
Applicant was married in June 1981, separated in March 2004, and divorced in 
December 2011. He has been engaged since May 2012. Applicant and his ex-wife have 
five daughters, born in 1982, 1983, 1987, 1989, and 1993. He is a June 1977 high 
school graduate.  
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 Applicant is a substance abuser whose choice of substances was marijuana and 
crack cocaine. He used marijuana on a few occasions while in high school.10 In about 
2008, Applicant started using crack cocaine. He purchased an unspecified quantity of 
the substance from drug dealers for as much as $300 per week, and used it during 
weekends with several individuals whom he did not know.11 He continued to use crack 
cocaine, at times on a weekly basis, until at least June 2010.12 He attributed his use of 
crack cocaine to “a lot of hardship, lot of hard times, lot of marital problems with my 
former wife, and I just kind of misled in the wrong direction.”13 Financial issues 
contributed to his actions.14 
 
 The crack cocaine use finally ceased when he determined that it was affecting 
his health.15 He experienced some serious health issues, and at one point, he was in a 
coma for three weeks.16 Nevertheless Applicant never received medical treatment or 
drug rehabilitation treatment for his drug abuse.17 Applicant realized that using drugs 
was not only bad for his health, but was against his religion, and he did not like the 
person that he had become while he was using crack cocaine. He was ashamed, and 
regretted his actions.18 He sought help from the employee assistance program (EAP), 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 16. 
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 37-38. 
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 38; Tr. at 7. 
 
9
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 38. 
 
10
 Tr. at 37-38. Applicant’s marijuana use was not alleged in the SOR, and since there is no evidence of any 
more recent use of marijuana, it is not of any current security significance. 
 
11
 GE 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated January 31, 2011), at 1; Tr. at 38-41. 
 
12
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated September 10, 2012, at 1. 
 
13
 Tr. at 38. 
 
14
 GE 5, supra note 11, at 2. 
 
15
 GE 5, supra note 11, at 1-2. 
 
16
 Tr. at 45. 
 
17
 GE 2 (Applicant’s Answer to Interrogatories, dated April 10, 2012), at 4. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
and received unspecified assistance on five or six occasions from June 2010 until 
October 2010.19 He attended Narcotics Anonymous (NA) meetings from October 2010 
until December 2010, and followed that up with unspecified counseling from his 
pastor.20 Applicant has abstained from further drug use since June 2010, and there is 
no evidence of a continuing drug problem. He intends to not use illegal drugs in the 
future.21 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s use of crack cocaine occurred after he had 
been granted a security clearance. Applicant denied the allegation and explained that 
his security clearance had ended and he had already been debriefed in August 2008, 
before he started using crack cocaine.22 There is no evidence to refute Applicant’s 
contention. 
 
Personal Conduct 
  
In June 2008, Applicant incurred a hand injury in an unspecified accident at 
home. He went to an office at work to obtain a band-aid, and in a moment of panic, 
stated that the accident had occurred on the job. He completed an injury report. When it 
was determined that the injury report was false, he received unspecified disciplinary 
action from his employer.23 He subsequently acknowledged that it was “a bad mistake 
on my part.”24 
 
 On December 15, 2010, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he responded to a 
question pertaining to the illegal use of drugs or drug activity. Question 23a asked if, in 
the last seven years, he had illegally used any controlled substance, including crack 
cocaine, and Applicant answered “no.”25 He certified that the response was “true, 
complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge, but the response to the above 
question was, in fact, false. Applicant subsequently acknowledged that he concealed his 
drug use when he completed his SF 86, and explained that he was scared that he 
would not get a security clearance if he told the truth.26  
  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
18
 Tr. at 45. 
 
19
 GE 5, supra note 11, at 2; Tr. at 46. 
 
20
 GE 5, supra note 11, at 2; Tr. at 46. Applicant stated that his pastor has experience as a marriage 
counselor, and assumed he had experience in drug and alcohol counseling as well. There is nothing in the record to 
support his assumption. 
 
21
 GE 2, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
22
 Tr. at 40-41; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 1; AE A (Statement, dated September 10, 
2012). 
 
23
 Tr. at 48, 56. 
 
24
 Tr. at 56. 
 
25
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 36. 
 
26
 GE 5, supra note 11, at 1; Tr. at 44-45. 
 
5 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations 
 
In 1995 or 1996, Applicant was experiencing financial difficulties because his wife 
wasn’t working and he incurred the financial burdens of the family. He filed for 
bankruptcy under Chapter 13 of the U. S. Bankruptcy Code, and after making the 
required payments to the bankruptcy trustee, the bankruptcy was eventually 
discharged.27  
 
It is unclear when Applicant’s finances transitioned from current to delinquent, for 
Applicant indicated that after the bankruptcy, his accounts were paid up, but that 
financial problems continued. He stated that his new financial problems commenced in 
2003 because of the continuing difficulties with his wife, and the fact that he had more 
debt than he could afford without her help.28 As a result, accounts started to become 
delinquent, placed for collection, or charged off, judgments were obtained, and a state 
tax lien was filed.29 Applicant acknowledged that, to a certain extent, by spending 
money for crack cocaine, it affected his ability to pay some of his financial obligations, 
but he denied that his current delinquencies were because of those diverted funds.30  
 
In January 2003, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the Defense 
Security Service (DSS). They discussed various accounts that were described as 
delinquent, in collection, charged off, or in judgment. While Applicant did not recognize 
some of the accounts, he did acknowledge other accounts. He stated he would resolve 
the accounts he recognized, and find out about the remaining accounts.31 In January 
2011, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM). They discussed a larger number of accounts that were also 
described as delinquent, in collection, charged off, or in judgment. Once again, while 
Applicant did not recognize some of the accounts, he did recognize other accounts, and 
vowed to resolve them as he had indicated eight years earlier.32  
 
In April 2012, Applicant referred to a number of his delinquent accounts, and 
indicated he either had made arrangements to pay them off, or would do so soon 
because some of the debts were small. He also denied having the telephone numbers 
for some of the creditors to discuss his options.33 The SOR identified 16 purportedly 
continuing delinquencies, totaling approximately $20,768. Those accounts fall within 
four categories: a) those for which he has made limited efforts to set up repayment 
                                                          
27
 GE 6 (Statement, dated January 30, 2003), at 1; Tr. at 76-77. 
 
28
 Tr. at 76; GE 6, supra note 27, at 1. 
 
29
 GE 5, supra note 11, at 2-4; GE 4 (Applicant’s Answer to Interrogatories, dated April 10, 2012), at 2-10; 
GE 10 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax credit report, dated January 11, 2011). 
 
30
 Tr. at 38-39. 
 
31
 GE 6, supra note 27, at 1, 3. 
 
32
 GE 5, supra note 11, at 2-4. 
 
33
 GE 4, supra note 29, at 2-10. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
arrangements; b) those for which he has made no such efforts; c) those which he 
contended he paid off under a settlement agreement, but had no documentation to 
support his contentions of either a settlement agreement or a payment; and d) those 
which Applicant denied were his responsibility. Those accounts that come within the first 
category, are four accounts (SOR ¶¶ 3.a. ($6,611), 3.b. ($160), 3.m. ($50), and 3.n. 
($50)). Those accounts that come within the second category, are the vast majority of 
the SOR accounts (SOR ¶¶ 3.c. ($5,370), 3.d. ($1,246), 3.e. ($419), 3.f. ($50), 3.h. 
($204), 3.i. ($2,449), 3.j. ($547), 3.l. ($1,494), 3.o. ($1,193), and 3.p. ($250)). He 
contends he entered into a settlement arrangement with one creditor (SOR ¶ 3.g. 
($473)) and had paid it off. He denied that he was responsible for one account (SOR ¶ 
3.k. ($202)).  
 
Three credit reports from 2012 reflect Applicant’s continuing delinquencies.34 As 
noted above, Applicant offered no documentation to support his contention that he had 
held discussions with some creditors or had paid off one creditor. Furthermore, 
Applicant’s explanations as set forth in his answers to interrogatories, in his statements, 
in his Answer to the SOR, and his testimony during the hearing, are inconsistent and 
contradictory. Accounts that supposedly had repayment arrangements did not actually 
have any such arrangements. Some accounts that were previously recognized by 
Applicant are no longer recognized. Other accounts were to be investigated by 
Applicant, but never were. When questioned as to his reasons for not making payments 
on even the smallest of his debts, he indicated that he had other financial obligations 
which had priority; his impending wedding expenses, a school loan, an automobile loan, 
and a portion of his mother’s bills.35 As of the closing of the record, there is no evidence 
that Applicant has resolved any of the SOR debts.   
 
Applicant’s net monthly earnings are about $3,000, and after paying his 
necessary monthly bills, he has approximately $2,000 remaining for discretionary 
spending or saving.36 Applicant never received financial counseling.37 
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
Several co-workers have stated that Applicant worked in the mailroom for a little 
over a month in 2012, and that he performed in such a reliably manner that there no 
complaints regarding his performance.38 Applicant’s fiancée has known him since high 
school. She believes Applicant’s reputation in the community for honesty, integrity, and 
trustworthiness, is good.39 On May 20, 2012, Applicant became an ordained minister.40  
                                                          
34
 GE 9 (Equifax credit report, dated March 5, 2012); GE 7 (Equifax credit report, dated June 28, 2012); GE 
8 (Equifax credit report, dated December 13, 2012). 
 
35
 Tr. at 49, 54. 
 
36
 Tr. at 51-54. 
 
37
 Tr. at 71. 
 
38
 AE B (Character Reference, dated September 10, 2012). 
 
39
 Tr. at 33. 
 
7 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”41 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”42   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”43 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.44  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
40
 AE C (Certificate of Ordination, dated May 20, 2012). 
 
41
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
42
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
43
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
44
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”45 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”46 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
                                                          
45
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
46
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 25(a), any drug abuse (see above definition), is potentially disqualifying. Also, AG 
¶ 25(c) might apply when there is illegal drug possession, including . . . purchase. . . . 
Similarly, AG & 25(g) may apply when there is any illegal drug use after being granted a 
security clearance. Applicant admittedly purchased and used crack cocaine from about 
2008 until at least June 2010. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) have been established, but further 
comment is necessary regarding AG ¶ 25(g).   
 As for AG & 25(g), in order for it to apply, there must be evidence that Applicant 
had been granted a security clearance and that it was still in a valid status during any 
portion of the period in which the drug abuse took place. The only evidence pertaining 
to a security clearance granted to Applicant appeared in his SF 86 where he stated that 
he had previously been granted a security clearance but that he had lost it and been 
debriefed before he started using crack cocaine. The Government offered no evidence 
to refute Applicant’s contentions. AG & 25(g) has not been established. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying conditions 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Under AG ¶ 26(b), 
drug involvement concerns may also be mitigated where there is 
a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
As noted above, in about 2008, Applicant started purchasing and using crack 
cocaine. He generally used it during weekends with several other individuals until at 
least June 2010. He attributed his use of crack cocaine to a variety of reasons, including 
unspecified “hardship,“ unspecified “hard times,” marital problems, and financial 
problems. Applicant’s period of crack cocaine abuse occurred over a period of nearly 
three years. He has been abstinent for nearly that long. It is difficult to conclude that his 
drug involvement happened “so long ago,” or “was so infrequent,” or that it “happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur,” especially since Applicant has 
received no drug treatment or rehabilitation for his crack cocaine abuse, and he still has 
financial problems. Likewise, while Applicant has generally commented that his use of 
crack cocaine was bad for his health and was against his religion, other than his general 
statement, he has failed to provide a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
future. It is unclear if he has disassociated himself from his drug-using associates and 
contacts and avoided the environment where he used the crack cocaine. AG ¶¶ 26(a) 
and 26(b) partially apply, for considering Applicant’s history of falsifications and 
 
10 
                                      
 
statements with factual inconsistencies, I have little confidence in his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is: 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
In addition, under AG ¶ 16(c), it is potentially disqualifying when there is:  
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information.  
AG ¶ 16(e) may apply where there is personal conduct or concealment of 
information about one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person's personal, professional, or community standing. . . . Finally, association with 
persons involved in criminal activity, may raise security concerns under AG ¶ 16(g).  
In June 2008, Applicant submitted a false injury report to his employer, claiming 
that he had sustained a hand injury in the work place when he had not. For that 
misconduct, he received unspecified disciplinary action from his employer. In December 
2010, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he responded to a question pertaining to 
the illegal use of drugs or drug activity within the past seven years. Applicant answered 
“no.” He certified that the response was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his 
knowledge, but the response to the question was, in fact, false. Applicant subsequently 
 
11 
                                      
 
acknowledged that he concealed his drug use when he completed his SF 86, and 
explained that he was scared that he would not get a security clearance if he told the 
truth.  AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(c), 16(e), and 16(g), have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(a) may apply if the individual made 
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before 
being confronted with the facts. AG ¶ 17(c) may apply if the offense is so minor, or so 
much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,. Also, AG ¶ 17(d) may apply if 
the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Similarly, AG ¶ 17(e) may apply if the individual has taken positive steps to 
reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Also, AG ¶ 
17(g) may apply if the association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased 
or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s fiancée believes Applicant’s reputation in the community for honesty, 
integrity, and trustworthiness, is good. His colleagues consider him to be a reliable 
worker. However, considering Applicant’s history of falsifications and statements with 
factual inconsistencies, it is difficult to overlook his intentional falsification regarding his 
substance abuse in his SF 86, or even consider it to be aberrant behavior. Furthermore, 
it is unclear if he has disassociated himself from his drug-using associates and contacts.  
AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(c), and 17(d), do not apply, and ¶¶ 17(e) and 17(g) partially apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise 
security concerns. In addition, AG ¶ 19(f) may apply if there are financial problems that 
 
12 
                                      
 
are linked to drug abuse. . . .  Applicant’s financial problems actually commenced in 
1995 or 1996, but were resolved through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, only to reemerge in 
2003. Applicant acknowledged that, to a certain extent, by spending money for crack 
cocaine, it affected his ability to pay some of his financial obligations, but he denied that 
his current delinquencies were because of those diverted funds. Nevertheless, accounts 
became delinquent and were placed for collection or charged off. In addition, there was 
a judgment. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f) apply.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Also, AG 
¶ 20(c) may apply if the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control. 
Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows the individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.47  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies. None of the other mitigating conditions apply. 
Applicant has continuing delinquencies. He attributed his earlier financial problems to 
difficulties with his wife, and the fact that he had more debt than he could afford without 
her help. He also went through a divorce in 2011. Yet, he failed to demonstrate how 
those circumstances were largely beyond his control.48 He offered no documentation to 
support his contention that he had held discussions with some creditors, or had paid off 
one creditor. His explanations in his answers to interrogatories, in his statements, in his 
                                                          
47
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that she or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
48
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Answer to the SOR, and his testimony during the hearing, are inconsistent and 
contradictory. Accounts that supposedly had repayment arrangements did not actually 
have any such arrangements. Some accounts that were previously recognized by 
Applicant are no longer recognized. Other accounts were to be investigated by 
Applicant, but never were. Applicant has made no “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. When questioned as to his reasons for not 
making payments on even the smallest of his debts, he indicated that he had other 
financial obligations which had priority; his impending wedding expenses, a school loan, 
an automobile loan, and a portion of his mother’s bills. Applicant never received 
financial counseling. As of the closing of the record, there is no evidence that Applicant 
has resolved any of the SOR debts. Because of the lengthy period of inaction in 
addressing his delinquent accounts, Applicant has not acted responsibly under the 
circumstances,49 and it casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.50   
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has 
acknowledged making mistakes when he filed a false injury report, falsified material 
facts on his SF 86, and purchased and used crack cocaine. He now realizes those were 
foolish activities. He sought the assistance of the EAP. He resolved his earlier financial 
difficulties through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  
                                                          
49
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
50
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
He filed a false injury report in 2008; he purchased and used crack cocaine from 2008 
until at least June 2010; he lied on his SF 86 in 2010; and he ignored his delinquent 
debts. Applicant’s stories related to his financial problems are inconsistent and 
contradictory. Applicant has made no “good-faith” effort to contact or repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. Because of the lengthy period of inaction in 
addressing his delinquent accounts, Applicant has not acted responsibly under the 
circumstances, and it casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:51 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated no “meaningful track record” of debt reduction and 
elimination. Instead, he has made no significant timely efforts to resolve his accounts. 
Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug involvement, 
personal conduct, and his financial considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 
2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                                                          
51
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
15 
                                      
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant   
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant    
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
