 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09446 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 17, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Item 5). On August 9, 2012, the Department 
of Defense (DoD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security 
concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) and Guideline C (foreign preference). 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. The SOR detailed reasons why 
DoD could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
him.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 8, 2012, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on November 5, 2012. A 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Government 
Exhibits (GX), was provided to Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM.   
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on November 16, 2012, and returned it to the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). He timely submitted a letter that I marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and 
admitted into the record without objection from Department Counsel. I received the case 
assignment on January 7, 2013. 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Afghanistan. (FORM.) Counsel provided 13 supporting documents to show detail and 
context for those facts. I marked the AN documents as GX 8 (1-13.) Applicant did not 
object to the documents, and I grant Department Counsel’s request.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, 
and denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, and 2.a. (GX 3.) His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 70 years old. He was born in Afghanistan and attended high school 
and a university there. He was conscripted into the Afghan army for one year. He 
worked for an Afghan governmental agency from 1970 to 1989. In April 1989 he left 
Afghanistan after the Soviet Union invaded the country. He then resided in Pakistan 
until September 1992, at which time he immigrated to the United States on a political 
asylum visa at the age of 52. In September 2001 he became a naturalized U. S. citizen. 
He has a current U.S. passport. (GX 5, 7.) He does not own property or bank accounts 
in Afghanistan. (GX 4.)  
 
From April 2000 to December 2008, Applicant worked as a cashier. He has been 
unemployed since December 2008, supporting himself through his and his wife’s social 
security benefits. In January 2012 he applied for a translator/linguist position with a 
defense contractor. (GX 7.) 
 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s spouse was born and raised in Afghanistan. They married in 1966. 
She became a naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant’s four children were born in 
Afghanistan. Three of them are U.S. citizens and residents. One of them is a citizen and 
resident of Australia. Applicant’s parents were citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
Both are deceased. Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law were citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. Both are deceased. Applicant has two brothers and one sister, 
who were born and raised in Afghanistan. His sister is a citizen and resident of 
Germany. One brother remains a citizen and resident of Afghanistan, and works for an 
airline. His other brother recently moved to Sweden to live with his daughter. That 
brother is a retired officer of an Afghan defense agency. In the past, Applicant sent 
money to his family in Afghanistan for financial assistance. He thinks he sent about 
$300 total. He has not sent money in the past couple years. (GX 3, 5, 6, 7; AX A.)  
Applicant communicates with both brothers yearly. (GX 6.) He also has weekly or 
monthly communication with two friends, who served in the Afghan military with him. 
(GX 6.) 
 
An investigator interviewed Applicant regarding information on his e-QIP. He 
asked Applicant, “’Is there any country that you feel more loyal to or like more than the 
U.S.?’” (GX 7 at 2.) In response, Applicant said, “’Oh no I like MY (sic) country 
Afghanistan. I would say Afghanistan and then United States.’” (Id.) In his response to 
the FORM, he wrote that “I admit that I love U.S.A., my second country more than 
Afghanistan.” (AX A.)  
 
Applicant told the investigator that he wants to return to Afghanistan “to help 
improve Afghanistan, second to support HIMSELF (sic) and third help the U.S. Mission.” 
(GX 7.) He acknowledged that:  
 
Afghanistan’s future right now is very sad. I am very home sick. . . 
Everyone is looking for money. I wish I had all the money to give to them 
because of the poverty. It is very dangerous over there, especially as an 
American. I am like a foreigner to them now. (GX 7.) 
 
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from Afghanistan, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.   
 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
including al-Qaeda and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the 
country. Safety and security are key issues because these terrorist organizations target 
United States and Afghan interests by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, 
car-jacking, assaults, and hostage taking. At this time, the risk of terrorist activities 
remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record remains poor and violence 
is rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents 
continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. 
Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from 
violence.  
 
The United States-Afghan relationship is summarized as follows: 
 
After the fall of the Taliban, the U.S. supported the emergence of a broad-
based government, representative of all Afghans, and actively encouraged 
a [United Nations] role in the national reconciliation process in 
Afghanistan. The U.S. has made a long-term commitment to help 
Afghanistan rebuild itself after years of war. The U.S. and others in the 
international community currently provide resources and expertise to 
Afghanistan in a variety of areas, including humanitarian relief and 
assistance, capacity-building, security needs, counter-narcotic programs, 
and infrastructure projects. 
 
During his December 1, 2009 speech at West Point, President Barack 
Obama laid down the core of U.S. goals in Afghanistan: to disrupt, 
dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda and its safe havens in Pakistan, and to 
prevent their return to Afghanistan. . . . [T]he United States plans to 
remain politically, diplomatically, and economically engaged in 
Afghanistan for the long term.    
 
(U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, Nov. 28, 2011 at 13) The 
United States has more combat troops deployed to Afghanistan than to any other 
foreign country. The U.S. Government plans to withdraw U.S. combat troops from 
Afghanistan in the next two years. The United States’ extraordinary commitment to 
Afghanistan is balanced against the inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in 
Afghanistan to citizens and residents of Afghanistan and Afghan Government problems 
developing and complying with the rule of law. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline B (foreign influence) and Guideline C (foreign 
preference).  
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. Applicant, his parents, and siblings were all born in 
Afghanistan. One brother currently lives in Afghanistan, with whom he has yearly 
contact. Applicant provided some money for his family living in Afghanistan, but 
asserted that he does not any longer. He admitted that there are safety issues for 
people living in Afghanistan, especially for American citizens.  
 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The mere circumstance of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, 
a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationship of Afghanistan with the United States places a significant but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his family members living in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant 
should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose between 
loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family member living in Afghanistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Afghanistan has an enormous 
problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with his elderly brother living in 
Afghanistan creates a potential conflict of interest because this relationship is 
sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist a family member 
in Afghanistan by providing sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel 
produced evidence of Applicant’s contacts with his brother and has raised the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and 
further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
Applicant sent about $300 to his family living in Afghanistan some years ago. He 
has not sent any money to them within the last couple years. That small financial 
contribution was insubstantial and does not raise a security concern under AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Since leaving Afghanistan 
Applicant has maintained contact with his brother living in Afghanistan, and previously 
with his other brother who recently moved from there. His loyalty and connections to his 
brother in Afghanistan are positive character traits. However, for security clearance 
purposes, those same connections to his family living in Afghanistan negate the 
possibility of mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a). Applicant also failed to provide sufficient 
evidence to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his 
relationships with his relatives who are Afghanistan citizens] could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) has partial application. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has 
some connections to the United States. In 1992 Applicant moved to the United States 
on a political asylum visa. In 2001 he became a U.S. citizen. His wife and three adult 
children are naturalized U.S. citizens, residing in the United States. He worked in the 
United States for at least eight years, and now collects social security benefits. There is 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
no evidence that he owns real estate or personal property in the United States, or has 
established other longstanding connections here.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his brother living in 
Afghanistan, and indirectly, his brother’s relationships with other Afghan citizens living in 
Afghanistan. He acknowledged that he annually communicates with his brother living in 
Afghanistan over the years. There is no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the 
Afghan Government, or those conducting espionage have approached or threatened 
Applicant or his brother in Afghanistan to coerce Applicant or his family for classified or 
sensitive information.1 As such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant or his 
brother would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. 
On the other hand, Applicant has conceded that his brother, like every other person 
living in Afghanistan, is already at risk from terrorists and the Taliban. Applicant failed to 
present sufficient credible evidence to demonstrate that he has enough loyalties to this 
country necessary to warrant the full application of this mitigating condition and to 
outweigh his feelings of sympathy and connections to his place of birth. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. At this time, the U.S. Government has not 
authorized Applicant’s involvement with his brother living in Afghanistan. Nor has 
Applicant has been in a situation, which may require him to report his contacts with his 
brother living in Afghanistan. AG ¶ 8(f) has no application because there is no evidence 
that Applicant has any interest in property or bank accounts in Afghanistan.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
 (d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
Applicant’s initial statement to the investigator in which he professed greater 
allegiance to Afghanistan than the United States is not controverted by his subsequent 
written statement in his response to the FORM. It is, in fact, corroborated by his 
comments regarding his feelings of homesickness for Afghanistan. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
 
                                            
1
There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
  10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority. 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and, 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
 None of the above mitigating conditions are sufficient to mitigate the security 
concerns raised under this guideline. The record evidence does not outweigh 
Applicant’s assertions of strong allegiance to Afghanistan. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
  11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
   
There are foreign influence security concerns arising from Applicant’s brother, 
being a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. Applicant, his parents, and his siblings were 
born in Afghanistan. He was educated and raised there. He served in the Afghan army. 
He worked for an Afghan governmental agency for over 19 years. Since arriving in the 
United States in 1992, he has communicated with his elderly brother living in 
Afghanistan on an annual basis. He also communicates on a regular basis with two 
friends who served in the Afghan army with him.  His brother in Afghanistan would be at 
a greater risk if Applicant obtained a position as a linguist and, if his clearance was 
granted, there is a theoretical increase in the risk to his family in Afghanistan. He is fully 
aware of the risks to himself, and he is also aware that his brother in Afghanistan is at 
risk from terrorists and the Taliban. Applicant expressed strong sympathies and 
homesickness for Afghanistan, raising foreign preference security concerns.   
 
Applicant established connections to the United States, including his U.S. 
citizenship for the last eleven years, as well as his wife and children’s U.S. citizenship 
and residency. He and his wife have worked in the United States and collect social 
security. He does not own property in Afghanistan. His request for employment as a 
translator is based on a desire to help Afghanistan, his financial situation, and the U.S. 
mission there. Although these factors weigh in favor of approval of Applicant’s security 
clearance, they are not sufficiently persuasive to outweigh the factors against its 
approval, including his long history of connections to Afghanistan and recently 
expressed equivalence regarding allegiance to the United States. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with sufficient doubt as to Applicant’s 
present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He has not carried his burden 
to mitigate the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.d:       For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:        Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
____________________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
