 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07147 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 1, 2012, the Defense of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 24, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on November 29, 2012. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on December 3, 2012, scheduling the hearing for January 3, 2013. 
 
2 
 
The case was reassigned to me on December 20, 2012. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 14, 2013.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about India. The request and the attached documents were not admitted 
into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant did 
not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in HE I. The 
facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, called four witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, 
which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to 
submit additional information. He submitted documents that were marked AE E through 
Gq and admitted without objection. E-mail correspondence about the exhibits is marked 
HE II. 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR 1.a by withdrawing the words “a 
valid Indian passport,” and substituting the words “an Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) 
card.” The motion was granted without objection by Applicant. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance for the first time. He is married with two children, ages 14 and 11.1 
  
 Applicant was born in India to Indian parents. He attended college and graduate 
school in India, and he earned a bachelor’s degree, a master’s degree, and a Ph.D. He 
wanted to pursue further education in the United States. He came to the United States 
in the early 1990s, and he received a master’s degree from a U.S. university. He 
married an Indian citizen in India. His wife completed a bachelor’s degree in India, and 
she came to the United States a few years after Applicant. Applicant and his wife 
remained in the United States, and they became U.S. citizens in 2004. Their two 
children were born in the United States.2  
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of India. His father is about 80 
years old and his mother is in her mid-70s. His father worked for a state government in 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17, 61; GE 1; AE B. 
 
2 Tr. at 16-18, 33-37, 62; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE B. 
 
3 
 
India before he retired. He receives a pension from the state government based on his 
employment. Applicant’s mother is a retired teacher. She also receives a pension from 
the state government. Applicant calls his parents about once a week, and he also e-
mails them.3 
 
 Applicant had four siblings, but one is deceased. Two of his siblings are U.S. 
citizens and residents. He also has a sister who is a citizen and resident of India. She is 
a retired teacher. Her husband is also retired. Applicant’s sister has two adult children 
who live and work in the United States as permanent residents (green card holders).4 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is deceased. His father-in-law is a citizen and resident 
of India. He is retired and receives a pension. Applicant has several friends who are 
citizens and residents of India. To the best of Applicant’s knowledge, none of his friends 
have any direct connection to the Indian government.5 
 
 Applicant and his wife travel to India about every two to three years. He traveled 
more frequently in the last several years when his sibling became ill and eventually 
passed away.6 
 
 Applicant obtained status as an Overseas Citizen of India in 2006, for 
convenience of travel to India. The OCI program is discussed below. Applicant’s OCI 
card does not have an expiration date. When he realized the possession of the OCI 
card could be a security concern, he initiated the process of formally renouncing his OCI 
status. His application is currently being processed by the Indian Embassy.7 
 
 Applicant received a plot of land in India from his father in about 1987. He 
intended to build a house on the land, but he immigrated to the United States, and the 
property has never been developed. He estimated the value of the land at about 
$10,000. Applicant has started the process of transferring the property to his parents, 
but he stated the “process is cumbersome and bureaucratic, and is expected to take 
about four (4) to six (6) months.”8 
 
 Applicant opened a joint bank account in India with his mother in about 2004. He 
wanted the account to be used in case of emergency. He maintained an average of 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 16-18, 37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE B. 
 
4 Tr. at 44-47, 62; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. at 47-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 53-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
7 Tr. at 15-16, 26-33, 62-64; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A, B, E-G. 
 
8 Tr. at 16, 54-56, 59; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE B, F. 
 
 
4 
 
about $3,000 in the account. Applicant is awaiting forms from the bank to close the 
account. He anticipates that the account will be closed in April 2013.9 
 
 Applicant has no intention of returning to India to live. He stated that he is “a 
blessed and proud citizen of the United States of America and [he] swear[s] allegiance 
to upholding the values and laws of the United States of America.” He and his wife have 
about $900,000 in U.S. assets, which includes a house valued at about $380,000, with 
approximately $300,000 in equity. He donates to his local community, and he volunteers 
as a coach for an elementary school’s math and science teams.10  
 
 Applicant submitted several letters and four witnesses testified to Applicant’s 
excellent job performance, judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, work ethic, 
dependability, loyalty, and honesty.11 
 
India 
 
India is a multi-party, federal, parliamentary democracy, with a bicameral 
parliament and a population of approximately 1.1 billion. Its political history since it 
gained independence from Great Britain in 1947 has included several armed conflicts 
with Pakistan, assassinations of two prime ministers, sporadic outbreaks of religious 
riots, and violent attacks by several separatist and terrorist groups in different parts of 
the country. There is a continuing threat from terrorism throughout the country, including 
attacks on targets where U.S. citizens or Westerners are known to congregate or visit. 
 
India’s size, population, and strategic location give it a prominent voice in 
international affairs. India has always been an active member of the United Nations. 
India is a non-permanent member of the Security Council, and it seeks a permanent 
seat on the Security Council. 
 
The United States and India have differences over India’s nuclear weapons 
programs, the pace of India’s economic reforms, and India’s bilateral strategic 
partnership with Iran. Nevertheless, the United States recognizes that India is important 
to U.S. strategic interests. The strategic partnership between the United States and 
India is based on shared values such as democracy, pluralism, and the rule of law. 
Since 2002, the United States and India have held a series of substantive combined 
exercises involving all military services. The United States is India’s largest foreign 
investment partner. Since December 2006, direct civilian nuclear commerce with India 
has been permitted. The two countries have a common interest in the free flow of 
commerce and resources, including through the vital sea lanes of the Indian Ocean. 
The United States and India share a common interest in fighting terrorism and in 
creating a strategically stable Asia. They are seeking to foster bilateral relations by 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 16, 38-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE B, F. 
 
10 Tr. at 19, 56-62; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B-D. 
 
11 Tr. at 65-84; AE C, D. 
 
 
5 
 
establishing working groups to address five areas of mutual interest: (1) strategic 
cooperation; (2) energy and climate change; (3) education and development; (4) 
economics, trade, and agriculture; and (5) science and technology, health, and 
innovation. 
 
In the past, India had long-standing military supply relationships with the Soviet 
Union, and Russia remains India’s largest supplier of military systems and spare parts. 
India is one of many countries engaged in economic intelligence collection and 
industrial espionage directed at the United States. The United States has long-standing 
economic issues with India regarding protection of intellectual property rights and trade 
in dual-use technology. There have been numerous incidents of international 
businesses illegally exporting, or attempting to export restricted, dual-use technology 
from the United States to India. 
 
The Indian Government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but there are 
serious problems involving abuses by police and security forces. Corruption in the 
police force is pervasive, and police officers often act with impunity. Abuses by police 
and security forces have occurred primarily in criminal investigations and efforts to 
suppress separatist and terrorist groups. There is no evidence that India uses torture or 
abuse against its citizens to extract economic intelligence. 
 
“Overseas Citizens of India” 
 
India does not permit its citizens to hold dual nationality. In 2006, India launched 
the “Overseas Citizens of India” program, which has often been mischaracterized as a 
dual nationality program. It does not grant Indian citizenship. If a U.S. citizen obtains an 
OCI card, the U.S. citizen will not become a citizen of India; the person will remain a 
citizen of the United States. An OCI card is similar to a U.S. “green card” in that a holder 
can travel to and from India indefinitely, work in India, study in India, and own property 
in India (except for certain agricultural and plantation properties). An OCI card holder, 
however, does not receive an Indian passport, cannot vote in Indian elections, and is 
not eligible for Indian government employment.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
                                                          
12 HE I, Item XII; AE A. 
 
6 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
7 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;  
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; and 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
India does not recognize dual citizenship, but a former citizen can obtain 
Overseas Citizens of India status. Despite the misnomer, this is not citizenship. The 
U.S. State Department equated it to a U.S. green card. Applicant was not an Indian 
citizen when he obtained his OCI status, but he was able to obtain the status because 
of his past Indian citizenship. No specific foreign preference disqualifying condition has 
been raised by Applicant’s OCI status. However, the action could indicate a preference 
for India over the United States, and it is a privilege granted by India because Applicant 
used to be an Indian citizen. A general foreign preference security concern under AG ¶ 
9 has been raised, even without the applicability of a specific disqualifying condition. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11, including: 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Because India does not recognize dual citizenship, when Applicant became a 
U.S. citizen, he in essence gave up his Indian citizenship. AG ¶ 11(b) is applicable. 
Applicant initiated the process of formally renouncing his OCI status, and his application 
is being processed by the Indian Embassy. No other specific mitigating condition is 
applicable, but I consider Applicant’s actions sufficient to mitigate any concerns raised 
by his obtaining an OCI card. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
8 
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s parents, sister, father-in-law, and several friends are citizens and 
residents of India. His parents and father-in-law receive pensions from a branch of the 
Indian government. Applicant has a bank account and a plot of land in India. India is the 
world’s largest democracy, works closely with the United States on many matters, 
shares common strategic interests, and generally respects the rights of its citizens. But 
it also continues to have human rights problems; it has been victimized by terrorist 
attacks; and restricted, dual-use technology has been illegally exported to India. This 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(d), and 7(e) 
have been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
 
9 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
Applicant has been in this country for more than 20 years, and he has been a 
U.S. citizen since 2004. His wife became a U.S. citizen at about the same time, and 
their children are U.S. citizens who were born in the United States. He has two siblings 
who are U.S. citizens, and his sister’s children are U.S. permanent residents. Applicant 
has a successful career. He and his wife have about $900,000 in U.S. assets. He 
donates to his local community, and he volunteers his time as a coach for an 
elementary school’s math and science teams. While he and his wife still have family in 
India that they care for, their life and future are in the United States. India is a 
democracy and strategic partner of the United States. Technology has been illegally 
exported to India, but the documents provided for administrative notice do not show that 
coercion was utilized. I find that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of the Indian government or his family members 
in India and the interests of the United States. I further find there is no conflict of 
interest, because Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are applicable.  
Applicant is in the process of divesting himself of his Indian bank account and 
plot of land. I further find that the value of those foreign assets, when compared with the 
value of his U.S. assets, are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used 
effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure him. AG ¶ 8(f) is applicable. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
10 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to India. There is a strong 
partnership between the United States and India, and they share common strategic 
interests. However, Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.13  
 
The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
India is a democracy that generally respects the rights of its citizens, but 
numerous serious problems remain. Like many countries, including the United States, it 
has been victimized by terrorist acts. Restricted, dual-use technology has been illegally 
exported to India, but there is no indication that India utilizes coercion against its 
citizens for espionage purposes. While Applicant’s parents and father-in-law receive a 
pension, Applicant’s position, assets, and ties to the United States make economic or 
some other type of non-coercive influence extremely unlikely to happen and even less 
likely to succeed.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns.  
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
11 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.f:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
