 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-03725 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated foreign influence, financial considerations, and 
personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 21, 2012, the Defense of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 18, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
 
2 
 
9, 2013, scheduling the hearing for February 12, 2013. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 21, 2013.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Jordan. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in 
HE I. The facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 15 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary evidence.  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding the following two 
allegations under Guideline E, personal conduct: 
 
3.a. You falsified material facts in your security clearance application, 
certified by you on October 28, 2011, in response to Question 20A, foreign 
activities. You falsely indicated that your property in Jordan was sold in 
April 2010.  
 
3.b. You falsified material facts in your bankruptcy filing in July 2010, by 
failing to disclose your property in Jordan.  
 
The motion was granted over Applicant’s objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since October 2010. He had an interim security clearance in the 
mid-2000s, but it lapsed. He has a master’s degree. He married in 1993 and divorced in 
1997. He married again in 1999 and divorced in 2003. He has a 12-year-old child from 
his second marriage.1 
  
 Applicant was born in Jordan to Jordanian parents. He came to the United States 
in the late 1980s to attend college and graduate school. He remained in the United 
States and married a U.S. citizen. He became a U.S. citizen in 1996. His second wife 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20-24, 29, 34-38; GE 1-5. 
 
 
3 
 
was also a U.S. citizen. Their child was born in the United States. Applicant renounced 
his Jordanian citizenship in 2004. He does not have a valid Jordanian passport.2 
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Jordan. His parents are 
divorced. His father remarried. Applicant’s stepmother is a Jordanian citizen and 
resident. Applicant’s father is a retired businessman. His mother and stepmother are 
both housewives.3 
 
 Applicant has five siblings, two half-siblings, and three brothers-in-law who are 
citizens and residents of Jordan. He has another sibling who is a U.S. citizen and 
resident. Two other siblings are deceased. One of Applicant’s half-siblings works for a 
public aviation company. One brother-in-law is a university professor. Another brother-
in-law is a low-level Jordanian government employee. Applicant stated that he has 
minimal contact with his brothers-in-law. Another half-sibling is a Jordanian citizen and a 
resident of Qatar.4 
 
 Applicant had financial problems in the later 1990s, which he attributed to 
“underemployment or the lack of employment, divorce and graduate school expenses.” 
He also had a failed business venture. He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1998, and his 
debts were discharged in 1999.5 
 
 Applicant worked for a defense contractor from about 2004 to 2006. He applied 
for a security clearance in March 2004. He was granted an interim clearance. He served 
as a linguist in Afghanistan from about March 2004 to August 2006. He continued to 
work for the contractor for several months after he returned to the United States. His 
clearance was being adjudicated at the time. He testified that he left the job because his 
ex-wife was ill for an extended period and he had to care for his child. He wrote in his 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), which he submitted on October 
28, 2011, that he left his employment because he had a “[d]eath in the family.”6 
 
 Applicant was unemployed for several years after he left his contractor position. 
Two of his siblings became very ill and one of them passed away. He provided 
extensive financial support to his family in Jordan. Applicant spent much of his time 
between 2007 and 2010 in Jordan. He cared for his parents and helped them with their 
grief. He supported himself with his savings and his profits from day-trading stocks. He 
bought a condominium in Jordan in about 2007 for about $90,000. He sold the 
condominium in November 2011 for about $90,000.7 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 24, 36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
3 Tr. at 73-74; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
4 Tr. at 74-85, 107, 114; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
5 Tr. at 24, 36-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 6. 
 
6 Tr. at 20-23, 39-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
7 Tr. at 24-31, 40-48, 52-56, 66-67, 76-81, 87-88, 116-117; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant started losing money on his day-trades in about 2008. He applied for a 
number of jobs in the United States, but was not hired until 2010. He traveled back and 
forth between the United States and Jordan for job interviews and for his background 
investigation. He frequently stayed in hotels when he was in the United States.8 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in July 2010. Under Schedule A, Real 
Property, Applicant was required to “list all real property in which the debtor has any 
legal, equitable, or future interest.” Applicant did not list his condominium in Jordan, 
instead he listed that he had no real property. There were no claims listed under 
Schedule D, Creditors Holding Secured Claims, or under Schedule E, Creditors Holding 
Unsecured Priority Claims. Under Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority 
Claims, the petition listed 23 debts totaling $244,246. Included were credit card debts of 
$23,899, $22,892, $9,625, $42,214, and $85,775. There were also debts for unpaid 
state income taxes ($3,916), property taxes ($2,677), personal property taxes ($1,074, 
$950, and $575), DOD for overpayments ($389 and $389), and the Department of the 
Treasury ($506). Applicant’s dischargeable debts were discharged in October 2010.9 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent taxes were not discharged in bankruptcy. He testified that 
he paid most of the taxes, except he owes his state about $750, and he is paying $100 
per month toward that debt.10 
 
 Applicant testified that he did not list his condominium in Jordan on the 
bankruptcy petition because he did not know that he had to list foreign assets. He also 
stated that he may have told his bankruptcy attorney about the condominium, and the 
attorney may have told him that he did not have to report it. He stated that he did not 
think of the property as an asset because he owed a lot of money on the property. The 
property was not mortgaged, but he owed about $30,000 to his father and about $9,000 
to his sister, and he planned to pay them with the proceeds from the sale of the 
condominium. Applicant did not list the debts to his father and his sister on the 
bankruptcy petition.11 I did not find Applicant’s testimony credible. I find that he 
intentionally provided false information to the bankruptcy court on his bankruptcy 
petition. 
 
 Applicant submitted his SF 86 on October 28, 2011. Section 20A asked if 
Applicant had “EVER owned, or do you anticipate owning, or plan to purchase real 
estate in a foreign country?” (emphasis in original). Applicant listed that he owned a 
condominium in Jordan that was purchased in about January 2008, for about $70,000, 
but he wrote that “[t]he property was sold in April 2010.”12 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 67-73. 
 
9 Tr. at 32, 73; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 7. 
 
10 Tr. at 33-34. 
 
11 Tr. at 56-60, 88-89, 101-106. 
 
12 GE 1. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant denied intentionally providing false information on the SF 86. He gave 
several reasons for the false information. He testified that he may have copied the 
information from a previous SF 86. He also stated that real estate transactions in Jordan 
are much different than those in the United States. He stated that he received about 
$3,000 in April 2010 as a down payment on the sale of the condominium, with the 
remainder to be paid in six months. He stated that the $3,000 constituted the start of the 
sale. The potential buyer did not close the deal in six months, and the time was 
extended. The deal fell through in about February 2010. Another buyer eventually 
agreed to purchase the condominium and the deal was finalized in November 2011.13 
Applicant’s explanation was not credible. I find that he intentionally provided false 
information on the SF 86. 
 
 Applicant travelled to Jordan in November 2011, in part to handle the sale of his 
condominium. He traveled there in 2012 for an operation.14 
 
Jordan 
 
 Jordan is a constitutional monarchy with a developing economy and a modern 
infrastructure. Jordan has followed a pro-western foreign policy and has had close 
relations with the United States for six decades.  
 
The Jordanian government respects human rights in some areas, but its overall 
record continues to reflect some problems. Problems include: torture, arbitrary arrest, 
prolonged detention, denial of due process, infringement on citizens’ privacy rights, 
political detainees, and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly, association, 
and movement.  
 
The Jordanian government publicly condemned terrorist acts throughout the 
world, practiced strict security measures, passed new anti-terror legislation, and 
disrupted several terrorist plots. Despite Jordan’s aggressive pursuit of terrorists, the 
threat of terrorism remains high in Jordan. Al-Qaida has focused terrorist activities 
against Jordan and U.S. interests in Jordan. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 61-65, 93-98, 114-115. 
 
14 Tr. at 85-87. 
 
6 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s parents, stepmother, five siblings, two half-siblings, and three 
brothers-in-law are citizens and residents of Jordan. Another half-sibling is a Jordanian 
citizen and a resident of Qatar. Jordan has had close relations with the United States for 
many years, and it respects human rights in some areas. But it also continues to have 
human rights problems, and it has been victimized by terrorist attacks. This creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by 
the evidence.  
 
  SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i allege information that is already addressed under SOR ¶ 
1.g. Accordingly, SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i are concluded for Applicant. 
 
  SOR ¶ 1.j alleges that between 2007 and 2010, Applicant spent more than two 
years in Jordan. That information is important when assessing the totality of Applicant’s 
ties to Jordan, but it does not have independent security significance.15 Accordingly, 
SOR ¶ 1.j is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
                                                          
15 See ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005). 
 
8 
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Jordan. There is a close 
relationship between the United States and Jordan. However, Guideline B is not limited 
to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.16  
 
The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
Applicant came to the United States in the late 1980s to attend college and 
graduate school. He became a U.S. citizen in 1996, and he renounced his Jordanian 
citizenship in 2004. He has a U.S.-citizen child living in the United States. However, 
most of his remaining family members are in Jordan; he spent several years living in 
Jordan; and he purchased a condominium there. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of national security.” Because of Applicant’s close family ties to 
Jordan, I am unable to find any of the mitigating conditions to be fully applicable. 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
9 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. He filed bankruptcy in 1998 and 2010. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant attributed his financial problems in the 1990s to unemployment, 
underemployment, divorce, graduate school expenses, and a failed business. He was 
unemployed for several years in the late 2000s, but he apparently left his job voluntarily. 
He spent a few years in Jordan assisting his family, and he supported himself with 
savings and by day-trading stocks. His bankruptcy petition listed 23 unsecured debts 
totaling $244,246. Most of his debts were discharged in bankruptcy, and he received 
financial counseling as a requirement of the bankruptcy. However, he was dishonest on 
the bankruptcy petition, and he has not paid all his back taxes. 
 
I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts.17 His financial issues are recent. I am 
                                                          
17 The Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
 
10 
 
unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not 
applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable. I find that financial concerns 
remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information about his Jordanian 
condominium on his bankruptcy petition and on his SF 86. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) are 
applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
11 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
Applicant did not correct his falsifications before being confronted with the facts. I 
found him to be less than completely forthcoming at the hearing. There are no 
applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
12 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B, F, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s work overseas and the dangers involved in that work. 
However, he has extensive family ties to Jordan; he has a history of financial problems; 
and he intentionally provided false information on his bankruptcy petition and on his SF 
86. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated foreign influence, financial considerations, and personal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.h-1.j:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a-3.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
