 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02545 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are the result of circumstances beyond his control. 
He paid one SOR debt, established a payment plan on a second SOR debt, and intends 
to pay the remaining SOR debt in turn. He presented evidence of efforts to resolve his 
delinquent debts and is establishing control of his financial situation. Clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 2, 
2010. On October 11, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on November 6, 2012, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
                                            
1 The DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DoD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
The case was assigned to me on November 29, 2012. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 5, 2012, 
scheduling a hearing for January 7, 2012. At the hearing, the Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and submitted three exhibits (AE) 1 
through 3. AE 2 and 3 were received post-hearing. All exhibits were received without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 15, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the three factual allegations in SOR, with explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the 
evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old information systems security analyst employed with a 
government contractor. He has never been married, and he has no children. In June 
1999, he enlisted in the U.S. Marine Corps (Marines), and served on active duty until 
December 2003. He achieved the grade of lance corporal (E-3), and was 
administratively discharged because he failed to meet height and weight standards. His 
service was characterized as honorable.  
 
After his discharge, Applicant was unemployed for approximately 10 months. He 
worked for a government contractor from October 2004 until December 2005. Applicant 
stopped working for that government contractor to attend college from January 2006 
until 2009. He did not complete his bachelor’s degree because he did not have the 
money to continue with his education. He requires 45 additional credits to complete his 
bachelor’s degree. He paid for his three years of college using his GI Bill benefits and 
by using student loans.  
 
While in college, Applicant worked occasional part-time jobs, but for the most 
part he was unemployed. From May 2009 until August 2009, Applicant was employed 
full-time with a government contractor. From September 2009 until August 2010, 
Applicant was mostly unemployed with some periods of part-time employment as a 
substitute teacher and waiter. He was employed full-time from August 2010 until June 
2011, working for two government contractors. He was unemployed from June 2011 
until April 2012. He was hired in April 2012 by a government contractor, and he has 
worked for his current employer, a government contractor, from June 2012 to present. 
 
Applicant possessed access to classified information at the secret and top secret 
levels from 2000 to present as a result of his work for government contractors. His 
access to classified information was suspended while he was in college or unemployed, 
but his security clearance has been reinstated whenever he has been rehired by 
government contractors. There is no evidence to show that Applicant compromised or 
caused others to compromise classified information. Outside of the security concerns 
 
3 
 
 
alleged in the current SOR, there is no evidence that Applicant had any other security 
issues of concern. 
 
Applicant disclosed in his November 2010 SCA (Section 26 - Financial Record), 
that during the prior seven years, he had defaulted on student loans and that these 
were turned over to collection agencies. The subsequent background investigation 
revealed the three delinquent student loans alleged in the SOR, totaling over $41,000. 
Applicant explained that these were his student loans which became delinquent 
because of his unemployment and underemployment situation. He was not earning 
sufficient money to pay for his day-to-day living expenses and his student loans.  
 
Applicant considers himself to be honest, trustworthy, and a dedicated employee. 
He believes he demonstrated his loyalty to the United States through his years of 
military service. He credibly testified that he would never to anything to harm the United 
States. He noted that he has held access to classified information for 12 years without 
any security incidents. He believes he is a valuable employee with good performance. 
Now that he is employed full-time, Applicant is trying to bring his delinquent loans 
current.  
 
Applicant presented documentary evidence to establish that he settled and then 
paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($10,412) around October 2010. (AE 1 and 2) He 
also established a payment plan with the creditor for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b 
($14,866) in January 2011. He made 12 monthly consecutive payments and was 
current on his payment plan as of his hearing. This student loan is now in rehabilitation 
status. Applicant promised to pay $500 a month until the debt is paid. 
 
Concerning the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c ($16,184), Applicant testified that he 
has been making payments on this delinquent debt (two consolidated student loans) 
since 2009. (Tr. 36-39). Applicant’s bank records from December 2009 to December 
2012 show that he made some payments to the Department of Education. They also 
confirm that Applicant made numerous payments by check, which Applicant averred 
were made to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c. The bank records do not show the payee of 
those checks. Notwithstanding, considering the record as a whole and Applicant’s 
demeanor while testifying, I find his testimony credible.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
4 
 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant paid for three years of college education using his credit and student 
loans. He did not have the financial means to finish his last year of college. After leaving 
college, he has been unemployed or underemployed during extensive periods of time. 
Applicant’s student loans became due in 2010. Because of his employment situation he 
was unable to address his student loans and they became delinquent. His financial 
problems continue to the present as evidenced by the three delinquent debts alleged in 
the SOR, totaling about $41,000. Two of the financial considerations disqualifying 
 
5 
 
 
conditions apply: AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and AG ¶ 19(c): 
a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s periods of unemployment and underemployment are circumstances 
beyond his control that contributed to his financial problems. He presented documentary 
evidence showing that in late 2012 he paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He also 
established that he made consecutive payments toward the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b 
from January 2011 to present. That student loan is now rehabilitated and Applicant has 
a payment plan in place. Applicant made some payments on the delinquent debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. He promised to be more aggressive paying this debt in the future.  
 
 Considering the record as a whole, I find that Applicant should have been more 
aggressive and timely in addressing all of his delinquent debts. Notwithstanding, I find 
that Applicant established a viable plan to resolve his financial problems, and he has 
taken significant actions to implement his plan. Although Applicant’s financial problems 
are ongoing, he has established that he is in control of his financial situation and that his 
financial problem is being resolved. Applicant is fully aware that he is required to 
maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a security clearance.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) applies, in part, because Applicant’s financial problems occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur, and it does not cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) 
apply to this case because Applicant made good-faith efforts to pay his creditors, and 
there are indications that his financial problems are being resolved or under control. AG 
¶¶ 20(c), 20(e), and 20(f) are not applicable to the facts of this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He honorably served four years in the Marine Corps. 
He has experience working for government contractors while possessing a security 
clearance. Except for the current security concern, there is no evidence of any problems 
or concerns while he possessed a security clearance.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems were largely the result of circumstances beyond 
his control. Because of his limited income he has been slow addressing his delinquent 
debts. Currently, Applicant more fully understands the importance of maintaining 
financial responsibility. He was honest and truthful in his answers to the SCA questions. 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant has a viable plan to resolve his delinquent 
debt, and he is taking control of his financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
