 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05176 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco (Paco) Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on September 14, 2007. On February 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline D, Sexual 
Behavior. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On March 6, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a determination 
be made in his case without a hearing.  On April 16, 2009, Department Counsel 
prepared a File Of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant on 
April 17, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on April 23, 2009. He had thirty days from 
the receipt of the FORM to submit additional matters. He timely submitted additional 
matters. On May 20, 2009, Department Counsel indicated that they had no objection to 
the additional matters. The case was assigned to me on June 1, 2009. Based upon a 
 
2 
 
 
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denies the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a, admits to  
the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b, and neither admits or denies the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c.  
His failure to admit or deny the allegation SOR ¶ 1.c is treated as a denial.   
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to obtain a security clearance.  He is a ship fitter and has worked for his current 
employer since April 2003. This is his first time applying for a security clearance. He 
recently married and has three children. (Item 3)   
 
On October 2, 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with two counts of 
sexual battery, a misdemeanor offense, and two counts of indecent liberties with a child, 
a felony offense. The alleged offenses occurred on November 1, 2005, and April 24, 
2006. No specific details regarding the offenses are provided in the record. (Item 5; Item 
6. Item 7) 
 
On March 13, 2007, Applicant pled guilty to two counts of sexual battery, a 
misdemeanor. He was sentenced to 12 months in jail, suspended, ordered to pay $150 
court costs, and given three years unsupervised probation. (Item 6) The indecent liberty 
charges were nolle prossed. (Item 6) Applicant was required to register as a sexual 
offender on his state’s web-site because of his guilty plea and conviction of two counts 
of sexual battery. (Item 7)  
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denies that he pled guilty to sexual battery. 
He claims that he entered an Alford plea because he would not admit to something that 
he did not do. (Item 3) In his response to the FORM, postmarked May 11, 2009, 
Applicant states that his probation was complete on March 16, 2009. He did not provide 
documentation from the court system verifying his probation was terminated. He 
indicated that his only regret is that he did not fight his case. He pled because he 
believed he had too much to lose. (Response to FORM, postmarked May 11, 2009)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
 
3 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in 
¶30 of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
 or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 
4 
 
 
There are two Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) which apply to 
Applicant’s case. CC DC ¶31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and 
CC DC ¶31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted) apply with respect to 
Applicant’s arrest and charges of two counts of Sexual Battery and two counts of 
Indecent Liberties with a Child. He pled guilty to two counts of Sexual Battery. The 
Indecent Liberty charges were nolle prossed.  
 
While the record lacks specific information about the specific conduct that was 
the basis for the charges, the government established a prima facie case under criminal 
conduct. Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise disqualifying 
conditions under the criminal conduct concern, the burden shifted to Applicant to 
produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
(Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. (See, ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005)).  
 
The following Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (CC MC) are relevant to 
Applicant’s case: 
 
CC MC ¶32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, 
or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). The criminal 
charges were relatively recent.  Although Applicant claims he entered an Alford plea, 
the court records indicate that he pled guilty to two counts of sexual battery. There is not 
enough information for me to conclude CC MC ¶ 32(a) applies. 
 
CC MC ¶32(c ) (evidence that the person did not commit the offense) does not 
apply. Applicant claims that he entered an Alford plea because he did not commit the 
offense.  Court records indicate Applicant pled guilty to two misdemeanor offenses of 
sexual battery.  The record does not contain additional evidence to corroborate 
Applicant’s claims of innocence.  
 
CC MC ¶32(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement) does not apply. Not enough time has passed to conclude 
Applicant has been successfully rehabilitated. Applicant was sentenced to three years 
probation which would end in March 2010.  Applicant claims that he has completed 
probation but provided no proof that his probation has terminated. He provided no 
information about his employment record and/or community involvement.  
 
There is not enough information in the record to conclude Applicant mitigated the 
criminal conduct concern. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Sexual Behavior 
 
 The security concern raised under the sexual behavior guideline is set forth in 
¶12 of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may subject the 
individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. No adverse inference concerning the standards in this Guideline may be 
raised solely on the basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 The following disqualifying conditions are relevant to Applicant’s case: 
 
 Sexual Behavior Disqualifying Condition (SB DC) ¶ 13(a) (sexual behavior of a 
criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been prosecuted) 
 
 SB DC ¶ 13(c) (sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to 
coercion, exploitation, or duress) 
 
 SB DC ¶ 13(d) (sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of 
discretion or judgment) 
 
 Applicant was arrested on two counts of sexual battery and two counts of 
indecent liberties with a minor. SB DC ¶ 13(a) applies. These arrests and the underlying 
behavior that led to the arrests make Applicant vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. SB DC ¶ 13(b) applies.  The sexual behavior also reflects a lack of discretion or 
judgment since Applicant’s behavior resulted in criminal charges being brought against. 
SB DC ¶ 13(d) applies. 
 
 Concerns raised under Sexual Behavior can be mitigated. The following 
mitigating conditions potentially apply to Applicant’s case. 
  
 Sexual Behavior Mitigating Condition (SB MC) ¶ 14(b) (the sexual behavior 
happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. The offenses were relative recent. 
Applicant was charged with more than one offense so it cannot be concluded the 
unlawful sexual behavior was isolated.  There is insufficient evidence in the record for 
me to conclude Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment are sound.    
 
 SB MC ¶ 14(c) (the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, 
exploitation, or duress) does not apply. Applicant is still vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. 
 
6 
 
 
 SB MC ¶ 14(d) (the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet) 
does not apply. There is insufficient evidence in the record to determine whether this 
mitigating condition applies.   
 
 Applicant has not met his burden of proof to mitigate the concerns raised under 
sexual behavior.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant has 
worked for the same defense contractor over the past six years. However, he did not 
provide information pertaining to his work performance. I considered that Applicant was 
arrested and charged with two counts of sexual battery and two counts of indecent 
liberties with a minor. I considered that he pled and was found guilty of two counts of 
sexual battery. The government established a prima facie case to raise concerns under 
criminal conduct and sexual behavior. As such, the burden switched to Applicant to 
mitigate the concerns raised under the criminal conduct and sexual behavior concerns. 
He did not mitigate the concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
