 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-10956 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 13, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 24, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines G (Alcohol Consumption), 
E (Personal Conduct), and F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 6, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) received the request. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 
31, 2016, and I received the case assignment on September 19, 2016. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on November 18, 2016, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
December 20, 2016. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 8, which were received 
 
2 
 
 
without objection. Applicant testified. He did not submit any exhibits. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 3, 2017. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding Subparagraphs 1.l 
and 1.m. They allege Applicant was charged with a June 30, 2007 driving while 
intoxicated offense, and Subparagraph 1.m. he was charged with a July 21, 1997 
driving while intoxicated offense. Applicant admitted both new allegations and had no 
objection to the amendments. I granted the Department’s motion. (Tr. 26-30) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a, 
1.b, 1k, and Paragraph 2. He admitted the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.c to 1.j, 
Subparagraphs 3.a to 3.j. He also provided additional information to support his request 
for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 53 years old, married, and has three adult children. His two sons live 
at his house but do not pay much in rent, room and board, and Applicant could not 
explain why they do not contribute more to his household. He has been an electronics 
technician for the past 27 years. He works for a defense contractor. (Tr. 17, 18, 21, 22, 
52, 56, 57; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Under the Alcohol Consumption guideline (Paragraph 1), Applicant is alleged to 
have committed 10 alcohol-related offenses between 1984 and May 2012. He also is 
alleged to consume alcohol while driving about twice a month and continuing to commit 
such actions. Six offenses involved driving while intoxicated (DUI), two involved public 
intoxication (PI), and two were possessing open alcoholic containers (POAC). He is also 
alleged to consume alcohol to excess and to the point of intoxication. These same 
events are the basis of the Personal Conduct allegation in Paragraph 2. (Tr. 22-45; 
Exhibits 2-4, 8) 
 
 Applicant started consuming alcohol when he was about 20 years old. The 
November 1984 offense was a speeding and DUI offense which occurred after he 
departed a bar and drove home (Subparagraph 1.j). Applicant admitted the January 
1986 public intoxication arrest. (Subparagraph 1.i). He also admitted the July 1986 DUI, 
which occurred after he came out of a bar and tried to drive home (Subparagraph 1.h). 
Applicant admitted from the mid-1980s to the early 1990s he drank about three times 
per week, consuming mixed drinks and eight to ten beers at a sitting. Then, in July 1991 
he was charged with reckless driving and operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated. 
(Subparagraph 1.g)  In November 1991, he was charged with DUI. (Subparagraph 1.f). 
 
3 
 
 
In December 1995, he was charged again for DUI (Subparagraph 1.e). He also admits 
to being convicted for a DUI arrest on July 21, 1997. (Subparagraph 1.m). Then, again, 
on June 30, 2007, Applicant was arrested for DUI and found guilty, fined $200 and court 
costs of $454 with a suspended 30 day jail sentence and two years of probation 
(Subparagraph 1.l). Applicant was charged in June 2008 with POAC in a motor vehicle, 
found guilty, fined $200, and received a 30 suspended jail sentence and two years of 
probation (Subparagraph 1.d). On May 23, 2012, after he completed the e-QIP, he was 
charged with the POAC in a motor vehicle and found guilty of that charge 
(Subparagraph 1.c). He purchased a container of beer on his way home and started 
consuming it when he was seen by a police officer and stopped. (Tr. 21-33; Exhibits 2-
4, 8)   
 
 Applicant testified that as he is now older he no longer goes out to bars and 
drinks. He has to start work at 5:30 a.m. He claims he hardly drinks now and only at 
home. He claims he was more of a “social drinker” than an alcoholic. He drinks alcohol 
only once a week, from two to six beers. He had alcohol education as part of his 
sentences for the various offenses. He stated at the hearing that while his history looks 
bad he has had a security clearance with no problems and can be trusted. Since 2012 
he could not remember any additional alcohol offenses.  (Tr. 25, 29-34, 53, 54; Exhibits     
2-4, 8) 
 
 Applicant has a history of filing bankruptcy actions to discharge or organize 
repayment plans for his debts. Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in October 2003 
and was discharged in August 2005 (Subparagraph 3.j). This bankruptcy was caused by 
Applicant’s wife’s surgery and medical expenses. She is currently on disability as a 
result of that condition in 2003. Later, he filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in 
January 2013 that was closed in July 2016 (Subparagraph 3.a). Meanwhile, after 
medical leave for a surgery, Applicant started a new bankruptcy plan under another 
Chapter 13 action he filed in April 2016. He did not explain how he had two Chapter 13 
bankruptcies going at the same time. On the latest filing he marked the block that asked 
if he filed bankruptcy in the past eight years with a negative answer. Under that 
confirmed Chapter 13 plan he pays $462 every two weeks to the bankruptcy trustee for 
60 months. This bankruptcy is Applicant’s fifth petition because he field two earlier 
bankruptcy actions in the 1990s. Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in November 
1991 that was closed in February 1992. Then he also had a Chapter 13 bankruptcy that 
he filed in March 1992 and closed in 1995. He filed these earliest two bankruptcies 
because of medical debts. The Government submitted an exhibit listing all of Applicant’s 
bankruptcy actions.  (Tr. 35-45; Exhibits 5-7) 
 
Regarding the specific delinquent debts under Paragraph 3, Applicant has seven 
unpaid medical collection accounts totaling $415, dating at least from 2008. He owes a 
finance company $37,014 for his home mortgage. He also owes $16,635 on student 
loans that he paid down to $2,000 but the bankruptcies prevented him from continuing 
to make payments so the unpaid debt has climbed again to that amount. The delinquent 
medical debts are included in his latest bankruptcy. Applicant has not had any financial 
counseling. Applicant admitted he withdraws money from his Internal Revenue Code 
 
4 
 
 
(IRC) Section 401(d) (401(k) instead of 401(d)?) retirement twice a year to pay for 
expenses. Applicant pays $1,200 monthly for his mortgage because he has refinanced 
the mortgage often. He bought the house 25 years ago for $44,500 but had to use the 
refinancing and retirement account withdrawals to pay debts after his wife became ill 
and lost her job several years ago. They borrowed money “to survive while she had no 
income.” They sold six acres of land they owned for $55,000 several years ago and paid 
off several of these loans. He also testified he works very hard and a lot of overtime.  
(Tr. 44-55; Exhibits 5-7) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. Two conditions may apply: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
 Applicant has 10 alcohol related offenses that he committed between 1984 and 
2012, including one after he completed his e-QIP. He has a history of alcohol 
consumption that continues to the present day. He contends he now has reduced his 
drinking and only drinks at home. There is no independent verification of those 
assertions. AG ¶ 22 (a) and (c) are established.  
 
AG ¶ 23 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns. One may 
apply: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant’s last arrest was in 2012, but he continues to consume alcohol. While 
four years have passed since his last arrest, because he continues to drink alcohol, the 
 
6 
 
 
potential for further arrests exists. His past behavior was frequent. His conduct casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. This mitigating 
condition does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. Two conditions may apply: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
 Applicant’s personal conduct alleged in the SOR refers to his many alcohol 
related incidents and offenses occurring between 1984 and 2012, and his continued use 
of alcohol. The pattern of these incidents shows he has a difficult time controlling his 
actions regarding the use of alcohol. They demonstrate questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability for compliance with laws, and other characteristics 
showing Applicant may not properly safeguard protected information. AG ¶ 16 (c) is 
established.  
 
 Applicant’s continued consumption of alcohol with resulting adverse legal 
consequences over a 28 year period shows he conducts himself in the public in a way 
that affects his personal, professional, and community standing. Applicant commits 
 
7 
 
 
criminal acts when he consumes too much alcohol and is arrested and charged with 
offenses by the local law enforcement community. Again, the pattern of his behavior 
shows a lack of control and appropriate social interactions. His DUI actions put himself 
and other drivers at risk on the public highways. The passage of four years since his 
last offense is not significant in view of the 28 years of prior illegal activity. AG ¶ 16 (e) is 
established. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. None 
apply to Applicant’s actions: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
 Applicant has not taken prompt and good-faith efforts to correct his alcohol-
related problems and history. AG ¶ 17 (a) does not apply. There was no improper 
advice by any authorized person or legal counsel. AG ¶ 17 (b) does not apply. His 
offenses are not minor or that far in the past that they do cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment (AG ¶ 17 (c)). Applicant has not obtained 
 
8 
 
 
counseling or changed his behavior or taken other positive steps to show his past 
pattern of misconduct will not recur. AG ¶ 17 (d) is not established. Applicant has not 
taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to coercion. AG ¶ 17 (e) is not 
established. Finally, the last two mitigating conditions are not applicable on their own 
terms.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated seven delinquent debts totaling $415 from 2008 to the 
present time that remain unpaid. He owes $37,014 on his mortgage. During the hearing 
he admitted he has unpaid student loans of $16,635 that are not listed in the SOR. He 
pays on them for a time and then does not pay. He filed Chapter 13 and Chapter 7 
bankruptcies from 2003 to the present time. He now pays $462 twice a month to the 
bankruptcy trustee in his latest Chapter 13 action. Applicant has a history of not paying 
his debts in a regular manner and using bankruptcy as a way to repay or discharge his 
debts. AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c) apply. 
 
 The evidence raises all of the above security concerns, thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. One condition may be applicable:   
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
 circumstances. 
 
9 
 
 
  
Applicant takes the position that his wife’s loss of employment for several years 
caused his financial problems. He did not show that he sought viable methods to 
mitigate that loss of income. Instead, he borrowed money to maintain his life style. He 
had to sell land to repay those debts, and yet he continued to incur debt leading to his 
latest bankruptcy. Applicant has not acted responsibly under these circumstances. AG ¶ 
20 (b) is not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s pattern of alcohol use 
and array of related criminal actions, coupled with his pattern of financial difficulties 
during more than the past decade, shows serious problems exist in his life. His alcohol 
use and financial mismanagement issues began 28 years ago. He has a long history of 
problems with alcohol and finances.  His actions were all voluntary with no indication of 
rehabilitation or permanent behavioral changes. All his actions are likely to continue.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his alcohol involvement, 
personal conduct, and financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a to 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a to 3.j:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
