 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11776 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concern. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 6, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on June 2, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the 
 
2 
 
FORM on June 17, 2016. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on April 7, 2017. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 
through 5 are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He obtained his high-school diploma in 1976, a 
bachelor’s degree in 1993, and a master’s degree in 2012. He is married and has three 
adult children. He has lived in his current state since at least 2000.1 
 
 Applicant served in the Air National Guard from May 1977 to October 1978, and 
in the U.S. military from October 1978 until September 2005, when he retired with an 
honorable discharge. He began his current job with a federal contractor in July 2005. He 
has had numerous DOD background investigations throughout his career, and his most 
recent DOD security clearance was granted in 2008.2 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s failure to file his state income tax returns for tax 
years 2006 through 2011, as required. Applicant disclosed his failure to file his state 
income tax returns in his July 2012 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 
86), and during his August 2012 interview with an authorized DOD investigator.3 
 
 Applicant attributes his failure to timely file his relevant state income tax returns 
to changing his home of record from one state to another state when he retired from the 
U.S. military. He did not think to file his state tax returns, even though state taxes were 
being deducted from his salary. He did not prioritize filing his state tax returns because 
he believed he was due refunds. When he realized he had not filed his state tax returns, 
he contacted the state tax commission who informed him that he needed to do so for 
tax years 2006 through 2011. As of his July 2012 SF 86, Applicant was working with the 
state tax commission to determine if he owed any taxes or recoup any refunds he was 
due. During his August 2012 interview with an authorized DOD investigator, Applicant 
stated that he had begun filing his relevant state tax returns, and expected to have them 
filed by December 2012. Applicant has not provided corroborating evidence of actions 
he may have taken to file his relevant state tax returns.4 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 4, 5.  
 
3 Items 4, 5. 
 
4 Items 1-5. 
 
3 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
4 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant failed to file his state income tax returns for tax years 2006 through 
2011, as required. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying condition. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
  
 Applicant has not provided corroborating evidence of actions he may have taken 
to file his relevant state tax returns. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his 
financial problems are unlikely to recur. His failure to timely file his relevant tax returns 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Circumstances beyond his control did not contribute to Applicant’s failure to file 
his relevant state tax returns. Applicant attributes his failure to do so to changing his 
home of record from one state to another state when he retired from the U.S. military. 
However, he has resided in the state for which he is required to file his relevant income 
tax returns since at least 2000. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant indicated in his July 2012 SF 86 that he was working with the state tax 
commission to determine if he owed any taxes or recoup any refunds he was due. 
Applicant also stated in his August 2012 interview with an authorized DOD investigator 
 
5 
 
that he had begun filing his relevant state tax returns, and expected to have them filed 
by December 2012. Applicant has not provided corroborating evidence of actions he 
may have taken to file his relevant state tax returns. Applicant’s financial situation is not 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable service in the U.S. military from 1978 to 2005, 
his numerous DOD background investigations throughout his career, his work with a 
federal contractor since 2005, and his most recent DOD security clearance granted in 
2008. Circumstances beyond his control did not contribute to his failure to file his state 
income tax returns from 2006 through 2011, as required. Applicant did not provide 
corroborating evidence of actions he may have taken to file his relevant state tax 
returns. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
 
