 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05005 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Anthony J. Kuhn, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations, 
personal conduct, and criminal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On an unspecified date, on or before December 22, 2003, Applicant applied for a 
security clearance and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 
86).1 On March 11, 2014, he submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security Clearance Application.2 On December 3, 2014, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a set of 
Interrogatories. He responded to those Interrogatories on December 19, 2014.3 On 
August 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
                                                          
1 GE 2 (SF 86, undated). 
 
2 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated March 11, 2014). 
 
3 GE 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated December 19, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
(CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information 
(December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns 
under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct) and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 1, 2015. On September 9, 2015, he 
responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. It is 
unclear when Department Counsel was prepared to proceed as there is no memorandum 
in the case file. The case was assigned to me on March 28, 2016. A Notice of Hearing 
was issued on April 7, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 26, 2016. 
 
 During the hearing, 14 Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 14, and 26 
Applicant exhibits (AE) A through AE Z, were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant and three witnesses testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 5, 2016. 
The record closed on May 5, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f.) and some, or the parts of some, 
of the factual allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶¶ 2.a. through 2.f.) of the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration 
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been an 
airfield management operations coordinator with the company since April 2013. He 
enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in March 2004 and served on active duty until March 2011 
when he received a general discharge under honorable conditions for drug rehabilitation 
failure. He was unemployed from March 2011 until March 2013. He is a 2003 high school 
graduate with additional college credits, but no degree. It is unclear if Applicant was ever 
granted a security clearance, because in his e-QIP Applicant denied having received one, 
but he subsequently indicated he was granted a security clearance in September 2004 
while in the U.S. Air Force, and he still may have it. Applicant was married in May 2007 
and divorced in June 2011. He was married again in June 2015. He has no children. 
 
  
 
3 
                                      
 
Military Record 
 
 During his period of military service, Applicant was awarded the Meritorious Unit 
Award, the Air Force Outstanding Unit Award (with one oak leaf cluster), the Air Force 
Good Conduct Medal, the National Defense Service Medal, the Iraq Campaign Medal 
(with one service star), the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, the Air Force 
Longevity Service Ribbon, and the Air Force Training Ribbon. He was a Senior Airman 
(E-4) at the time of his discharge, having been involved in a military disciplinary action for 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) violations for absence without leave (AWOL), 
dereliction of duty, and disrespect in language. Applicant was deployed to Iraq from 
December 2006 until May 2007. 
 
Financial Considerations4 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until his March 2011 
involuntary discharge from the U.S. Air Force and the lengthy period of unemployment 
that followed it. Without the funds necessary to satisfy his accounts, or at least maintain 
them in a current status, various accounts became delinquent. Accounts were placed for 
collection, and at least two of them were charged off. After he obtained a new position, 
Applicant contacted his known creditors to either work out settlements or arrange for 
repayment plans. 
The SOR identified six purportedly delinquent debts that had been placed for 
collection, as reflected by his March 2014 credit report, his July 2015 credit report, or his 
December 2015 credit report. Those debts, totaling approximately $22,485, and their 
respective current status, according to the credit reports, other evidence submitted by the 
Government and Applicant, and Applicant’s comments regarding same, are described 
below: 
SOR ¶ 1.a. refers to a university student loan account with a high credit of $2,355 
and an initial unpaid and past-due balance of $2,640 that was placed for collection after 
Applicant withdrew from the course in 2011, within the two-week grace period established 
to receive a full refund on the tuition. Applicant was unaware that there was a delinquency, 
and when he learned of the account status, he was unable to make any payments. In 
August 2013 – two years before the SOR was issued – he set up a $62.50 bi-weekly 
payment. His July 2015 credit report reflected a remaining balance of $578. Applicant 
eventually paid $3,140.39, including $2,355.29 in principal and $785.10 as a collection 
charge. The account has been resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.b. refers to a medical account with a high credit of $6,575 and an unpaid 
balance of $6,495 that was placed for collection in 2012. He was unable to make any 
payments. In February 2014 – one and one-half years before the SOR was issued – he 
                                                          
4 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: GE 1, supra note 2; GE 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated March 25, 
2014); GE 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated July 16, 2015); GE 8 (Equifax Credit Report, dated December 28, 2015); 
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated September 9, 2015; GE 3, supra note 3. More recent information can be found 
in the exhibits furnished and individually identified. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
set up a $40 bi-weekly payment. His July 2015 credit report reflected a remaining balance 
of $5,295. His December 2015 credit report reflected a remaining balance of $4,815. 
Applicant contended that he had never missed a payment under the plan, but he failed to 
submit any documentation such as cancelled checks, receipts, or account statements to 
support his contentions. Nevertheless, because the credit reports indicate a decreasing 
balance, I have concluded that Applicant is making his payments. Accordingly, the 
account is in the process of being resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.c. refers to a financial services credit card account with a $14,000 credit 
limit and unpaid balance of $10,346 that was placed for collection in 2011. His July 2015 
and December 2015 credit reports reflected that $15,896 was charged off. He was unable 
to make any payments. In April 2013 – nearly two and one-half years before the SOR 
was issued – he set up a $200 monthly payment. Applicant continued making his 
payments until July 2015, by which time he had paid the collection agent $9,870. On July 
16, 2015, the creditor acknowledged that the account had been settled for less than the 
full balance, leaving a zero balance. The account has been resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.d. refers to a credit union credit card account with a $9,900 credit limit 
and an unpaid and past-due balance of $5,112 that was placed for collection in 2012. His 
July 2015 credit report reflected that $9,817 was charged off. He was unable to make any 
payments. In April 2013 – nearly two and one-half years before the SOR was issued – he 
set up a $100 bi-monthly payment. Applicant continued making his payments until July 
2015, when the creditor acknowledged that the account had been settled, leaving a zero 
balance. His December 2015 credit report reflected a zero balance. The account has 
been resolved. 
 SOR ¶ 1.e. refers to a medical account with a high credit, unpaid balance, and 
past-due balance of $596 that was placed for collection. He was unable to make any 
payments. In February 2014 – one and one-half years before the SOR was issued – he 
set up a $25 bi-monthly payment. Applicant continued making his payments for an 
unspecified period. On June 25, 2015, the collection agent acknowledged that the 
account had been satisfied, leaving a zero balance. The account has been resolved.  
SOR ¶ 1.f. refers to a medical account with an unpaid balance of $558 that was 
placed for collection. He was unable to make any payments. In February 2014 – one and 
one-half years before the SOR was issued – he set up a $25 bi-monthly payment. 
Applicant continued making his payments until December 2014. On an unspecified date, 
the collection agent acknowledged that the account had been satisfied, leaving a zero 
balance. The account has been resolved.  
At the time of the hearing, Applicant had not received any financial counseling. 
Applicant indicated that once he had obtained his new employment, after the lengthy 
period of unemployment, he had worked hard to begin paying off his creditors. He is on 
a budget. That budget reflects the net monthly combined income for Applicant and his 
wife is $5,771.40 (including a U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) disability benefit); 
monthly expenses of $3,743.04; and a monthly remainder of $1,628.36 available for 
saving or spending. Applicant’s most recent credit reports, a TransUnion credit report, 
 
5 
                                      
 
dated April 15, 2016, and an Experian credit report, dated April 15, 2016, indicate that his 
remaining financial accounts are current. Applicant clearly resolved five of the six SOR-
related debts, and the remaining debt is either in the process of being resolved, or has by 
now actually been resolved. It appears that Applicant’s financial status has significantly 
improved, and that his financial problems are under control.  
Personal Conduct5 
 Applicant was a substance abuser whose choice of substances was identified as 
non-prescription over-the-counter Robitussin or Coricidin cough and cold medicine. His 
descriptions regarding his relationship with cough and cold medicines are inconsistent. 
Although he claimed he started using Robitussin in May 2007 upon returning from his 
deployment in Iraq, there is documentary evidence that he actually started using cough 
medicine in 2004 as a 19-year-old enlisted man with mild abdominal pain and intermittent 
nausea, to relieve his anxiety and stress, and to facilitate his ability to sleep. It should be 
noted that “use” of a medication without substantially more information does not 
necessarily constitute “abuse” of that medication. In October 2004, he was admitted to a 
medical center emergency room where he was evaluated, tested, and treated. Applicant’s 
urinalysis registered a positive for phencyclidine (PCP) which the laboratory technician 
opined was the possible result of dextromethorphan or dicyclomine. Dextromethorphan 
is the cough suppressant in Robitussin. The discharge diagnosis by the physician 
included the following language: “at this time I believe it is a false positive due to the OTC 
cold medications he was taking.” 
 
 When Applicant returned from his deployment, he started dealing with Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).6 Once again, he started to self-medicate, returning to 
Robitussin. In 2010, Applicant self-identified his cough and cold medicine abuse to his 
commander who recommended Applicant for a 28-day residential substance abuse 
treatment. He successfully completed that treatment on October 18, 2010. There is no 
                                                          
5 General source information pertaining to the substances abused, Applicant’s involvement in criminal conduct, 
personal conduct, and questions pertaining to his candor and truthfulness, discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: GE 3, supra note 3; GE 6 (Docket Record/Driver’s History, dated March 29, 2014); GE 7 Arrest 
Report, dated May 23, 2012); GE 11 (Case Summary, dated April 12, 2016); GE 12 (Arrest Report, dated April 19, 
2016); GE 13 (Arrest Report, dated April 19, 2016); GE 14 (Case Summary, dated September 8, 2015); Applicant’s 
Answer to the SOR, supra note 4. 
6 According to the Mayo Clinic,  
PTSD is a mental health condition that's triggered by a terrifying event — either experiencing it or 
witnessing it. Symptoms may include flashbacks, nightmares and severe anxiety, as well as 
uncontrollable thoughts about the event. Most people who go through traumatic events may have 
temporary difficulty adjusting and coping, but with time and good self-care, they usually get better. If 
the symptoms get worse, last for months or even years, and interfere with your day-to-day 
functioning, you may have PTSD. Getting effective treatment after PTSD symptoms develop can be 
critical to reduce symptoms and improve function. 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/post-traumatic-stress-disorder/home/ovc-20308548 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
evidence of any diagnoses made, and there is no evidence that the rehabilitation facility 
found Applicant to be dependent on PCP, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b. 
  
 Upon his return to duty after the rehabilitation, Applicant was confronted with a 
variety of stressors: his commander advised him that he would be processed for 
discharge from active duty;7 his supervisors and peers treated him differently; his PTSD 
was still undiagnosed; and he was in the process of getting divorced. The combined 
stressors led to additional anxiety, and with no outlets available to him, Applicant slipped 
and returned to Robitussin to deal with his issues. Misconduct followed. Applicant called 
the suicide hot-line in 2011. Applicant received non-judicial punishment under the UCMJ, 
and in March 2011, he was discharged from military service. While there is evidence that 
Applicant slipped after completing his substance abuse treatment, there is no evidence 
that Applicant failed the Air Force Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention and Treatment 
(ADAPT) Program, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.d. 
 
 In May 2012, things started to unravel. On May 11, 2012, after rolling his vehicle, 
Applicant took his girlfriend’s car to a local drug store and stole Coricidin. Upon returning 
to the residence, he was questioned by the police and charged with (1) receiving stolen 
property (a misdemeanor); (2) reckless operation (a violation); and (3) conduct after 
accident (a misdemeanor). He was convicted of the first two charges, and the third charge 
was nolle prossed. He was fined $372 (suspended). The Arrest Record and the Court 
Record do not support the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.e. that Applicant was placed on probation 
for six months. 
  
 On May 22, 2012, Applicant’s girlfriend (and as of June 2015, his wife) reported to 
the police that, after a dispute with her, Applicant, while emotionally unstable and having 
a panic attack, had attempted to kill himself by wrapping a seatbelt around his neck. She 
stopped the car and cut the seatbelt. Applicant walked away. A police officer attempted 
to speak with him, but Applicant kept walking away because he did not realize the 
individual was a police officer. When the police officer grabbed him, Applicant resisted. 
Another police officer arrived and a struggle ensued. Applicant was tasered. Applicant’s 
girlfriend complied with the police officer’s request that she sign an Involuntary 
Emergency Admission (IEA) petition, and Applicant was taken to the hospital for a suicide 
watch evaluation and medical treatment. The following morning, Applicant agreed to 
voluntarily seek mental health treatment at the VA hospital. Applicant was issued a hand 
summons for resisting arrest and given a court date. The charge was placed on file 
without a finding providing Applicant remained on good behavior for one year, ending on 
October 3, 2013. The judge informed Applicant that as long as there were no future 
incidents, and he maintained good behavior, the incident would be removed from his 
record as though the incident never existed. There is no evidence of any further 
misconduct.  
 
 Applicant’s family has not seen any evidence of Applicant using the cold and cough 
medicine since May 2012. However, Applicant acknowledged that he last abused non-
                                                          
77 U.S. Air Force policy at that time essentially mandated discharge for a member found to have abused drugs 
unless the member met seven specific criteria. See Air Force Instruction 36-3208, Administrative Separation of Airmen 
(April 2, 2010), ¶ 5.55.2. 
 
7 
                                      
 
prescription over-the-counter cold and cough medicine in September 2012. The period 
between May and September 2012 involved periodic use, but there is no evidence that 
the simple “use” constituted “abuse.”  He intends to remain drug free. During 2011 – 2013, 
Applicant was seen on various occasions at several different VA hospitals, and he was 
seen for a variety of issues. PTSD was initially merely identified by VA personnel in 
December 2011, revisited in May 2012, and again mentioned in May 2013, but until that 
last date, he was not treated for PTSD, largely because there were insufficient resources 
or facilities to do so. In May 2013, Applicant’s PTSD was deemed to be chronic. Actual 
treatment for the condition was essentially commenced at that point. Effective January 1, 
2014, Applicant was awarded a 50 percent service-connected disability evaluation, an 
increase from the original 10 percent. He tried attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and 
Narcotics Anonymous (NA), but nobody could relate to him because his substance was 
neither alcohol nor narcotics, but rather non-prescription over-the-counter cold and cough 
medicine. He sees two physicians at the VA hospital to assist him, and sees a psychiatrist 
every few months. He has been prescribed Effexor for anxiety. In April 2016, feeling 
increased anxiety over his security clearance issues, Applicant sought guidance from his 
VA treating psychologist. After receiving ten minutes of support and cognitive therapy, he 
reported relief and indicated he would continue to use his developed stress management 
techniques. 
 
 On May 11, 2014, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, a question in Section 22 
– Police Record asked if, in the past seven years, he had been arrested by any police 
officer, sheriff, marshal or any other type of law enforcement official. Applicant answered 
“no” to that question. He certified that the response was “true, complete, and correct” to 
the best of his knowledge and belief, but the response to that question was, in fact, false 
for Applicant had failed to report his arrest of May 22, 2012. He subsequently 
acknowledged that the incident occurred, but he did not think the incident had to be 
reported because (a) he did not think he was arrested, but rather detained for his own 
safety, and (b) the judge told him the records would be purged after one year of good 
behavior. 
 
 On April 2, 2014, when an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) interviewed Applicant, he acknowledged the incident that occurred 
on May 22, 2012, but his memory of the events differed substantially from what was 
reported in the police record. Applicant acknowledged several parts of the incident: the 
dispute with his girlfriend; being yelled at, and tasered; and being questioned. He disputed 
that he initially knew the individual was a police officer because the individual was in plain 
clothes; that he was arrested; that he was taken to the police department; and that he 
had been charged. Applicant subsequently denied intending to provide false information, 
and he stated that he volunteered all the information based upon what he could 
remember. It is unclear if the arresting police officer was in plain clothes, although his 
girlfriend only saw uniformed officers. It is clear that Applicant was not taken to the police 
station; he was taken to the hospital in an emotionally disturbed condition, necessitating 
a suicide watch. Likewise, it is clear that Applicant’s condition at the time of the incident 
might make it difficult for him to understand or recall the actual facts of the incident. 
Furthermore, Applicant repeatedly stated that he did not think the incident had to be 
 
8 
                                      
 
reported because the judge told him the records would be purged after one year of good 
behavior. 
 
 In his December 19, 2014 response to a DOHA Interrogatory regarding his last 
misuse of a non-prescription over-the-counter cold and cough medicine, Applicant stated 
that he had stopped using the medicine in approximately August 2011, and that he 
routinely states the “clean date” is September 1, 2011. That date was a mistake. Applicant 
denied deliberately providing false information. Although he acknowledged slipping in 
2011, he now contends that he has been sober since September 2012 – nearly three 
years before the SOR was issued, and over four and one-half years ago. The SOR (¶ 2.i.) 
alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified material facts in his answer to the DOHA 
Interrogatory by stating his last abuse of non-prescription over-the-counter cold and 
cough medicine occurred on January 9, 2011. That allegation is unsubstantiated. The 
information regarding that particular date was furnished by Applicant when he was 
correcting the information that appeared in the OPM version of Applicant’s Personal 
Subject Interview. It was not an answer to the interrogatory. 
 
 The downward spiral of Applicant’s life has stopped, and Applicant has turned his 
life around. The tough love imposed upon him by his family assisted him in overcoming 
his health issues. The various stress factors in his life have ceased or been successfully 
modified to a point where they are manageable. Physicians and a psychiatrist are 
routinely treating his PTSD; his anxiety is managed by prescribed medication; he uses 
various support mechanisms; he is highly thought of by his supervisors and colleagues; 
he is out of debt; he has rebuilt family relationships; he has established new relationships 
with a new wife; and he realizes that he must be drug free. In hindsight, Applicant 
acknowledges that questions could have been answered differently. 
Work Performance and Character References 
 The airfield manager (Applicant’s direct supervisor) and the assistant airfield 
manager have both known Applicant since he began working for his employer. Applicant’s 
position involves many responsibilities, and he has handled them effortlessly. His hard 
work and determination are apparent, and because Applicant is an important, effective, 
and integral part of the team, and he has proven to be dependable, he has been tasked 
with additional responsibilities. Applicant multitasks effectively and is able to handle a 
high-volume workload. Applicant is honest and trustworthy. Applicant’s most recent 
performance review rated him 4.55 out of a possible 5.0. Co-workers generally 
characterize Applicant with terms such as dependable, trustworthy, reliable, honest, 
hardworking, truthful, conscientious, and courteous. Applicant’s immediate and extended 
family members are universal in their support for him, and they have characterized him 
as “scrupulously truthful.”  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
 
9 
                                      
 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”8 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”9   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”10 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.11  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
                                                          
8 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
9 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
10 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”12 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”13 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a “history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant was unemployed from March 2011 until March 2013, and 
during that period, a number of accounts were placed for collection or charged-off. The 
SOR identified six purportedly delinquent debts. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
                                                          
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
13 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the person 
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG 
¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated 
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”14  
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c) and 20(d) apply. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Some of 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by events that were largely beyond his 
control. He was discharged from the U.S. Air Force in March 2011 (for actions over which 
he did have some control), and he was unable to obtain new employment until March 
2013. In addition, his PTSD went untreated and he generally self-medicated by abusing 
non-prescription over-the-counter cold and cough medicine. Because of the lack of funds, 
his accounts became delinquent, and at least two of them were charged off. However, 
upon obtaining new employment, and well before the SOR was issued, Applicant 
contacted his known creditors to either work out settlements or arrange for repayment 
plans. The SOR identified six purportedly delinquent debts that had been placed for 
collection, totaling approximately $22,485. Applicant clearly resolved five of the six SOR-
related debts well before the SOR was issued, and the remaining debt is either in the 
process of being resolved, or has by now actually been resolved. There are no other 
delinquent accounts. Applicant maintains a budget, and has a monthly remainder of 
$1,628.36 available for saving or spending. Applicant’s financial status has significantly 
improved, and that his financial problems are under control. Applicant’s actions, under 
the circumstances, no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.15 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
                                                          
14 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
15 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
In addition, “deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, 
or other official government representative” may raise security concerns under AG ¶ 
16(b). 
It is also potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(c), if there is: 
 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.  
 Also, under AG ¶ 16(e), security concerns may be raised where there is  
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . . 
 As noted above, on May 11, 2014, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he 
responded to a question pertaining to his police record. The question in Section 22 – 
Police Record asked if, in the last seven years, he had been arrested by any police officer, 
sheriff, marshal or any other type of law enforcement official. Applicant answered “no” to 
the question. He certified that the response was “true, complete, and correct” to the best 
of his knowledge and belief, but the response to that question was, in fact, false.   
Likewise, when an OPM investigator interviewed Applicant on April 2, 2014, he denied he 
had been arrested. 
 
 Applicant’s responses provide sufficient evidence to examine if his submission on 
the e-QIP and his OPM response were deliberate falsifications, as alleged in the SOR, or 
merely the result of misunderstanding on his part. Applicant subsequently denied 
 
13 
                                      
 
intending to falsify his responses and explained that he had simply answered the 
questions at that time with the mindset that he had not been arrested, essentially because 
the judge had informed him that the records of the incident would be purged after one 
year of good behavior as though the incident never existed. Upon reflection, Applicant 
now concedes that he made a mistake in his thinking, and he could have responded 
differently.  
 
 I have considered Applicant’s background, professional career, his mental health 
issues, and his reputation in analyzing his actions. Applicant is an intelligent, talented, 
and experienced individual, and his explanation, under the circumstances, should be 
afforded some weight. His confusion and resultant actions are considered aberrant 
behavior out of character for him. His position, while normally unacceptable, is reasonable 
for a layperson not schooled in the law. Applicant relied on an authority figure – a judge 
– in deciding how to respond to the questions pertaining to the incident. As it pertains to 
the alleged deliberate falsifications, AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) have not been established. As 
it pertains to the questionable personal conduct (the criminal actions and Applicant’s 
abuse of non-prescription over-the-counter cough and cold medicine), AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 
16(e) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(b) may apply if  
 
the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused or 
significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of authorized 
personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual specifically 
concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully,  
 
If “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG 
¶ 17(c) may apply. Also, AG ¶ 17(d) may apply if  
 
the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
Similarly, AG ¶ 17(e) may apply if “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce 
or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” 
 
AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) apply. AG ¶¶ 17(b) and 17(c) partially apply. As noted 
above, Applicant’s e-QIP entry and his OPM interview response – essentially 
concealments or omissions of the true facts – regarding his May 2012 arrest were caused 
or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of a judge. That judge, 
though a position of authority, especially to a layperson, was not an authorized person or 
 
14 
                                      
 
legal counsel with the authority to advise or instruct Applicant concerning the security 
clearance process. Those incidents occurred between two and one-half and three years 
ago. Applicant’s other questionable conduct, including his abuse of non-prescription over-
the-counter cough and cold medicine to self-medicate himself during periods when the 
U.S. Air Force medical specialists and the VA medical specialists failed to diagnose and 
treat his PTSD; his General Discharge under Honorable Conditions; and his substance-
related arrests, all occurred between five and ten years ago. Now that Applicant’s PTSD 
has been recognized and treated; he has undergone and continues to receive counseling; 
his anxiety is managed by prescribed medication; he has developed stress management 
techniques; he has a support system; he is happily married; he is highly thought of by his 
supervisors and colleagues; and he has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate his 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such conduct is unlikely to recur. A 
person should not be held forever accountable for misconduct from the past, especially if 
there is a clear indication of subsequent reform, remorse, or rehabilitation. In this 
instance, I conclude that Applicant’s actions no longer cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.16 
 
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He self-medicated 
by using and abusing non-prescription over-the-counter cough and cold medicine over a 
substantial period; he got into trouble with the U.S. Air Force and civilian police authorities; 
he stole some non-prescription over-the-counter cough and cold medicine; he resisted 
arrest; and he was not fully candid when reporting or responding to inquiries regarding 
                                                          
16 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
his police record. In addition, his memory regarding his last use of the non-prescription 
over-the-counter cough and cold medicine was not accurate.  
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s concealments or omissions of the true facts regarding his May 2012 arrest 
were caused, or significantly contributed to, by improper or inadequate advice of a judge.  
Applicant denied intending to falsify his responses and explained that he had simply 
answered the questions at that time with the wrong mindset. Upon reflection, Applicant 
now concedes that he made a mistake in his thinking, and he could have answered the 
questions differently. Based on his reputation, Applicant’s actions appear to be aberrant 
behavior. Moreover, those incidents occurred between two and one-half and three years 
ago. Applicant’s other questionable conduct, including his abuse of non-prescription over-
the-counter cough and cold medicine to self-medicate himself during periods when the 
U.S. Air Force medical specialists and the VA medical specialists failed to diagnose and 
treat his PTSD; his General Discharge under Honorable Conditions; and his substance-
related arrests, all occurred between five and ten years ago. There is substantial evidence 
of successful rehabilitation.   
 
Now that Applicant’s PTSD has been recognized and treated; he has undergone 
and continues to receive counseling; his anxiety is managed by prescribed medication; 
he has developed stress management techniques; he has a support system; he is happily 
married; he is highly thought of by his supervisors and colleagues; and he has taken 
positive steps to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such conduct is unlikely to recur. A person should not be held forever accountable 
for misconduct from the past, especially if there is a clear indication of subsequent reform, 
remorse, or rehabilitation. In this instance, I conclude that Applicant’s actions no longer 
cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context 
of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated and overcome the Government’s case.  
 
 The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
 
16 
                                      
 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 17 
 
Applicant has clearly demonstrated a “meaningful track record” of debt reduction 
and elimination efforts. After his lengthy period of unemployment, Applicant approached 
his creditors and started resolving his debts. He did so well before the SOR was issued. 
Five of the six debts were clearly resolved, and the sixth debt was in the process of being 
resolved or it has already been resolved. Applicant maintains a budget, and has a monthly 
remainder of $1,628.36 available for saving or spending. It appears that Applicant’s 
financial status has significantly improved, and that his financial problems are under 
control.   
 
 I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and supporting 
evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative process, and my 
interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG 
¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.f.:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.i.:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
