 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02864 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 May 23, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns that arose out of his 
infrequent marijuana use from September 1982 through January 2013. Applicant has 
been candid with the Department of Defense about his illegal drug involvement, and 
does not intend to use any illegal drugs, including marijuana, in the future. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 6, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigative Processing (e-QIP). On October 24, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on December 19, 2014, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
December 5, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on December 14, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled 
on February 8, 2017. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through I, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one witness. 
The record then closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 16, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a government contractor, where he has 
worked for three years. He is married and has one minor son. He seeks his first DoD 
security clearance in connection with his work assignment. (GE 1; AE H; Tr. 18-19.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that between September 1982 and January 2013, Applicant 
used marijuana. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted this allegation, with 
clarifications. 
 
 Applicant’s used marijuana 15 to 20 times between September 1982 and 
January 2013. He estimated he used it twice, at the age of 16, in 1982. He also used it 
a few times in college. In 2008 or 2009, he used it five or six times as a self-prescribed 
remedy to treat insomnia. At that time, he found another remedy for insomnia and 
ceased marijuana use because, “it was illegal and I was dumb for using it.” However, in 
2013 he unintentionally used marijuana again when he smoked a clove cigarette that 
unknowingly had been laced with marijuana. On this occasion, he took a puff off of 
someone else’s clove cigarette at a social gathering and discovered it did not taste like 
a regular clove cigarette. He learned afterword that the person hollowed out a regular 
clove cigarette and put marijuana in it. He no longer associates with the friend that 
provided the cigarette laced with marijuana. None of his current friends or associates 
use marijuana. He has never purchased any marijuana. Applicant honestly reported all 
uses of marijuana. (Tr. 20-35.) 
 
 Applicant recognized the poor judgment of his past illegal drug use. He signed a 
statement of intent demonstrating he would not abuse any drugs in the future. All drug 
tests in evidence were negative. A letter from Applicant’s physician indicated no 
evidence of drug use has been observed. (AE A; AE B; AE C; Tr. 25-26.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by those who know him, as verified by his witness 
that testified on his behalf and several character reference letters introduced into 
evidence. He is considered honest and trustworthy. (AE G.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
 
3 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG 
¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H. Applicant used marijuana, infrequently from September 
1982 until approximately 2009. He also unintentionally ingested marijuana once in 2013. 
The facts established through the Government’s evidence and through Applicant’s 
admissions raise security concerns under both of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
While Applicant’s intentional sporadic illegal drug use spanned over a 27-year 
period, Applicant has made a number of significant changes in his life during the past 
eight years that demonstrate his serious commitment to abstinence from illegal 
substances. He recognized that he was wrong to use marijuana. He ceased using all 
drugs prior to applying for a security clearance. He disassociated himself from drug-
using friends and associates. He focuses on being a role model for his ten-year old son. 
Thus, he has changed his environment and no longer frequents places were drugs 
might be used. While the Directive does not define what constitutes “an appropriate 
period of abstinence” under AG ¶ 26(b)(3), his candor about his illegal drug abuse leads 
me to accept as credible his assertions of no future intent to use marijuana, under any 
circumstances. Applicant has demonstrated sufficient intent not to use any illegal drugs 
in the future. He signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. He has matured and understands that any illegal drug involvement is 
 
5 
 
incompatible with his defense contractor employment. Applicant has presented 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the Government’s concerns under AG ¶ 26(b). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s infrequent but 
illegal drug use occurred over a long span. He was irresponsible at the time and did not 
recognize the seriousness of his actions. He has now matured. He has not used illegal 
substances intentionally for eight years after coming to the revelation that there was no 
room for illegal substances in his professional life. While he unintentionally used 
marijuana in 2013 after taking a puff from a marijuana-laced cigarette, he now is aware 
of the hazards of intentional ingestion and will avoid placing himself in such positions in 
the future. His changes are permanent and the likelihood of recurrence is extremely low. 
Applicant is respected by those who know him. He has a reputation for honestly and 
trustworthiness. Applicant’s current reputation for honesty, coupled with his candor 
concerning his past drug use, adds weight to his commitment to abstain from illegal 
drug use. The record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant should be granted a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
