 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 14-06367 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 6, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on June 3, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on June 10, 2016, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and provided no response to the 
 
2 
 
 
FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as items 1 through 6, is admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. He graduated from high school in 1999, and reports 
some college. He has been married since May 2013, and reports having no children. He 
has been employed by a federal contractor since April 2014, pending his acquisition of a 
security clearance. Applicant reports having no previous security clearance. Applicant 
disclosed some of his delinquencies involving student loans in section 26 of his May 2, 
2014, Questionnaire for National Security Positions or security clearance application 
(SCA). Applicant’s only explanation for these delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, was 
that he had insufficient income to pay these debts, and his wife handled all of their 
family finances.   
 
Applicant admitted all eleven of the alleged delinquent debts in the SOR, totaling 
$16,824. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.i, which are all 
student loan debts, are currently being paid by a garnishment of 15% of his wages each 
month.2 He also stated that he will begin paying off the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b,1.c,1.j, and 1.k after he pays off the delinquent student loan debts. Applicant has 
failed to establish a regular payment history through the putative garnishments or an 
installment plan for the delinquent student loans. He did not document that he brought 
his other delinquent consumer and cable provider debts current. No explanation has 
been offered as to how he became delinquent on these debts in the first place, except 
to say that he relied on his wife, and he had inadequate income. He earned 
approximately $22,000 a year at all relevant times, and his spouse earned $30,000 a 
year.3 
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s May 2, 2014, 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or Security Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 3). 
 
2 Item 2.  
 
3 Item 4, p. 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
4 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted to all of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. These 
admissions are corroborated by his SCA, the Officer of Personnel Management (OPM) 
Personal Subject Interview of June 2014, and his credit reports. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
5 
 
 
 
 Applicant disclosed his student loan delinquent debts in his SCA. His wages are 
being garnished each month to pay down these debts. However, no garnishment order 
or documents have been provided to show this. He repeatedly stated the reason for his 
financial problems is insufficient income. This is another way of saying that he spends 
beyond his means. Applicant indicated that he plans to pay off the other delinquent 
consumer debts alleged in the SOR, once he is employed and after he pays off the 
student loans. However, he has produced no evidence that he reached out to these 
creditors, attempted to settle these debts, or entered into any installment payment 
plans. These debts remain unresolved. His financial problems are recent and ongoing. 
Applicant provided insufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under 
control, and that his debts were incurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. The 
mitigating conditions enumerated above do not apply.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There are ample indications that 
Applicant’s financial problems, including his student loans, are not under control. He has 
not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
 
6 
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:             Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
     _____________________________ 
                                            Robert J. Kilmartin 
               Administrative Judge 
 
 
