 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-05862 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On June 16, 2016, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 24, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 23, 2017, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on April 19, 2017. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were 
 
2 
admitted without objection. The record remained open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional documents, which she did. They were marked AE F through P, and were 
admitted without objection.1 The record closed on May 3, 2017. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 27, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.l to reflect a dollar amount past 
due as $229 and the outstanding balance as $856; SOR ¶ 1.m to reflect a dollar amount  
past due as $70 and the outstanding balance as $260; and SOR ¶ 1.n to reflect the 
dollar amount past due as $135 and the outstanding balance as $3,702. There was no 
objection and the motion was granted.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.h, and 1.k 
through 1.s. She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, 2.a and 2.b. Her 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. She earned an associate’s degree in approximately 
2002 and a bachelor’s degree in 2010. She has been married and divorced twice. She 
has two adult children. Applicant served on active duty in the military from 1986 to 1988 
and accepted an early release. She received an honorable discharge. She has been 
employed with her present employer since November 2015.3  
 
 Applicant disclosed on her May 2013 public trust application and testified she 
had periods of unemployment as follows: June 2015 to November 2015; December 
2012 to May 2013; June 2012 to September 2012; February 2011 to June 2011; 
January 2010 to May 2010; March 2008 to June 2008; October 2006 to February 2007; 
January 2006 to March 2006; and November 2004 to May 2005. Some of the 
employment that Applicant listed was part-time. She may have had other periods of 
unemployment, but stated it was widespread without being specific. Some of the 
periods she was unemployed she noted she was attending school. Some periods she 
received unemployment benefits.4  
 
 Applicant testified that since starting her present employment in November 2015, 
she has lived with her father and does not pay rent, so she can pay her delinquent 
debts. The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit reports from June 2013 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is Department Counsel’s discovery letter. HE II is the exhibit list. HE III is 
Department Counsel’s email memoranda and HE IV is Applicant’s fax cover sheet. 
 
2 Tr. 11-12.  
 
3 Tr. 19-22. 
 
4 Tr. 23-25; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
and September 2014. Applicant testified that she had documents to show she paid 
some of her debts, but they were on her phone.5 
 
 During Applicant’s June 2013 background interview with a government 
investigator, numerous delinquent debts were brought to her attention. She told the 
investigator that she was unaware of many of the debts.6  
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n through 1.s are federal student loans. Applicant 
admitted she owes these debts. She obtained the student loans in approximately 2008. 
She testified she never made payments on the loans. She either had the loans 
repeatedly deferred or held off paying them because she did not earn sufficient income 
to pay them. In February 2017, she had the loans consolidated and an income-based 
repayment plan was approved. The loans are deferred until April 2018. Due to her 
limited income she does not have to make any payments until April 2018. At that time, 
her payment will be $489, unless she files additional papers for a different term.7  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m are state student loans. Applicant testified that 
she believed SOR ¶ 1.a is a duplicate of ¶ 1.l. Applicant provided a document to show 
that a state loan was paid. I do not have sufficient evidence to conclude these debts are 
duplicates. I find SOR ¶ 1.a is resolved. She provided documents to show she made 
recent payments on another state loan, which has a remaining balance of $440. She did 
not provide more detailed evidence, but it may be for SOR ¶ 1.m.8  
  
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f are medical accounts from 2014. She 
testified she paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c by debit card. She also stated she paid the 
other two medical debts and would provide proof, but none was provided.9 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are utility bills. Applicant testified that she paid 
one of them. She did not provide documentations to support which debt was paid.10 
 
 Applicant provided a partial copy of an April 2017 credit report. The information 
does not detail if collection accounts were removed due to payment or because of the 
age of the account. Many of her delinquent debts are more than seven years old. In her 
post-hearing submission, she provided additional pages of the credit report. I am unable 
to conclude if she paid dated collection accounts more than seven years old.11 
                                                          
5 Tr. 34-38; AE A. 
 
6 GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. 41-45; AE O, P. 
 
8 Tr. 28-32, 44-45; AE D, K. 
 
9 Tr. 32-34, 40-41; 47-49, 52. 
 
10 Tr. 48-49. 
 
11 AE A, P. 
 
 
4 
 Applicant provided a document that shows she paid a medical debt for $763. She 
did not identify the SOR debt, but it presumably corresponds to SOR ¶ 1.h. That debt is 
resolved in her favor.12  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j are accounts in collections, which were 
opened from 2007 through 2013. Applicant testified she was unfamiliar with the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.g, and she had paid all of her collection accounts. She stated that she 
cancelled the account in SOR ¶ 1.j years ago. She stated she would call the creditor to 
resolve it. Proof was not provided regarding the resolution of the above allegations.13 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($7,355) was for a truck driving training course that 
Applicant took, after which she was required to work for the company for a year. She did 
not fulfill the terms of the contract and owes the company for her training.14 This debt is 
unresolved. Applicant provided documents for two debts that were not alleged.15  
 
 Applicant testified that she misread the application when she completed the 
section asking about her finances and did not deliberately falsify her answers. She 
stated she believed the question asked if “all” of these issues existed, rather than if 
“any” of them existed. She stated she knew she had student loans that she could not 
pay. Although the questions are clear, I do not believe she deliberately intended to 
mislead the government.16  
 
 Applicant testified she took a course in 2015 on how to eliminate debt. She 
attributes her financial problems to periods of unemployment and underemployment. 
She stated that she is doing the best that she can. She testified that since living with her 
father she is paying collection accounts and working on her credit score.17 She testified 
that she previously could not afford to pay her bills, but since she has been employed, 
she is attempting to pay them. Applicant provided a copy of her recent performance 
evaluation that reflects ratings of “sometimes exceeds,” consistently exceeds” and 
“exceptional.”18  
 
Policies 
 
The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
                                                          
12 Tr. 50-51. 
 
13 Tr. 50-53. 
 
14 Tr. 52-53. 
 
15 AE H, I. 
 
16 Tr. 59-65. 
 
17 Tr. 28.  
 
18 Tr. 71; AE E. 
 
5 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made.  
   
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
6 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.19 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise concerns under AG ¶ 19. 
Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that she has been unable or unwilling 
to pay or resolve. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Many of Applicant’s delinquent debts remain unresolved. Some of these have 
been delinquent for many years. She has had difficulty resolving them due to her low 
                                                          
19 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
wages. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant is still resolving her delinquent 
debts.  
 
 Applicant attributes her financial problems to periods of underemployment and 
unemployment. These were conditions beyond Applicant’s control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant testified that she paid some of her debts, but did not provide 
supporting documentation. She never made payments on her federal student loans 
acquired in 2008, but recently consolidated them. They are in a deferred status and no 
longer delinquent. She resolved a state student loan and is making payments on 
another. There is insufficient evidence that many of her other debts are resolved.  
Applicant has not totally ignored her responsibility to pay her delinquent debts, but she 
does not have the financial means to do so. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant testified she took a debt resolution course in 2015. There is evidence 
she addressed her delinquent federal student loans by having them consolidated. She 
does not have any payments due until April 2018. The post-hearing documents 
Applicant provided were insufficient to conclude certain debts were paid or that there 
are clear indications that her financial problems are under control. The first part of AG ¶ 
20(c) applies.  
 
 Applicant has addressed her delinquent federal student loans and two state 
student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.m through 1.s. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to these 
debts.  
 
 Applicant testified that she canceled the account in SOR ¶ 1.j years ago. She did 
not provide supporting documentation of her actions to resolve that disputed debt. AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the process or any other failure to cooperate 
with the process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
8 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
I find that Applicant did not deliberately omit, conceal, or falsify her application 
when she failed to disclose her financial problems. Applicant appeared to be genuinely 
confused by the questions on the application. During her background interview, she told 
the investigator she was unaware of many of the delinquent debts. I find she has 
sufficiently refuted the personal conduct security concerns. Hence, it is not necessary to 
discuss disqualifying or mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant has experienced many periods of unemployment and 
underemployment. She indicated she is resolving her debts, but provided insufficient 
evidence to substantiate that some debts are paid. At this juncture, she has not 
established a meaningful track record of financial stability. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraph   1.a:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b-1.g   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.h:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.i-1.l:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.m-1.s:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
