 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06309 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
raised by his outstanding delinquent accounts, his failure to file federal income tax 
returns from 2007 to 2012, and his outstanding state and federal tax debts. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for consideration. 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on January 20, 2016. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received 
the FORM on February 1, 2016, and did not respond. The documents appended to the 
FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, and 5 through 6, 
without objection. GE 4 is excluded as explained below.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 GE 4 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing the interview Applicant had 
with an investigator in July 2014. The interview, which contains adverse information, 
has not been authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Footnote 1 of 
the FORM advises Applicant of that fact and further cautions him that if he fails to object 
to the admission of the interview summary in his response to the FORM that his failure 
may be taken as a waiver of the authentication requirement. Applicant’s failure to 
respond to the FORM or, specifically, to Footnote 1 does not demonstrate that he 
understands the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not 
establish that he understands the implications of waiving an objection to the 
admissibility of the interview. Accordingly, GE 4 is inadmissible and I have not 
considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has worked for a federal contractor since May 2011. He completed a 
security clearance application, his first, in May 2014. The ensuing investigation revealed 
and the SOR alleges that Applicant did not file his federal income tax returns for 2007 to 
2012 until 2014, resulting in a $2,300 fine from the IRS (SOR ¶ 1.f). The SOR also 
alleges that Applicant owes approximately $2,000 for a state tax lien (SOR ¶1.c), 
$1,748 on 24 collection accounts owed to a local government for parking tickets (SOR ¶ 
1.d),  two medical accounts for $202 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and $56 (SOR 1.e), respectively,  and 
an outstanding cable bill for $ 156 (SOR ¶ 1.b). 
 
 Applicant admits that he failed to timely file his federal tax returns. He did not 
consider the obligation to file the returns pressing because he usually received a refund. 
Applicant claims that he has made payment arrangements with the IRS to pay the fine. 
Applicant denies owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e. He claims that he 
currently has an active account with the creditor holding SOR ¶ 1.b and that he has paid 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.e. Applicant also denies the medical debt alleged in SOR 1.a 
because it does not appear on the credit reports he obtained. The debt is reported on 
GE 6, but does not identify a creditor.  
 
 Applicant did not provide any documentation to support any of his claims about 
the alleged debts. He did not provide any information about his current finances.  
 
 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”3   
 
Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports in the record establish the 
Government’s prima facie case, that Applicant has a history of financial problems, that 
he has demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to pay his creditors, and that he failed 
to file federal income taxes for five years between 2007 and 2012.4  Despite finding 
                                                          
3  AG ¶ 18. 
 
4 AG ¶ 19 (a), (c), and (g). 
 
 
4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a in Applicant’s favor,5 none of the financial consideration mitigating conditions 
apply. Applicant failed to submit any documentation to corroborate his claims that he 
paid SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.f. He also failed to establish that his account with the creditor 
in SOR ¶ 1.b is in good standing.  
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant failed to meet his burden of production and 
persuasion to refute or mitigate the SOR allegations. He did not provide any evidence to 
show financial rehabilitation or reform. Accordingly, his request for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:       For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.f:     Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
5 The Government’s evidence regarding SOR ¶ 1.a does not identify a creditor. As a result, Applicant’s 
ability to investigate and ultimately resolve the account is limited. Furthermore, individuals typically do not 
incur medical debt under circumstances that indicate reckless or irresponsible behavior that reflects 
negatively on their security worthiness.  
