KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant asserts the Judge erred by finding his home equity loan was for instillation
of a pool. The Judge’s finding is based on Applicant’s personal subject interview. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-05009.a1
DATE: 05/24/2017
DATE: May 24, 2017
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05009
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 15, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case
be decided on the written record.  On February 10, 2017, after considering the record, Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
In this case, Applicant did not file a response to the Government’s File of Relevant Material. 
His brief contains new evidence, in the form of character reference letters and account statements
that post-date the Judge’s decision, which the Board cannot consider on appeal.  See Directive ¶
E3.1.29.
Applicant asserts the Judge erred by finding his home equity loan was for installation of a
pool.  The Judge’s finding is based on Applicant’s personal subject interview.  Applicant also states
it would make no sense to use his IRA to pay debts because of the penalties.  The Judge’s finding
and conclusions in this regard arose because Applicant had proposed to take that action.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The  Board’s authority to review a case is limited
to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  Applicant has
not demonstrated any harmful error on the part of the Judge.   Therefore, the decision of the Judge
denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan      
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields_____
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
