KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline C
DIGEST: Applicant cites to evidence of his ties within the U.S., his permanent residence in this
country for several decades, and his lack of recent contact with his siblings. He argues that he
would not yield to pressure by foreign governments. Applicant’s arguments are not enough to
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-04852.a1
DATE: 05/25/2017
DATE: May 25, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 15-04852
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On January 30, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
During the hearing, the Judge granted a Government motion to amend the SOR by adding an
allegation under Guideline C (Foreign Preference).  Tr. at 55-59.  On March 1, 2017, after the
hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Roger C. Wesley
denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline C are not at issue
in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
came to the U.S. in the late 1970s, becoming a citizen of this country in the early 1990s.  His wife
is a U.S. citizen by birth.  The couple has no children.
Applicant’s parents were citizens and residents of Iran.1  They have passed away, but before
that Applicant provided them with financial support on occasion.  He has had infrequent contact
with his Iranian relatives for the past several years.  None of Applicant’s siblings have any known
connections with the Iranian military or government.  He last told his family about the nature of his
work in the mid-2000s.  Since 2011, he has kept the nature of his work from them.
Iran supports terrorist organizations.  Its proxies play disruptive roles in the Middle East. 
Iran has conducted intelligence operations against the U.S., which have increased in depth and
complexity.  The country commits human rights violations, and it sometimes places foreign visitors
under surveillance, monitoring hotel rooms, telephones, and fax machines.  
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for the quality of his work performance.  He
received a certificate of appreciation for his exemplary service.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant had not mitigated concerns arising from his family
connections in Iran.  He stated that, given Iran’s history of monitoring communications systems,
these connections could come to the attention of those in Iran interested in acquiring U.S. protected
data.  Indeed, it cannot be ruled out that this may already have occurred.  He also cited to evidence
of terrorist activity in Iran, the country’s human rights abuses, and the illegal exporting of U.S.
technology as matters that weigh against the granting of a trustworthiness designation.  
Discussion
Applicant cites to evidence of his ties within the U.S., his permanent residence in this
country for several decades, and his lack of recent contact with his siblings.  He argues that he would
not yield to pressure by foreign governments.  Applicant’s arguments are not enough to demonstrate
that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-09387 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2016).  
1The finding about the Iranian citizenship of Applicant’s relatives is found in the Analysis.  Decision at 10.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  In Foreign Influence cases, the nature of the foreign government involved, the intelligence
gathering history of that government, and the presence of terrorist activity are important
considerations that provide context for the other record evidence and must be brought to bear on the
Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the case.  The country’s human rights record is also an important
consideration.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 08-10099 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jan. 28, 2011).  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness cases is that set forth in
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding security clearances:  such a
determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’” See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2013).  See also Kaplan v.
Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert. denied.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
