 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02410 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 16, 2015, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was 
received by him on May 13, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. Therefore, the 
Government’s evidence identified as Items 2 through 9 are admitted into evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on May 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He is not married and has no children. He has worked 
for a federal contractor since 2002. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2007 
through 2013. He disclosed this information on his October 2014 security clearance 
application (SCA) and discussed it during his December 2014 background interview 
with a government investigator. Applicant explained that in the past he gave his father 
his tax returns to prepare for him. When he moved out of his father’s house in 2007, he 
forgot to file his tax returns. Initially he was embarrassed, but then was scared of the 
potential consequences and penalties the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) might impose 
and repeatedly did not file his tax returns for subsequent years. He told the investigator 
that he did not owe state or federal taxes because he believed he had sufficient funds 
withheld from his pay. After he completed his SCA, he researched failing to file tax 
returns or pay taxes. He told the investigator that there were no penalties for not filing 
tax returns if he was due a refund. He intended to give an accountant his tax documents 
in January 2015, so all of his delinquent tax returns could be filed. He believed he would 
receive a tax refund for all of the delinquent years. No other information was provided. 
Applicant did not provide proof that he has filed his delinquent tax returns. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
3 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides a condition that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant failed to timely file his 2007 through 2013 federal and state tax returns. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
condition. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.  
 
 Applicant admitted he forgot to file his 2007 federal and state tax returns. 
Subsequently, he became embarrassed and scared of the consequences. He then 
failed to file his 2008 through 2013 federal and state tax returns. He failed to provide 
documentary proof that he has filed any of the delinquent returns. Without such proof, I 
cannot find his behavior is unlikely to recur. His conduct is recent, ongoing, and casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant provided no evidence that the conditions that caused his financial 
problem were beyond his control. He provided no evidence that the problem is being 
resolved or under control. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) do not apply. 
 
 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He admitted he failed to file his 2007 through 2013 
federal and state tax returns. He told the government investigator that he would give his 
accountant the documents to prepare his delinquent tax returns in January 2015. He 
failed to provide proof that he has filed any of the delinquent returns. The DOHA Appeal 
Board has held that:  
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with these things is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 
01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug 18, 2015) See Cafeteria v. Restaurant Workers 
Union Local 473 v. McElroy 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960,  aff’d, 367 
U.S. 886 (1961).2 
 
Applicant’s repeated failure to comply with rules and regulations concerning his 
legal obligation to timely file tax returns is a security concern. He has failed to meet his 
                                                          
2 ISCR Case. No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun 29,, 2016) 
 
6 
 
 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
