 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02517 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 7, 2016, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on April 25, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on May 3, 2016. As of July 8, 2016, he had not responded. The 
case was assigned to me on April 11, 2017. The Government exhibits included in the 
FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2005. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1981 
to 1985. He is a high school graduate. He is married with two adult children and an adult 
stepchild.1  
 
Applicant developed financial problems in the 1990s, which he attributed to his 
and his wife’s financial irresponsibility. He filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in 1997, 
and his debts were discharged in 1998.2 
 
Applicant left a job in 2005 that he had held since 1987, and moved his family to 
another state where he thought he had another job waiting for him, and it was a better 
environment to raise his children. The housing market was booming, and he bought a 
house at the new location before selling the old house. The job opportunity fell through, 
and he had to accept a job at a much lower salary. He was unable to sell the old house, 
the housing market slowed, then crashed, and he was unable to maintain the payments 
on two mortgage loans. The old house was lost to foreclosure.3 
 
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts. The debts are listed on a credit report 
from December 2012. Applicant denied all the allegations. He stated that he had been 
working to get the debts removed from his credit report for over seven years without 
success.4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges “an account that is 120 days or more past due in the 
approximate amount of $544 and has a balance of $5,231.” A credit report from 2007 
shows this account as $544 past due with a credit limit of $5,231. The date of last 
activity was August 2006. There was a zero balance, but a note indicated that $3,373 
was charged off. A credit report from 2012 had similar information, except it did not list 
an amount that was charged off. The debt is not listed on credit reports from February 
2015 and September 2015.5 
 
The $229 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is to a collection company on behalf of a 
public utility in a state where Applicant has not lived since 2005. The 2012 credit report 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 10, 11.  
 
2 Items 9, 11.  
 
3 Items 5-8, 10.  
 
4 Items 4, 8.  
 
5 Items 4, 6-10.  
 
 
3 
 
listed the debt as opened in September 2008, with a date of last activity of November 
2008. The debt is not listed on the February 2015 and September 2015 credit reports.6 
 
The 2012 credit report listed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c as a past-due auto 
loan with a $3,333 balance. It listed the account as opened in November 2006, with a 
date of last activity of February 2010. The debt is not listed on the February 2015 and 
September 2015 credit reports.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a $13,179 debt that is being pursued by a collection company. 
The 2012 credit report listed the account as opened in December 2007, with a date of 
last activity of May 2010. A 2007 credit report listed a $13,179 debt to a different 
creditor. The date of last activity is May 2006. Applicant admitted owing that debt at one 
time. These may be the same debts. If they are the same debt, it is older than reflected 
in the 2012 credit report. The debt is not listed on the February 2015 and September 
2015 credit reports.8 
 
Applicant reported several delinquent accounts on his Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in November 2012. The only debt from 
the SOR that he addressed was the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He wrote the “account 
[was] closed as a profit and loss writeoff,” and that the account was resolved in 
September 2008. He reported a $228 debt that may be the same debt as the $229 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, but under a different collection company. Applicant wrote that he 
thought the debt was paid in 2008.9 
 
Applicant was asked about his finances during a background interview in January 
2013. He discussed his history of financial problems. The investigator asked him about 
debts from the 2012 credit report, including the four debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
was only able to identify the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He thought the account was tied 
in with the foreclosure of his old house. He stated that his wife handled the family’s 
finances, and that their finances were improving.10 
 
The February 2015 and September 2015 credit reports only list three accounts, 
and none of the accounts were delinquent. The September 2015 credit report, which is 
the most recent report available, shows the three listed accounts as paid and closed 
with zero balances.11 
 
                                                          
6 Items 4, 6-10.  
 
7 Items 4, 6-8, 10.  
 
8 Items 4, 6-10.  
 
9 Item 5.  
 
10 Item 10.  
 
11 Items 6, 7.  
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant had financial problems in the 1990s and the mid-2000s. He admitted 
that the 1990s problems were due to his and his wife’s financial irresponsibility. Those 
problems were resolved through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case. In 2005, he took a 
chance, left a long-time job, and moved to another state for a job that did not 
materialize. He also bought a house at the new location before selling the old house. 
 
 
6 
 
All of the SOR debts are at least seven years old, and none of them are listed on 
the two 2015 credit reports. The September 2015 credit report only listed three 
accounts, which were listed as paid and closed with zero balances. 
 
Applicant may be responsible for the SOR debts. However, even if they were his 
debts, they are old and no longer on his credit report. Debts remain a continuing course 
of conduct for as long as they remain unpaid. However, at some point debts get old, fall 
off credit reports, are no longer actively collected, and they are less telling about an 
applicant’s security worthiness. Applicant’s finances were stable as of the most recent 
information available, and had been for some time. Concerns about Applicant’s finances 
are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
