 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-00041 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 20, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision based 
on the written record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) 
on July 27, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on August 2, 2016. He had 30 days 
from his receipt of the FORM to submit additional information in response to the FORM. 
Applicant did not submit matters in response to the FORM. On October 11, 2016, the 
FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on May 23, 2017. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits SOR allegations 1.d, 1.f, 1,k, and 
2.a. He denies SOR allegations 1.a – 1.c, 1.e, 1.g – 1.j.      
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain a security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since June 1997. He has held a 
secret security clearance since 2000. He and his wife are separated. He has three adult 
children. (Item 2)   
  
On June 3, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) as 
part of a periodic background investigation related to his security clearance. In response 
to Section 26 – Employer Travel or Credit Card, “In the past 7 years have you been 
counseled, warned, or disciplined for violating the terms of agreement for a travel or 
credit card provided by your employer?” Applicant answered, “yes.” He explained that 
he charged $2,000 on his company credit card in order to pay his rent and while 
disputing his mortgage foreclosure. He paid the amount owed. (Item 2, section 26)  
 
Applicant also listed that he owed about $4,000 in delinquent student loans in 
2010. He fell behind making student loan payments while fighting the foreclosure on his 
home. He indicated the student loans were resolved by August 2011. He did not list any 
additional delinquent debts. (Item 2, Section 26).  
 
On June 6, 2013, Applicant submitted an addendum to his e-QIP application 
where he explained the cause of his financial problems. Applicant’s financial problems 
began in November 2007, when his wife left him after 30 years of marriage, leaving him 
responsible for all of the debts and with supporting their three children. Two of his 
children were in college at the time and one was in high school. He had difficulty 
meeting his financial obligations because of the loss of his wife’s income contributing 
towards the expenses and he was not receiving child support. His credit score suffered. 
Applicant did everything in his power to meet his financial obligations. He sought out 
payday loans, which further aggravated the problem. He fell behind on paying his 
children’s student loans, and other bills. Before his wife left him, he was never late on 
any of his bills. He intends to pay what he owes. In 2010, Applicant applied for a home 
loan modification program for his mortgage when it was with the creditor alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.g. The modification was approved, but his loan had been sold to the creditor alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.h, who foreclosed on his mortgage. He hired a law firm to fight the 
foreclosure, but he was not successful. (Item 2)  
 
A background investigation revealed that Applicant had ten delinquent debts; a 
total approximate balance of $220,825. Of that amount, $207,690 were debts involved 
in Applicant’s home mortgage foreclosure. The debts include: a home mortgage that 
was past due in the amount of $162,678. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 3 at 3; Item 4 at 1); a 
mortgage account that was past due in the amount of $16,555 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 4 at 1; 
Item 6 at 3; Item 7 at 2); a $9,554 student loan account that was placed for collection 
(SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 4 at 2; Item 7 at 3); a $1,638 account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d: 
 
3 
 
 
Item 4 at 2; Item 6 at 1; Item 7 at 1) ; an $851 cable television account that was placed 
for collection. (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 4 at 2); a $432 delinquent cable television account (SOR 
¶ 1.f: Item 6 at 2); a mortgage that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 3 at 6; Item 7 at 4); 
a $28,457 deficiency balance owed as a result of a mortgage foreclosure (SOR ¶ 1.h: 
Item 3 at 4); a $660 cable television account that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.i: 
Item 3 at 10); and a defaulted student loan account with an unspecified balance. (SOR 
¶ 1.j: Item 3 at 10)    
 
The SOR also alleged that Applicant was verbally warned for his misuse of his 
company credit card in approximately September 2012. This allegation was alleged 
under Guideline F and Guideline E. (SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 2.a: Gov 5 at 6)  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant addressed each allegation as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a:  A home mortgage past due in the amount of $162,678:  Applicant 
denies this debt. He claims he never had a mortgage with the mortgagor. This account 
is not listed on his recent credit report. (Item 1; Item 7) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: A delinquent mortgage that is past due in the amount of $16,555 with 
a total balance of $52,655: Applicant denies this debt. He claims he never had a 
mortgage with the mortgagor. This remains on his most recent credit report. There is no 
evidence that Applicant formally disputed this debt. (Item 1; Item 7 at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: A $9,554 federal student loan account that was placed for collection: 
Applicant denied this debt because he contacted the Department of Education and 
confirmed that he had a zero balance. On the most recent credit report in the file, the 
loan has a zero balance and is noted as a paid collection. (Item 1; Item 7 at 3)   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: A $1,638 account placed for collection:  Applicant admits this debt. 
He did not provide any updates on the status of the account. He did not provide proof of 
any steps taken to resolve the account such as a repayment agreement, and/or receipts 
of payment. The debt remains listed as delinquent on the most recent credit report.    
(Item 1, Item 7 at 7)  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.i: Cable television accounts placed for collection in the 
respective amounts of $871, $432, and $660: Applicant denies SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.i. He 
claims he was not given credit for some returned equipment. He admits the $432 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f.  He states this is the amount he owes after being given credit for 
returned equipment. He does not indicate that he took steps to resolve this debt. I find 
for Applicant with respect to SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.i because they all appear to be the same 
cable bill at different stages. (Item 1)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: Charged-off mortgage: Applicant denies this debt. He explained on 
his e-QIP application that this mortgage was purchased by the mortgagor alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.h. I find this allegation for Applicant. (Item 1). 
 
 
4 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: A $28,457 deficiency balance owed as a result of a mortgage 
foreclosure: While Applicant admits the mortgagor foreclosed on the property, he denies 
owing this debt.  He did not provide information on any steps taken to dispute this debt. 
(Item 1)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.j:  A defaulted student loan with a claim filed against the guarantor: 
Applicant denies this debt. He claims the student loan payments are paid. The most 
recent credit report reflects a zero balance on this account. (Item 1; Item 7 at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k: and ¶ 2.e:  Applicant was counseled for using his company credit 
card for personal purchase in 2012: Applicant admits he did this. In his response to the 
SOR, he claims the credit card charge was used for emergency car repairs. He brought 
the issue to his director’s attention. He repaid the credit card company immediately and 
was counseled that he could not charge personal expenses unless they were 
authorized. Applicant claims that this is the only time he used his company credit card to 
make personal charges. It is noted that Applicant initially said that he used his company 
credit card to pay a bond so that he and his children could remain living in their home 
while fighting foreclosure proceedings. (Item 1)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
5 
 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
incurred several delinquent debts which were placed for collection as well a home 
foreclosure. Both AG &19(a) and AG &19(c) apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
 
6 
 
 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control); 
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG &20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue). 
 
AG & 20(a) does not apply because Applicant still has several outstanding 
delinquent accounts. His financial problems are continuing.  
 
AG & 20(b) applies, in part, because Applicant began to have financial issues 
when his wife left him in 2007.  She left him to care for their three children without 
contributing any income to the care of the children. This is a condition that was beyond 
his control. This mitigating condition is given less weight because I cannot conclude 
Applicant behaved responsibly under the circumstances. He and his wife have been 
 
7 
 
 
separated for more than ten years and he continues to have financial problems. He did 
not provide any evidence showing what steps he was taking to resolve his financial 
problems.   
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply because Applicant did not demonstrate that his 
financial situation was under control. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies in that it appears from the credit reports that 
Applicant paid the delinquent student loan accounts. However, he did not provide 
evidence of any actions towards paying his other delinquent accounts.  
  
AG ¶ 20(e) has the potential to apply because Applicant disputes several debts 
alleged in the SOR. He did not provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or the evidence of actions he has taken to resolve the issue, such as directly 
disputing the debt with the creditor, or disputing entries on his credit report. For this 
reason, AG ¶ 20 (e) does not apply.  
  
Overall, Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the concern 
under financial considerations.   
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The following disqualifying condition applies to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information.  
 
 Applicant’s use of a company credit for personal purchases in 2012 indicates an 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. While Applicant initially stated he 
charged $2,000 in order to pay a bond so that he and his children could remain in the 
home during the foreclosure proceedings, he claimed it was for emergency car repairs 
 
8 
 
 
in his response to the SOR. I do not conclude Applicant was trying to mislead the 
government when he mischaracterized what purchase he made on his company credit 
card. He still acknowledged that he misused his company credit card. He was 
counseled by his supervisor. He immediately paid off the credit card and he has not 
abused his company credit card since 2012. There is no evidence indicating that 
Applicant misused his company credit card on more than one occasion. Applicant 
volunteered this information on his e-QIP application, and it is unlikely this information 
would have been discovered during his background investigation. For these reasons, I 
believe the following mitigating condition applies: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Applicant mitigated the concerns raised under personal conduct.   
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 20-year 
work history with his employer. I considered the reduced household income after his 
wife left him caused his financial problems. I found for Applicant for debts that the credit 
reports indicate as paid or where they appear to be duplicate entries. Applicant did not 
provide any evidence to show that he is taking steps to resolve his remaining delinquent 
debts.  A security concern remains under financial considerations.  
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i – 1.k: For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a:     For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
