 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03098 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on October 22, 2014. 
Applicant responded to interrogatories from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) on October 28, 2015, and acknowledged that the OPM investigation accurately 
reflected the information provided to the investigator. (Item 3) After reviewing the results 
of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance.  
 
On December 11, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The 
 
2 
 
 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the 
DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 22, 2016, admitting the ten financial 
allegations with explanation. He elected to have the matter decided on the written 
record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on 
March 25, 2016. (Item 7) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) 
on March 28, 2016. He was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. I was assigned the case on February 15, 2017.   
   
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 50 years old. He received a bachelor’s degree in 1990. He was granted an 
interim eligibility for access to classified information in 2003 while employed as a DOD 
consultant. Applicant never married and has no children. He has worked for DOD 
contractors or has been a military analyst consultant to DOD contractors since at least 
2003. He had various periods of unemployment while waiting for new contracts. (Item 2, 
e-QIP, dated August 20, 2014; item 3, Response to Interrogatories, dated October 28, 
2015, with PSI, dated October 27, 2014) 
 
 The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Item 4, dated August 30, 2014; Item 5, 
dated March 12, 2015; Item 6, dated October 5, 2015) confirm the following financial 
allegations against Applicant: failure to timely file 2010 Federal income tax return (SOR 
1.a); a debt of $41,631 for 2010 Federal income taxes (SOR 1.b); failure to timely file 
2011 federal income tax return (SOR 1.c); a debt of $2,150 for 2011 federal taxes (SOR 
1.d); failure to timely file 2012 federal income tax return (SOR 1.e); debt of $32,280 for 
2012 federal income taxes (SOR 1.f); failure to timely file 2013 federal tax return (SOR 
1.g; a debt of $2,159 for 2013 federal tax debt (SOR 1.h); failure to timely file state tax 
returns for 2010-2013 (SOR 1.i); and filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in July 2014 
converted to a Chapter 13 in October 2014 (SOR 1. j).  
 
 Applicant was a contract employee so his employer did not withhold funds from 
his pay for income tax purposes. Applicant was responsible for ensuring he had 
sufficient funds set aside to pay income taxes. Applicant admitted in his PSI that he did 
not set funds aside for tax purposes, because he used all of his income to pay his 
mortgage and other debts. He did not timely file his 2010 to 2013 tax returns, because 
he did not have the funds at the time to resolve his tax issues. He filed the returns late 
but still has not paid all of the taxes he owes. He stated that he is now employed, 
working on his financial issues, and he intends to pay his delinquent taxes. (Case File, 
Response to SOR, dated January 22, 2016; GX 3; Response to Interrogatories and PSI, 
dated October 27, 2014) 
 
3 
 
 
 IRS tax transcripts provided by Applicant in response to interrogatories show that 
Applicant filed his federal income tax return for tax year 2010 on November 19, 2014; 
for tax year 2011 on October 15, 2012; for tax year 2012 on November 17, 2014; for tax 
year 2013 on October 14, 2014; and for tax year 2014 on April 15, 2015. The only year 
Applicant filed his federal income tax return on time was in 2014. The transcripts show a 
tax balance in excess of $40,000 owed by Applicant as of November 2015. Applicant 
did not provide any other information on payments made to resolve his tax debt. 
 
 Applicant admits he filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in July 2014 to resolve 
his tax problems and to stop his residence from being foreclosed. The Chapter 7 
bankruptcy was converted to a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in October 2014. The bankruptcy 
is still pending. A bankruptcy discharge does not eliminate a tax liability under Chapter 
7. A Chapter 13 payment plan can pay a federal tax debt. Applicant did not provide any 
information on the payment status of the Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his 
obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Credit reports reveal, and Applicant admitted, that he did not timely file his 
federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 to 2013. He admitted that he did not timely 
file and pay his state income taxes for tax years 2010 to 2013. He has significant federal 
and state tax liability based on his failure to file returns for 2010 to 2013. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), AG ¶ 19(c) (a history 
of not meeting financial obligations), and AG ¶ 19 (g) (failure to file annual Federal, 
state, or local tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same). The 
information raises an issue about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his financial 
obligations. Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, the 
Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant was employed as a contract 
employee, so his employer did not withhold income taxes from his pay. Applicant was 
required to set aside funds to pay his taxes when due. Applicant decided not to keep 
funds aside to pay taxes for tax years 2010 to 2013. He used the funds to pay his 
mortgage and other debts. Applicant acted voluntarily to not save funds for tax purposes 
for three tax years, so his actions were frequent, not beyond his control, and can recur. 
Applicant also had periods of unemployment between contracts, but this did not affect 
his ability to set aside funds for taxes. Applicant may have received financial counseling 
to file his bankruptcy petition, but he has not shown that his financial problems are being 
resolved. Applicant also did not present a plan to pay his tax debt. Accordingly, he has 
not established a good-faith effort to pay his debts.  
 
 The circumstance that caused Applicant to have delinquent debts was his own 
action in not setting aside funds to pay income taxes. The conditions causing the 
problem were within his control, and Applicant has not acted responsibly by developing 
plans to pay his tax debts. There is no clear evidence that his tax problems have been 
resolved, so his finances are not under control. He has not acted with reason and 
responsibility towards his finances. His actions are a strong indication that he will not 
protect and safeguard classified information. Applicant did not present sufficient 
information to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
6 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant worked 
for 15 years for a defense contractor and was eligible for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s failure to file annual federal and state income tax returns was 
voluntary. The conditions causing the problem was not beyond his control. Applicant still 
has a significant tax debt, so he has not taken reasonable and responsible action to 
resolve his financial obligations. Applicant’s failure to appropriately manage his finances 
and his lack of action to resolve financial issues are firm indications that he may not 
adequately safeguard classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. He has not established his suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
