KEYWORD: Guideline B 
DIGEST: Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings. We conclude that there is no actual
inconsistency in the challenged finding. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-06611.a1
DATE: 05/08/2017
DATE: May 8, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Trustworthiness Designation
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 15-06611
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On November 23, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On February 16, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for a
trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant was born and educated in China.  She and her husband came to the U.S. in the
mid-1990s, and she subsequently received a degree from a U.S. university.  Applicant’s parents,
parents-in-law, and siblings are citizens and residents of China.  Applicant has weekly contact with
her parents.  She has weekly contact with her parents-in-law as well, although she rarely talks with
them herself.  In 2012 and 2014, Applicant visited her parents in China.  
China is an authoritarian regime ruled by the Communist Party.  It collects military,
economic, and industrial information from the U.S.  Chinese intelligence services operate in the U.S.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that Applicant has strong ties to her Chinese family members.  These ties
are based on Applicant’s sense of duty and affection for her relatives, which are positive character
traits.  However, these traits also suggest that through her family members Applicant could be
subject to coercion.  He concluded that Applicant did not present enough evidence to mitigate the
concerns arising from her ties within China.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to
favorable evidence but concluded that it was not sufficient to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns
inherent in Applicant’s circumstances.  He noted that China seeks protected information from the
U.S. and concluded that the record raises a real possibility that Applicant could become a target
through her Chinese relatives.
Discussion
Applicant’s brief includes matters from outside the record, which we cannot consider. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings.  Among other things, she
argues that there is a discrepancy in his finding about her contact with her Chinese in-laws.  She
states that it is not consistent to find that she has weekly contact with them yet rarely speaks with
them herself.  We note that the finding about Applicant’s weekly contact with her in-laws is based
upon her answers in her SF-86.  Government Exhibit 1 at 32-33.  In one of her own exhibits,
Applicant states that her husband speaks with his parents weekly but that she herself does so only
rarely.  Applicant Exhibit A.  We conclude that there is no actual inconsistency in the challenged
finding.  Applicant has identified some other errors, such as the year her child was born, which did
not likely affect the outcome of the case.  The Judge’s material findings are based upon substantial
evidence or constitute reasonable inferences from the evidence.  Applicant has not identified any
harmful error in the Judge’s findings.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 15-03377 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9,
2017).
Applicant argues that the evidence shows that she is loyal to the U.S.  However, an adverse
result under the Directive does not constitute a judgment that an applicant is disloyal.  Directive,
Enclosure 1, SECTION 7.  Rather, it is a recognition that the applicant’s conduct or circumstances
are such that he or she could be subjected to pressure to disclose protected information.  Applicant’s
contentions on appeal are not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence or that he weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.    See, e.g., ADP Case No. 15-06452 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 2017); ADP Case No. 12-09387
at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2016). 
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  There is a rational connection between an applicant’s family ties in a country whose
interests are adverse to the United States and the risk that the applicant might fail to protect and
safeguard protected  information.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 14-01655 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015).
The decision is sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness cases is that
set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding security clearances: 
such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’” See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2013).  See also Kaplan v.
Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert. denied.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                 
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
