1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-04915 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
__________ 
Decision 
__________ 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant illegally used marijuana about 10 times between November 2013 and 
March 2014, after he was granted a clearance. He has not used any illegal drugs in 
over three years. Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s 27-year 
service while holding a clearance and his medical condition, I find that the passage of 
time is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by his marijuana-related 
criminal behavior. Guideline H security concerns are mitigated. Clearance is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
August 14, 2014. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative 
decision to grant Applicant eligibility for a clearance. On February 10, 2016, the DOD 
issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
H (drug involvement).1 Applicant answered the SOR on March 18, 2016, and requested 
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA).  
 
The case was assigned to me on August 12, 2016. The DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on December 12, 2016, scheduling a hearing for January 5, 2017. At the 
hearing, the Government offered three exhibits (GE 1 through 3). Applicant testified and 
submitted six exhibits (AE 1 through 6). AE 6 was received post-hearing. All exhibits 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 
10, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, and 
provided evidence in mitigation and extenuation. He denied SOR ¶ 1.d - that he intends 
to use marijuana in the future. His admissions to the SOR and at his hearing are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, 
including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional 
findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has been married 
three times and divorced twice. He married his current spouse in 2003. They have a 13-
year-old son and a 9-year-old daughter.  
 
In 1983, while in high school, Applicant enlisted in the Army Reserve and served 
until 1985. He then enlisted in the Army (active duty) and honorably served until the end 
of his enlistment in 1989. He then rejoined the Reserve and attended college. Applicant 
received a bachelor’s degree and an Army commission in 1993. He honorably served 
on active duty as an officer until 2012, when he retired with the rank of lieutenant 
colonel. In August 2012, a military service hired him as a federal employee. Applicant’s 
current employer and clearance sponsor hired him in June 2013.  
 
Applicant possessed a clearance from about the date he was commissioned in 
2002 until he was honorably retired in 2012. Applicant believed his clearance was 
continued between August 2012 and June 2013, because during that period he had 
access to classified information and secured areas while working as a federal 
employee. (Tr. 30-34) His then employer was seeking renewal of his clearance. 
 
Applicant believed his clearance expired when he left his federal employee 
position in June 2013. He was pending renewal of his clearance, but the process was 
not completed. To his knowledge, the clearance was never renewed. Applicant testified 
he had no access to classified information or classified areas between May 2013 and 
August 2014, when he submitted his most recent SCA. (Tr. 35)  
 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
In response to Section 22 (Police Record) and Section 23 (Illegal Use of Drugs or 
Drug Activity) of his 2014 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he illegally used marijuana 
between November 2013 and March 2014. He used marijuana “periodically and less 
than 10” times. (SCA, Section 23) He averred the marijuana helped him to deal with his 
anxiety and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). He also reported his illegal use of 
marijuana to his employer. 
 
Applicant disclosed that in March 2014, a state police officer arrested and 
charged him with illegal possession of marijuana (less than 10 grams) after a traffic 
stop. Applicant pled guilty to the illegal possession of marijuana and the court 
sentenced him to complete 16 hours of community service. Upon completion of the 
community service, the charge was placed on a stet docket. Applicant also disclosed 
that in July 2012, while in the service, he received non-judicial punishment for drunk and 
disorderly and conduct unbecoming an officer. He received a reprimand and the 
command referred him to a substance abuse counseling program. He was evaluated, 
but not admitted to the counseling program. 
 
At hearing, Applicant confirmed his illegal use of marijuana between November 
2013 and March 2014. An acquaintance provided him with marijuana free of charge. He 
continues to associate with this acquaintance infrequently. (Tr. 39)  
 
Applicant explained he tried marijuana for self-medicinal purposes, to determine 
whether marijuana would help with his anxiety and PTSD problems. Applicant was 
diagnosed with anxiety while he was on active duty in 2010. He believes his condition is 
the result of his enlisted service in a sniper unit and his tour in Afghanistan. He has 
been treated and prescribed medications for anxiety since he was in the service in 
2010. He has a 30% disability rating from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) as of 
July 2013. (AE 6) 
 
Applicant averred he has had difficulty getting prompt appointments in the 
backlogged VA medical system. Sometimes, it took him six months to get a 
consultation, and if he went to the emergency room for his anxiety problems, he has to 
wait sometimes 10 hours to be seen. He was concerned about not getting his anxiety 
and PTSD under control. Applicant claimed he consulted with doctors outside of the VA 
system at his own expense. To him, the process becomes a guessing game as to what 
medications would work. He averred the medications he was prescribed made him 
groggy, drowsy, and he could not think clearly. He cannot handle those medications and 
work. He is seeking a doctor who will help him to achieve the right balance with his 
medications. He believes there are legal medicines that will help him stabilize his 
anxiety without side effects. 
 
Applicant knew the use of marijuana was illegal. Since March 2014, Applicant 
has been in situations where he believed his friends and associates were using 
marijuana. He ignored their behavior because he is not attracted to marijuana, and he 
no longer seeks it out. (Tr. 40) He averred he is not associated with marijuana users on 
a daily basis or a recurrent basis. He credibly stated he has not used any illegal drugs 
 
4 
 
 
after March 2014. Applicant testified that he does not intend to illegally use marijuana in 
the future. However, if federal law is changed and marijuana is approved for 
prescription, he would like to try marijuana again. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana (less than 10 times) between November 2013 
and March 2014. He used marijuana after being granted a clearance. He was arrested 
and charged with possession of marijuana in March 2014. The charge was placed on a 
stet docket following a pre-trial diversion program. 
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions related to drug involvement that raise a 
security concern and are disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution . . . ; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides two potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
 (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
Applicant’s marijuana-related criminal behavior last occurred in March 2014. It 
has been over three years since Applicant’s most recent use of marijuana. There is no 
 
6 
 
 
evidence of any further illegal drug abuse. Applicant promised to never use marijuana 
illegally again. His past statement regarding his intent to do so was contingent on 
marijuana being made legal by federal law. He promised that so long as security 
clearance rules prohibit his use of marijuana, he would follow security rules. 
 
Applicant’s illegal marijuana use was limited to a short period. His use of 
marijuana no longer casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. 
Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s 27-year service while 
holding a clearance and his medical condition, I find that the passage of time is 
sufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by his marijuana-related criminal 
behavior. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and (b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, 
but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He served 27 years 
in the Army - 19 of those years as an officer while holding a clearance. His past illegal 
use of marijuana is not recent. There is no evidence of any further marijuana-related 
criminal conduct after March 2014, or of any other illegal drug use. He disclosed his 
marijuana-related criminal conduct and other questionable behavior and criminal 
conduct in his 2014 SCA. He also notified his employer of his misconduct. Applicant 
acknowledged his criminal behavior and credibly promised never to illegally use 
marijuana again. He understands that his use of any illegal drug will raise additional 
security concerns. 
 
On balance, Applicant’s 27 years of service is sufficient to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by his short period using marijuana, after he was granted a clearance, 
three years ago. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
