 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01675 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 31, 2012. On 
October 25, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, 
Appendix H (2006), and they replaced the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 15, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
27, 2017, and the case was assigned to me on March 2, 2017. On March 3, 2017, the 
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for March 22, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified 
but did not present the testimony of any other witnesses or submit any documentary 
evidence. I kept the record open until April 21, 2017, to enable her to submit documentary 
evidence. At Applicant’s request, I extended the deadline for submitting documentary 
evidence to April 28, 2017. She timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 31, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the delinquent debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a-1.f and 1.h. She stated that she was unaware of the delinquent student loan for 
$7,748 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g and did not know the identity of the alleged creditor. Her 
admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old welder employed by a defense contractor. She 
graduated from high school in June 2010, attended a community college for one month 
in 2010, attended a vocational school from October 2011 to June 2012, and received a 
certification as a welder. She was employed in the private sector from September 2011 
to April 2012, and she was unemployed from April 2012 until she was hired for her current 
job in August 2012. She never married and has no children. She has never held a security 
clearance. 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g, but not 1.h, are reflected in credit bureau 
reports (CBRs) from February 2015 and October 2015. (GX 3; GX 4.) The evidence 
concerning these debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: Judgment for $9,058 entered in June 2013, for the deficiency after 
repossession of an automobile. This debt was incurred when Applicant co-signed her 
sister’s automobile loan in August 2011. Her sister failed to make the payments and the 
automobile was repossessed. (Tr. 30-32.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c: Medical debts for $343 and $350. In Applicant’s answer to 
the SOR, she stated that these two debts arose from the same hospitalization. However, 
the October 2015 CBR reflects that the $343 debt became delinquent in March 2015 and 
the $350 debt became delinquent in January 2011. (GX 3 at 1-2.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: Delinquent student loan for $2,857. This debt was incurred for tuition 
at the vocational school she attended in 2011-2012, and it became delinquent in 
November 2013. (GX 3 at 3.) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: Deficiency after repossession of an automobile, charged off for $4,622. 
The last payment on this debt was in October 2014. (GX 3 at 4.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: Credit-card account charged off for $1,222. The last payment on this 
account was in June 2012. (GX 3 at 4.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: Delinquent student loan for $7,748, charged off in December 2012. In 
her answer to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant stated that she was unable to identify 
the creditor for this debt. (Tr. 37.) After the hearing she submitted evidence of three 
payments to this creditor, using a prepaid credit card. She paid $356 on July 14, 2016; 
$100 on August 9, 2016; and $120 on August 23, 2016. (AX A.). 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: Collection account for $3,334. This debt is not reflected in the two 
CBRs submitted by Department Counsel. Applicant was questioned about it in a personal 
subject interview (PSI) in January 2013, and she told the investigator the debt was 
incurred to enable another person to obtain schooling, but she did not know that status of 
the debt. The summary of the PSI indicates that the investigator was questioning her 
about an older CBR not submitted by Department Counsel in this case. (GX 2 at 2.) In 
her answer to the SOR, she stated that she co-signed for a family friend and assumed 
that the debt had been paid. At the hearing, she testified that she did not sign any 
documents regarding the debt and did not know that she was responsible for paying the 
debt. (Tr. 38.)  
 
 For about three years, Applicant has lived in hotels because her bad credit 
prevents her from being able to lease an apartment. She spends about $350 per week 
for hotels. She does not own an automobile and depends on public transportation. 
  
 After receiving the SOR, Applicant contacted a bankruptcy attorney. She filed a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition January 2017 and received a discharge in March 2017. (Tr. 
40-42; AX A.) She testified that all the debts alleged in the SOR were included in her 
bankruptcy. Absent fraud, in a no-asset bankruptcy, all unsecured, nonpriority debts are 
discharged when the bankruptcy court grants a discharge, even when they are not listed 
on a bankruptcy schedule. See Judd v. Wolfe, 78 F.3d 110, 114 (3d Cir. 1996); Francis 
v. Nat’l Revenue Service, Inc., 426 B.R. 398 (Bankr. S.D. FL 2010). However, debts for 
government-funded or guaranteed education loans are not necessarily discharged. See 
11 U.S.C. § 523(a). Applicant provided no information about the status of her delinquent 
student loans.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
 
4 
 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is not established by substantial evidence. However, 
Applicant’s admissions and the evidence presented at the hearing establish the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g and are sufficient to raise two disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant’s unemployment for about four months 
before she was hired for her current job and the failure of her sister to pay the debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a were conditions beyond her control, but she has not acted responsibly. She 
submitted no evidence of contacts with her creditors, payments, payment agreements, or 
other efforts to resolve her debts, except for the three payments on the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.g after she received the SOR.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant would have been required to obtain 
counseling as part of her bankruptcy, but it is not clear whether all her financial problems, 
especially her delinquent student loans, are resolved.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Applicant made three payments on the debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.g, but the debt had been delinquent since December 2012, and she made no 
effort to resolve it until she received the SOR. Evidence of past irresponsibility is not 
mitigated by payment of debts only under pressure of qualifying for a security clearance. 
She made no payments on the other debts alleged in the SOR, even though she has 
been employed since August 2012. While bankruptcy is a legally permissible and 
sometimes prudent action, it does not constitute a good-faith effort within the meaning of 
this mitigating condition. See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant has not disputed any of the debts alleged 
in the SOR. Although she stated in her response to the SOR that she did not recognize 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, she made three payments on it in July and August 2016.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid and sincere at the hearing. She is living frugally. She is 
financially unsophisticated and has paid the price for financial generosity without 
consideration of the consequences. She presented no evidence of her income and 
expenses, except for her testimony about the hotel bills, and no evidence of financial 
planning or budgeting. Given her track record, it is too soon to determine whether she will 
exercise better judgment in managing her financial affairs. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
