 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 15-01430 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
May 25, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on May 19, 2014. (Government Exhibit 1.) On February 19, 2016, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
C (Foreign Preference) and B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on April 15, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on August 14, 2016. The case was assigned to me on August 17, 2016. The Defense 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on August 30, 2016. 
I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 18, 2016. The Government offered 
Government Exhibits 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
offered Applicant Exhibits A through C, which were admitted without objection, and 
testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 
26, 2016. Applicant submitted written corrections to the transcript on November 28, 2016. 
That document is marked and admitted into evidence as Applicant Exhibit D.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 64 years old, and married with two children. He has a doctorate degree 
and is employed by a university. He is also a consultant with the Defense Department. 
Applicant is applying for a security clearance in connection with his consultant work.  
 
Applicant was born in Egypt in 1952. His parents are by descent Palestinian, and 
were both born in what is now Israel. Prior to his birth, Applicant’s family acquired 
Jordanian citizenship. Applicant moved to the United States in approximately 1981 to 
continue his education. Applicant became a naturalized American citizen in 1992. His 
parents also became naturalized American citizens. They are now deceased. Applicant’s 
wife is a naturalized American citizen. His children are native-born American citizens. (Tr. 
24-27, 46-47; Government Exhibit 1 at Sections 1-4, 9, 10, 17, and 18.)   
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline C – Foreign Preference) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant has acted in a way that 
indicates a preference for a foreign country over the United States. 
 
 Applicant presented five expired Jordanian passports to Department Counsel at 
the hearing, who examined them all. The most recent Jordanian passport was acquired 
in 2009, and expired in 2014. Applicant used that passport on two occasions, in 2012 and 
2013, to visit Jordan. He used an older Jordanian passport to travel there in 1997. Other 
than those three occasions, all of his other travel to Jordan, as well as other overseas 
locations, has been with his American passport since becoming a citizen of the United 
States. He does not intend to apply for another Jordanian passport. (Tr. 28-29, 32-35, 37-
38, 50.) 
 
 Applicant has a valid and current United States passport issued in 2010. Applicant 
stated, “American Passport anywhere on earth is respected.” (Tr. 29; Government Exhibit 
1 at Section 8.) 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline B – Foreign Influence) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for a security 
clearance because he has foreign contacts and interests that could lead to the exercise 
 
 
3 
 
 
of poor judgment, unreliability or untrustworthiness on his part, or make him vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion. 
 
 As stated, Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Jordan. However, 
Applicant has never lived in Jordan. Applicant’s father obtained Jordanian citizenship for 
the family so they would not be stateless people as Palestinian refugees. Before moving 
to the United States in 1981 Applicant lived in Egypt. (Tr. 24-26.) 
 
 Applicant has one brother, who is a citizen and resident of Jordan. He worked in 
Saudi Arabia as a doctor for many years, but retired to Jordan. Applicant’s brother’s wife, 
his two children, and grandchild are all American citizens. The brother has extensive 
financial holdings in the United States. He also frequently travels to the United States, to 
visit Applicant and his family. (Tr. 38-43.) 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law was a Jordanian citizen. He passed away on August 6, 
2014. (Tr. 21-22.) 
 
Applicant has no financial interests in Jordan, or any other foreign country. His net 
worth in the U.S. is approximately $250,000. (Tr. 47-49.) 
 
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (Jordan) is a constitutional monarchy ruled by 
King Abdullah II bin Hussein.1 Jordan continues to have significant continuing human 
rights issues, including mistreatment and allegations of torture by security and 
Government officials. Discrimination against Jordanians of Palestinian origin remains 
widespread. The U.S. State Department assesses the threat of terrorism in Jordan as 
high. Also of note, on January 30, 2017, the Secretary of Defense met personally with 
King Abdullah II. At the meeting, “The two emphasized the close nature of the U.S.-Jordan 
defense partnership and reiterated their shared commitment to ensuring a stable and 
secure Middle East.”2 
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant submitted evidence showing that he is a highly respected and successful 
academic, and has been for many years. He has received recognition for his work, as 
well as many academic and professional honors. Applicant has written over 300 
publications. (Applicant Exhibits A, B, and C.)  
 
 Applicant testified very eloquently about his love for the United States, and how 
much he appreciates being an American citizen. He stated, “This country [the United 
States] gave me all what I’ve got. So I would kill myself for it.” (Tr. 15, 30-31.) 
                                                 
1 The following statements are based on the Government’s administrative notice request (Government 
Exhibit 3), except as otherwise indicated. (See Tr. 20.) 
2 U.S. Department of Defense, DoD News, Defense Media Activity, Mattis Meets With Jordan’s King, Calls 
South Korean, Italian Counterparts, https://www.defense.gov/News/Article/Article/1065103/mattis-meets-
with-jordans-king-calls-south-korean-italian-counterparts (Jan. 31, 2017.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an 
applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each 
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions (DCs) and 
mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in evaluating an applicant=s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, 
the administrative judge may also rely on his or her own common sense, as well as 
knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the world, in making a reasoned 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, AThe applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: AAny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference)  
 
 In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial 
evidence that Applicant had a valid Jordanian passport. Applicant has mitigated the 
Government’s concerns about that conduct. The concern is stated thus under this 
Guideline at AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
 One Disqualifying Condition in AG ¶ 10 potentially applies to the facts of this case:  
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
 In 2009 Applicant obtained a Jordanian passport. He did not realize that 
possession of a current foreign passport could be an issue. He used the passport twice 
for personal convenience. It has now expired, thereby invalidating it and establishing 
mitigation under AG ¶ 11(e). Guideline C is found for Applicant. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence) 
 
 The concern under Guideline B is styled as follows at AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 The following disqualifying condition applies to this case under AG ¶ 7, based on 
the fact that Applicant’s brother is living in Jordan:3  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant has provided compelling evidence to show that the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 8 also apply to this case, given his particular situation:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; and 
 
(b) There is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant has lived in the United States for more than half of his life. His wife is a 
naturalized American citizen, and his children are native-born American citizens. 
Applicant convincingly states that he views himself only as an American citizen, and has 
shown that his loyalties are to the United States. His brother’s wife and children are 
American citizens. Applicant has extensive personal and professional contacts in the 
United States that far outweigh his relationship to Jordan, which was merely one of 
necessity and convenience for his Palestinian family. Based on my analysis of the 
available information, Applicant has overcome the adverse inference arising from his 
minor familial contacts with Jordan. Guideline B is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                                 
3 As stated, Applicant’s father-in-law passed away in 2014. 
 
 
7 
 
 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has mitigated all the 
security concerns arising from the SOR. He has mitigated the security significance of his 
family connections to Jordan. Applicant is a law abiding, trustworthy, and responsible 
American citizen and employee. Applicant has had a long and successful career in 
academia and as a consultant to the Defense Department. Overall, the record evidence 
does not create doubt as to Applicant=s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
