 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06393 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations by demonstrating a good-faith effort to pay her debts. Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 23, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 28, 2016, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including 
 
2 
 
 
documents identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant received the FORM on May 6, 
2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She replied on June 30, 2016, with a narrative 
statement and several attachments, which are marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through G and admitted into evidence without objection. The SOR and the answer 
(Items 1 and 2) are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 5 are admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, with explanations 
and two documents. Her admissions and other comments are incorporated into the 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. She and her husband have three grown children. 
Applicant has worked for a defense contractor since 2000.1 She submitted a security 
clearance application (SCA) in February 2015. She disclosed that she had several 
delinquent debts. Many of the accounts were medical debts accrued as a result of 
hospitalizations and surgeries.2   
   
 In the SOR, the Government alleged 12 delinquent debts totaling about $15,485. 
The debts are all listed on Applicant’s April 2015 credit report.3   
 
The status of each debt is as follows:  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($292), 1.f ($164), 1.g ($117), 1.h ($100), 1.j ($62), 1.k ($50) and 1.l 
($45) are all medical debts. SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,744) is a judgment resulting from a personal 
loan to Applicant’s husband. Applicant provided documents with her answer and FORM 
response that these debts have all been paid.4    
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c ($10,960) is a charged-off account related to a repossessed auto. 
Applicant indicates that she fell behind on payments after she had several surgeries. 
The vehicle was repossessed in January 2014.5 It is unresolved.  
 
                                                          
1 Item 3 
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Item 4.  
 
4 Answer; AE A - AE G. 
 
5 Item 3; Answer; AE A.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($1,256) and 1.e ($606) are student loans that were placed in 
collection. Applicant indicates, but does not document, that she is making monthly 
payments on the accounts and is now current. She owes about $1,330.6   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i ($89) is a past-due cell phone bill. Applicant inquired about the 
account and was told that the account was removed or closed in October 2015 due to 
the statute of limitations.7  
 
Applicant indicated that her debts are due to her multiple surgeries and 
hospitalizations, as well as the fact that she and her husband have had to move five 
times in the past eight years due to his “constant job changes.” Applicant indicated that 
she understands credit and lending rates better than she did in the past. She and her 
husband have moved back onto family-owned property, allowing them increased 
financial stability. Applicant is also active in her church and her local community.8   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
6 Answer; AE A.  
 
7 Answer; AE A.  
 
8 AE A.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.9 
 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant fell behind on her debts due to health issues, as well as her husband’s 
employment instability and frequent moves. She accrued delinquent debts of about 
$15,465. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s health issues and her husband’s unstable employment led her to 
incur numerous delinquent debts. With some exceptions, most of them were medical 
debts. Applicant’s financial difficulties were caused by circumstances beyond her 
control. She has nonetheless maintained stable employment in the defense industry 
since 2000. She undertook a documented good-faith effort to repay her creditors. While 
not all of her debts have been paid, she has established that her debts are being 
resolved. Her finances have stabilized, and no longer cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c) and 20(d) 
apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. The record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
