 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06683 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Cathryn E. Young, Attorney At Law 
 
 
May 16, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 22, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 10, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 3, 2016. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on November 3, 2016, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on December 5, 2016.  The Government offered exhibits 1 through 6, which 
were admitted without objection.  The Applicant offered exhibits A through I, which were 
admitted without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  He also submitted four 
 
2 
 
post-hearing exhibits marked and admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibits J 
through M. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 13, 2016.   
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old, and married with two adult children.  He is a graduate 
of an automotive technology school.  He holds the position of Repair Mechanic for a 
defense contractor.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance is connection with his 
employment.   
 
 The Government opposes the Applicant’s request for a security clearance, not 
the basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following 
findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR. 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F- Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the 
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant has 22 past due debts totaling approximately 
$9,000, and he has filed bankruptcy three times.  Applicant admitted each of the 
allegations set forth in the SOR, except 1.d., 1.e., 1.m., 1.r., and 1.o., under this 
guideline.  Credit Reports of the Applicant dated April 29, 2015, and August 13, 2016, 
reflect that at one time Applicant was indebted to each of the creditors set forth in the 
SOR.  (See Government Exhibits 3 and 4.)   
 
 Applicant served in the United States Navy from 1984 to 1988, and received an 
honorably discharge.  He has worked for his current employer since June 2002.  He has 
held a security clearance since 2004.  (Government Exhibit 1.)   
 
 Twenty years ago, Applicant spent money frivolously and made poor financial 
decisions that negatively impacted his finances.  He admits that he was young, childish, 
and irresponsible.  He filed for bankruptcy twice in 1996.  In April 1996, he filed Chapter 
7 bankruptcy to discharge his debts.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  In December 1996, he 
filed for Chapter 13.  This bankruptcy was discharged in May 2002.  (Government 
Exhibit 5.)  Following this, Applicant was able to maintain a positive financial status and 
pay his debts on time for about fourteen years. 
 
 By 2010, Applicant was in financial trouble again.  In September 2010, Applicant 
filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  This bankruptcy 
was discharged in November 2014.  Applicant explained that this time, he had 
unforeseen circumstances that exceeded his financial resources that led to this filing. 
 
 Applicant explained that his daughter suffers from ADHD.  Her work at a horse 
ranch helped her condition, and in about 2005, Applicant purchased an expensive show 
 
3 
 
horse for his daughter.  Simultaneously, he believed that he could start a breeding 
business that could be lucrative, once he purchased the champion horse.  In order to 
purchase the horse he borrowed $20,000 against his house.  He also well insured the 
horse.  The horse fell ill on two occasions, which led to more than $25,000 in vet bills.  
The horse then died. The insurance denied the claim leaving the Applicant with the 
debt.  The insurance claimed that because there were two medical situations within a 12 
month period, the insurance would not cover the bill.  Applicant contacted attorneys for 
advice, but was told that he had no case.     
 
 Applicant’s daughter was devastated by the death of the horse, disappeared for 
two years, and self-medicated with drugs.  Due to expenses related to the horse, 
Applicant fell behind on other bills.  He tried to work out payment arrangements with 
creditors, but was unsuccessful.  In 2010, he filed for Chapter 13, and his monthly 
payments to resolve his indebtedness was about $3,000 monthly.  He worked overtime 
and volunteered to travel more at work to earn the money to pay his bills.  Applicant’s 
daughter eventually contacted him, letting him know that she was pregnant and needed 
a place to stay.  She moved back in with the Applicant, had her baby, and then left 
again.  Applicant now has legal guardianship of his grandson and provides all of his 
financial support.  Applicant incurred unexpected expenses related to this situation.       
 
 Applicant also stated that his son started riding dirt bikes at an early age, and has 
over the years, incurred many serious injuries.  Up until recently, Applicant has provided 
his medical insurance.  Applicant was negligent in allowing these medical accounts to 
move into collection.  The majority of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR are for 
co-pays for medical services rendered to his son. Applicant intended to include all of 
those debts in his 2010 Chapter 13 bankruptcy, but at some point learned that many of 
them had mistakenly not been included.  Since learning that these debts still remained 
owing, Applicant paid the debts off himself.  Applicant submitted proof that the debt in 
allegation 1.d., was discharged.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)   Applicant submitted proof of 
payments that resolve allegations 1.f., 1.g., 1.j., 1.l., 1.q., 1.w., and 1.x.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit C.)  He also submitted proof of payments that resolve allegations 1.h., 1.i., 1.k., 
1.n., 1.p., 1.s., 1.t., 1.u, and 1.v.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  He submitted proof of payment 
for allegations 1.m, and 1.r.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E and K.)  He also submitted proof of 
payment for allegation 1.o.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F.)  He provided documentation that 
confirms that allegation 1.e., was disputed and removed from his credit report.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit B.)   
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement indicates that together he and his wife 
bring home about $12,400 monthly.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G.)  He is now current with all 
of his monthly expenses, and has resolved all past due debt.  They have created a 
monthly budget that they are following.  They have their bills set up on automatic pay as 
to avoid delinquent accounts.  Applicant has about $45,000 in his retirement account, 
$7,000 in his savings account, and $2,000 in his checking account.  He and his wife are 
finally financially stable, and now plan on working to build their retirement savings.   
 
 
4 
 
 Letters for recommendation from Applicant’s supervisor, coworkers, and friends, 
reflect his trustworthiness and responsible character.  He is recommended for a security 
clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I.) 
 
 A letter from the Applicant’s wife confirms their financial problems of the past and 
their efforts to pay their bills, live within their means and improve their financial status.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit H.) 
 
 Applicant has received a number of awards, recognitions and accolades for his 
efforts on the job.  (Applicant’s Exhibit M.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
5 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 For many years, Applicant frivolously spent money he could not afford, including 
purchasing an expensive champion horse to help his daughter’s medical condition and 
to start a breeding business.  Applicant had no expertise or background in this area and 
did not give careful consideration to the ramifications of such an investment.  He also 
incurred numerous medical debts, as a result of his reckless son.  In the past, he turned 
to bankruptcy as the solution to his financial indebtedness.  This evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 More recently, however, he has come to realize that he must be financially 
responsible without the help of the court.  He now understands that in order to maintain 
employment, and to avoid further difficulties in the future, he must be responsible with 
his finances.  He must spend only what he can afford.  Since 2010, when he filed his 
last bankruptcy, he has been working diligently to pay all of his bills on time.  In addition, 
he paid off all of the medical bills that were mistakenly omitted from his 2010 
bankruptcy.   
 
 
6 
 
 The following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant made a series of poor financial decisions for many years in the past.  
Spending frivolously, and trying to accommodate his daughter’s ADHD without careful 
consideration for his own financial affairs threw him into serious financial problems.  
Over the past six years, he has shown that he can be financially responsible.  He has 
learned that he must pay his debts first before anything else.  He has demonstrated this 
by resolving his past due indebtedness which shows reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. His delinquent debts of the past have now been resolved, and he 
understands that he must continue to be financially responsible in the future.  There are 
clear indications that his finances are under control, and there has been a good faith 
effort to resolve his debts. The concern is mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  Applicant has 
favorable recommendations from his employer and people who know him that further 
confirm his reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.~1.x.:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene D. Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
