 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05625 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
August 19, 2014. On February 1, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.1 
 
                                                     
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 23, 2016, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on April 29, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on May 6, 2016, but he did submit 
evidence in mitigation or assert any objections to the Government’s evidence. The 
Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 7) are admitted into evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on March 21, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts totaling approximately $14,315.  
Applicant denied the allegations in the SOR with an explanation. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He graduated from high school and attended community 
college from 2010 to 2011. He has been employed by a defense contractor since 2014. 
Before that, he had been relatively steadily employed at various jobs since 2004. He is 
unmarried and has no children. He disclosed two delinquent auto loan debts in his SF 86. 
The SOR debts are supported by a credit bureau report (CBR), dated August 27, 2014, 
and Applicant’s personal subject interview (PSI).2  
 
 Applicant noted in his answer to the SOR and in his PSI, that he has either paid 
the debts “months ago” or they were included in a debt consolidation and were removed 
or settled. He provided documentation in his answer to the SOR showing paid-off SOR 
debts ¶¶ 1.e (insurance) and 1.g (medical), totaling $1,319. He also provided a CBR, 
dated February 23, 2016, which does not report any of the SOR debts except SOR ¶ 1.g. 
He stated in his answer that he cannot provide documents showing debt resolutions 
because they were not in his possession during the time he had to answer the SOR. 
Despite the additional opportunity to provide documents in response to the FORM, no 
additional documents were provided. There is no documentary evidence showing 
resolution of the remaining SOR debts. 
 
 No independent evidence supporting his use of a credit consolidation company or 
of financial counseling was provided. I was unable to further inquire into specifics related 
to the debts, his current financial status, and the likelihood of future financial difficulties 
since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
                                                     
2 Items 4 and 5. 
 
3 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance decision.3 
In Department of Navy v. Egan4, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is 
less than a preponderance of the evidence.5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” It is well-established law that no 
one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in Egan, “the 
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, 
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information 
will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.6 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to sensitive and classified information. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive or classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of sensitive or classified information. 
 
                                                     
3 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan.27, 1995). 
 
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance). 
 
5 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
6 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies and unresolved delinquent 
debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.7 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:8  
 
                                                     
7 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the applicability of mitigating 
conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a 
strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance. See 
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). 
After the Government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The standard 
applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
8 AG ¶ 20.f is not applicable. 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
  It is unclear why Applicant incurred delinquent debts. He claimed that he resolved 
the SOR debts through payments or through his debt consolidation company. Absence 
of debts on a current CBR is not evidence of resolution. Applicant has not shown 
documentary evidence of resolution of all but two debts in the SOR, and although he 
claimed that he used a debt consolidation company, he has not provided any 
documentary evidence to show what the company resolved on his behalf. He has not 
shown documentary evidence that he acted responsibly or in good faith to resolve his 
remaining financial obligations, despite a history of steady employment and his current 
position with a government contractor since 2014. Finally, there was no evidence showing 
Applicant received financial counseling or the current state of his finances. 
 
  Based on the paucity of mitigating evidence contained in the record, I find that the 
remaining SOR debts have not been sufficiently addressed to warrant application of any 
of the mitigating conditions, with the exception of SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g. The totality of the 
unresolved delinquent debts and lack of evidence of current financial responsibility, leave 
me with doubts about Applicant’s overall financial condition and ability or willingness to 
face his financial responsibilities. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of fact and comments under 
Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant has not prudently managed his finances. Although he has provided 
evidence of resolution of SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g, there is insufficient evidence to show 
resolution of the remaining SOR debts and that he is currently financially sound. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d, and 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
