 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-00210 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 6, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on May 
18, 2016.  Applicant received the FORM on June 2, 2016. He had 30 days from the 
receipt of the FORM to submit matters in response to the FORM. Applicant timely 
submitted a response to the FORM. (Item 7) The case was forwarded to the Hearing 
Office on June 29, 2016, and assigned to me on March 21, 2017. Based upon a review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits all SOR allegations. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking a security clearance. He 
has worked for his current employer since April 2012. He is a high school graduate. His 
married and has two adult sons from a previous relationship. He had one period of 
unemployment from June 2007 to April 2008. (Item 3)   
 
On June 7, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). (Item 2) In “Section 26, Financial Record – 
Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts,” Applicant indicated that he had several 
delinquent accounts, including a home foreclosure and a credit card account. (Item 3, 
section 26)   
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed the following delinquent 
accounts: a $42,776 home mortgage foreclosure that was charged off in 2011 (SOR ¶ 
1.a: Item 4 at 5, 7; Item 6 at 1); a $1,075 account that was charged off in June 2014 
(SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 6 at 2); a $451 medical account placed for collection in August 2014 
(SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 6 at 2); a $449 utility account placed for collection in July 2012 (SOR ¶ 
1.d: Item 6 at 2); a $407 account placed for collection in June 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 6 
at 2); and an $83 medical account placed for collection in June 2010. (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 4 
at 6; Item 6 at 2)  
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $43 medical account placed for 
collection in April 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 4 at 6; Item 6 at 2); an account with a bank that 
was charged off in December 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 6 at 2); a department store credit 
card account that was charged off in May 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 6 at 3); a $3,678 state 
tax lien filed in September 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.j: Item 4 at 4); a $320 judgment filed against 
Applicant in 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.k: Item 4 at 4); a $191 judgment filed against Applicant in 
2008 (SOR ¶ 1.l: Item 4 at 4); a credit card that was charged off in September 2009. 
(SOR ¶ 1.m: Item 4 at 8); and a $291 account that was placed for collection in May 
2011. (SOR ¶ 1.n: Item 4 at 5) 
 
In his Response to the SOR, Applicant admits all of the debts alleged in the 
SOR. He claims the debts became delinquent because of financial difficulties. He 
indicated that he was entering payment arrangements to pay off the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.h, and 1.m.  He said that he paid down the balance of the state tax lien 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j to $766.80.  He claims the two judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k 
and 1.l were being paid through garnishment. Applicant did not provide any 
documentation verifying his payment arrangements, such as receipts, bank statements, 
a copy of the payment history from the creditor, a repayment agreement, etc. I find for 
Applicant with regard to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, and 1.m because the 
credit reports dated May 15, 2012, and December 15, 2014, indicate all of these 
accounts have a zero balance. (Item 4 at 5, Item 6 at 2-3)  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant did not provide documentation showing he was making payments in his 
response to FORM. He provided a copy of the SOR and wrote the phrase, “to the best 
of my knowledge” next to each SOR allegation. Applicant did not provide information on 
his current financial situation such as his monthly income and monthly expenses. (Item 
7) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has 
14 delinquent debts, owing approximately $49,764. The largest debt was a mortgage 
foreclosure in the amount of $42,776. The delinquent debts were incurred between 
2008 and 2014. Applicant has a history of financial irresponsibility.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG & 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
  
AG & 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG &  20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
& 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s financial problems continue. Most of his 
delinquent debts remain unresolved. Most of the debts have relatively small balances, 
but Applicant has not provided documentation of his efforts to resolve these delinquent 
accounts. Questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment 
remain.  
 
The first part AG & 20(b) applies because Applicant endured a period of 
unemployment between June 2007 to April 2008. This is considered a condition beyond 
Applicant’s control. However, I cannot conclude that Applicant acted responsibly under 
the circumstances because Applicant continued to incur delinquent debts after 
becoming employed full time. He provided no proof that he is taking action towards 
resolving his delinquent accounts.  
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant attended 
financial counseling. He did not provide information about his current financial status. 
Applicant’s financial problems are unlikely to be resolved in the near future.   
 
AG & 20(d) partially applies because Applicant appears to have resolved the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1,I, and 1.m.  He did not demonstrate that he was making 
 
6 
 
 
a good-faith effort to resolve his remaining delinquent accounts.  For this reason AG & 
20(d) is given less weight.  
 
AG & 20(e) does not apply, because Applicant does not dispute any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, he failed to provide sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances that 
would mitigate financial considerations security concerns. While Applicant resolved 
three of the debts, the remaining 11 debts are unresolved. It is unknown whether 
Applicant has sufficient income to meet his financial obligations.  
   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant may be able to 
demonstrate a track record of resolving his financial obligations at some point in the 
future. At present, it is too soon to make this conclusion. The security concerns raised 
under financial considerations are not mitigated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g, 1.j- 1.l, and 1.n: Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.h, 1.i, and 1.m:   For Applicant  
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
