1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-06277 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald C. Sykstus, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant illegally used and purchased marijuana between 1994 and 2012. 
Applicant continued to use marijuana after receiving a security clearance in 2006. He 
received that clearance after submitting a security clearance application from which he 
intentionally omitted his drug use to that point. Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
about his deliberate falsification, but security concerns about his illegal drug involvement 
remain unresolved. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On January 21, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of an ensuing background 
investigation, Applicant received a security clearance. On September 10, 2014, Applicant 
submitted another e-QIP to renew his eligibility for access to classified information. Based 
on the results of another background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) 
2 
 
adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
Applicant to have a security clearance.1 On April 27, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed under the 
adjudicative guidelines2 for drug involvement (Guideline H) and personal conduct 
(Guideline E).  
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. I 
received this case on September 26, 2016, and convened the requested hearing on 
November 17, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 
- 3. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - P. Five witnesses also 
testified for Applicant. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received a 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 30, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that Applicant illegally used marijuana 
between 1994 and 2012 (SOR 1.a); that he purchased marijuana for personal use 
between 1996 and 2012 (SOR 1.b); and that Applicant used marijuana while holding a 
security clearance granted in June 2006 (SOR 1.c). 
 
 Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately made a 
false official statement in his January 2006 e-QIP when he answered “no” to questions in 
Section 24 (Illegal Drugs) that required disclosure of illegal drug use in the preceding 
seven years (SOR 2.a). 
 
 Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of the SOR allegations. In addition to the 
facts established by his admissions, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He and his wife have been married since December 2001 
and have two children, ages 10 and 4. Applicant holds a doctoral degree in electrical 
engineering earned in June 2013. He has held his current job since July 2013. Applicant 
previously worked for a defense contractor in another state. He held an information 
technology (IT) position there between August 2005 and January 2007, and his work 
required access to sensitive military facilities. That company sponsored Applicant’s 
previous request for clearance through his January 2006 e-QIP. Between 2007 and 2013, 
Applicant was self-employed in the IT field in work that did not require a clearance. (Gx. 
1 – 3; Tr. 20 - 23) 
 
 Applicant first used marijuana in high school. He used it once or twice in high 
school, but his drug use became frequent, as often as a few times each week, during and 
                                                 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
2 The Department of Defense implemented the adjudicative guidelines on September 1, 2006. These 
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
3 
 
after college. Applicant last used marijuana in 2012. He estimates he used marijuana 
several hundred times after high school. He decided to stop using marijuana in 
anticipation of getting his current job. Applicant sometimes purchased drugs by 
contributing to the cost of drugs he was sharing with friends. He has purchased drugs 
from friends and acquaintances in each place he has lived, worked and attended school. 
At one time, he bought drugs from his brother-in-law.3 While studying for his doctorate, 
Applicant fraudulently obtained a medical marijuana prescription despite having no 
apparent need for pain relief. (Answer; Gx. 3; Tr. 24 - 27) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his first application for a clearance in 2006, he did not 
disclose his drug involvement, as he was required to do. He withheld that information 
because he was concerned that doing so would jeopardize his chances of getting a 
clearance and, with it, the job that required access to classified information. After 
receiving his clearance, Applicant continued to smoke marijuana and did not tell anyone 
about it. He did not want to “open a can of worms.” Applicant always has been aware that 
use and possession of marijuana is illegal under federal law. Applicant first disclosed his 
drug use to the government in a September 2014 e-QIP submitted through sponsorship 
of his current employer. (Answer; Gx. 1 – 3; Tr. 27 – 29, 31 - 33) 
 
 Applicant and his wife used marijuana together once or twice annually until 2005 
or 2006, when she last used marijuana. They moved to their current location from the 
state where Applicant received his PhD in 2014. Because of the more conservative views 
about marijuana where they currently reside, they do not currently associate with anyone 
who uses illegal drugs. However, before 2014, they usually were able to associate with 
people more accepting of marijuana and with whom Applicant and his wife could use 
marijuana. Applicant’s wife likened Applicant’s use of marijuana at social gatherings there 
to having a beer. (Gx. 1; Tr. 39 - 42) 
 
 In response to SOR 1.a, Applicant stated, in part: 
 
I do not believe that the consumption of marijuana is justification for denial 
of a security clearance because my consumption did not negatively impact 
my work or family life, and I come from a culture where smoking marijuana 
is generally accepted. (Answer) 
  
 In response to SOR 1.c regarding his use of marijuana while holding a security 
clearance, Applicant further stated, in part: 
 
I recognized the criticality of the work performed at [previous DOD contractor 
employer] but struggled to understand how occasional consumption of 
marijuana was a severe transgression that would impact my ability to protect 
classified information. While I did not discuss marijuana in classified 
environments, I also did not conceal my marijuana use, so I did not 
understand how use of marijuana could be used for coercion or as a form of 
blackmail. I do not believe that the use of marijuana while holding a DoD 
                                                 
3 It is not clear from the record if he was referring to his wife’s brother or to the spouse of a sibling. 
4 
 
Industrial Security Clearance is justification for denial of a clearance because 
my access to classified information was very limited, my marijuana use was 
infrequent, and I do not believe that marijuana use could be used as leverage 
to force me to reveal classified information. (Answer) 
 
 Applicant has an impressive technical, professional, and academic background. 
His employer and managers within his company actively recruited him for work in a variety 
of projects. Applicant demonstrated technical leadership on a number of fronts. He has 
received several professional and academic awards, and work evaluations since 2013 
reflect superior performance. Witnesses from the workplace expressed their high regard 
for Applicant personally and professionally. Each witness testified that Applicant is a 
valuable asset to the company and the work they perform in support of DOD missions. 
Applicant has a reputation for honesty and reliability. He has always been physically 
active, engaging in outdoor activities and martial arts instruction. (Ax. B – P; Tr. 42 – 70) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of 
the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, administrative judges 
should follow specific applicable guidelines whenever it possible to measure a case 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. 
 
 The principal purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
                                                 
4 See Directive. 6.3. 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 
 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden 
of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government 
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her 
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 The Government’s information, along with Applicant’s admissions, supports the 
allegations at SOR 1.a – 1.c regarding Applicant’s illegal use and purchase of marijuana 
between 1994 and 2012. Applicant illegally used a controlled substance while holding a 
security clearance after 2006 and while employed in work that required a clearance until 
2007. Available information raises security concerns addressed at AG ¶ 24 as follows: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include:  
 
       (1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances;  
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.  
 
 More specifically, the record requires application of the disqualifying conditions at 
AG ¶¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see above definition)); 25(c) (illegal drug possession, 
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia); and 25(g) (any illegal drug use after being granted a 
security clearance). As Applicant explained in his interview, he considered the sensitive 
                                                 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
6 
 
nature of his work when first granted a security clearance. Nonetheless, he decided to 
engage in illegal drug use. He is an intelligent, sophisticated professional who was aware 
that using marijuana was illegal, even in places where he lived and worked in which 
marijuana use is “acceptable.” He also knew that using marijuana is wholly incompatible 
with holding a DOD security clearance. His reliance on his own speculation that illegal 
drug use would not subject him to blackmail is misplaced. Nothing in the AG ¶ 24 security 
concern addresses “blackmail.” Instead, the concern here centers on an individual’s 
judgment, reliability, and “willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” 
Applicant illegally used marijuana for 18 years. During that time he illegally purchased 
marijuana, at one point illegally manipulating medical marijuana laws while studying for 
his doctorate. Further, he continued to use marijuana after receiving a security clearance 
from the Government. All of the foregoing supports the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 
25(a), 25(c), and 25(g).  
 
 I also have considered the mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 26(a) (the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment); and 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any 
drugs in the future, such as: (1) dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation). 
 
 At the outset, I conclude the record does not support AG ¶ 26(a). Applicant’s illegal 
drug involvement occurred over the span of 18 years. Beginning in high school, his use 
increased significantly during his academic career, and continued into adulthood as he 
embarked on his professional career. Applicant may have grown up in a culture that 
accepted marijuana in the same sense as casual alcohol use. Nevertheless, it is not 
negotiable that illegal drug use is incompatible with working in a classified environment. 
Applicant’s willingness to continue using marijuana despite his understanding of that 
incompatibility precludes mitigation based on judgment, frequency of use, and 
remoteness in time.  
 
 As to AG ¶ 26, only AG ¶ 26(4) is available to Applicant. He submitted an affidavit 
stating he does not intend any future illegal drug involvement. In the affidavit, he also 
acquiesced to an immediate revocation of his clearance if he again becomes involved 
with illegal drugs. The collective benefit from AG ¶¶ 26(b)(1) and (b)(2) is attenuated by 
the fact that Applicant’s change of circumstances and disassociation are more the result 
of an employment opportunity than his own decisions to avoid illegal drug involvement. 
As to AG ¶ 26(b)(3), Applicant used marijuana on a significant basis for most of his adult 
life. Abstention for less than five years, in light of all of the information probative of his 
involvement with illegal drugs, does not constitute an appropriate period of abstinence. 
On balance, the security concerns about Applicant’s drug involvement remain. 
  
7 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant admitted he deliberately omitted from his 2006 application for clearance 
the fact that he had used marijuana within the preceding seven years. This information is 
sufficient to raise a security concern expressed at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 More specifically, Applicant’s conduct invokes the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 
16(a): 
 
  deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant’s deliberate falsification reflected his own self-interest, in that he did not 
want to risk not getting a clearance and, with it, a job. The government needed the 
information he concealed in order to make an accurate and well-informed decision 
regarding Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information.  
 
 I also have considered the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 17 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 
8 
 
 After initially concealing his drug use in a 2006 e-QIP, Applicant disclosed his drug 
use eight years later. This does not qualify as a “prompt, good-faith” correction of his 
earlier falsification. His 2006 omission was not the result of any guidance or advice from 
someone authorized to give it. Applicant’s decision to conceal relevant and material 
adverse information from the government arose solely from a desire to put his own 
interests ahead of the government’s compelling interest in ensuring its decision to allow 
access is based on all available information.  
 
 Finally, Applicant’s intentional conduct in this regard is not minor. In his first 
opportunity to be candid about facts in his background, Applicant decided his interests 
were more important than the national interest. The fact it happened only once is 
irrelevant when viewed as an ongoing deception. Applicant knew his drug use (which was 
still ongoing) was of security concern to his employer and the government, but he did not 
disclose it, not wanting to “open a can of worms” that might cost him his job. For the same 
reasons, the passage of time does not help Applicant here because he maintained his 
deception until less than three years ago.  
 
 The only question remaining is whether Applicant’s decision to make and 
perpetuate a falsehood in his dealings with the government is likely to recur and whether 
it is reflective of his current judgment and reliability.  I conclude it is unlikely that Applicant 
will again intentionally make false statements to the government. The mitigating condition 
at AG ¶ 17(c) applies and is sufficient to mitigate the allegations under this guideline.  
 
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(a). As noted, Applicant presents with an impressive record of achievements 
and professional expertise. His witnesses testified positively regarding his character and 
his value to the work undertaken by his employer in support of DOD. Nonetheless, doubts 
about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance raised by the Government’s 
information about his long history of illegal drug involvement, especially after receiving a 
security clearance, remain unresolved. Because protection of the national interest is the 
principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved in favor of the 
Government’s intent to deny Applicant’s request for clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
