 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08133 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 8, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 18, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 28, 2017, scheduling the hearing for April 6, 2017. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 20, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2008. He seeks to retain a security clearance. He has a 
bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in 2001, and he attended post-graduate school 
in 2007 to 2008 without earning an additional degree. He is married with four minor 
children.1 
 
Applicant and his wife overused credit in the late 2000s, and they developed 
financial problems. They filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in February 2009. Under 
Schedule D, Creditors Holding Secured Claims, the petition listed $267,230 in secured 
claims, which included first and second mortgage loans and two vehicle loans. There 
were no claims under Schedule E, Creditors Holding Unsecured Priority Claims. Under 
Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the petition listed debts 
totaling $110,324, which included about $40,000 in student loans. Applicant paid into 
the approved plan for five years, and his dischargeable debts were discharged in April 
2014.2 
 
Applicant’s five student loans were transferred to one entity for collection. The 
trustee made payments toward Applicant’s student loans from August 2013 through 
January 2014. Applicant knew that the student loans were not paid for most of the 
bankruptcy, but he did not expect them to grow as much as they did because of the 
accumulation of interest. He did not pay the student loans after the bankruptcy as he 
attempted to negotiate a lower monthly payment. The loans went into default.3 
 
In November 2015, Applicant began a repayment agreement under a loan 
rehabilitation program in which he agreed to pay $59 per month for nine months. He 
made all the required payments through July 2016. The loans came out of default and 
were transferred to another entity. It took some time for Applicant to negotiate a 
manageable payment schedule.4  
 
The finalized payment arrangements require Applicant to make 24 monthly 
payments of $357, with the first payment due in April 2017, followed by 87 monthly 
payments of $899. He made the first $357 payment. In April 2017, the balance on the 
loans was $61,829.5  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 21, 35-36, 38; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 15, 20-23; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 15-17, 23-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A. 
 
4 Tr. at 16-20, 25-29; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 15-16, 29; AE A, B. 
 
3 
 
Applicant accepted responsibility for his financial problems and allowing his 
student loans to languish. He credibly testified that he intends to continue to pay his 
student loans. He received financial counseling. He stated that he has matured and 
learned a valuable lesson. He and his wife now save for purchases and use credit 
cautiously. The only accounts with balances on his March 2017 credit report are his 
mortgage loan, which is current, and his student loans.6 
 
Applicant submitted letters attesting to excellent job performance, dedication, 
work ethic, honesty, commitment, and integrity.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 16-17, 20, 30, 36-37, 39-40. 
 
7 AE C, D. 
 
4 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had financial problems resulting in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case. He 
neglected his student loans, and they went into default. The above disqualifying 
conditions are applicable.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant should have been more diligent about his student loans. He receives 
minimal credit in mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) because he still has a long way 
to go to pay his student loans. Nonetheless, he consistently paid his bankruptcy plan for 
five years; he paid his student loans under a rehabilitation program for nine months; and 
he now has a set payment plan. He credibly testified that he intends to pay his student 
loans. His finances are now in order. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence. His financial history is not perfect, but I am convinced that he will 
adhere to his payment plan for his student loans. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
