 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 15-06018  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate alcohol and criminal conduct allegations related to two 
charges of driving under the influence of alcohol. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 29, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On March 19, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. (Item 1.) 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 2, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
May 16, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on that day. He received it on May 19, 2016. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. He did not file any 
objection to the Government’s FORM or submit additional information. DOHA assigned 
the case to me on March 27, 2017. Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR. (Item 1.) His admissions are 
incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old and unmarried. He has a 20-year-old daughter. He 
began working with his employer in April 2013. (Item 2.)  
 
 On July 2, 2009, Applicant was charged with operating a motor vehicle under the 
influence (OUI) and resisting arrest. His blood alcohol content (BAC) was over the legal 
limit. He plead guilty to the OUI. In addition to being fined, the judge ordered him to 
attend driving under the influence (DUI) classes for 20 hours. His driver’s license was 
suspended for 30 days. (Items 4, 5.) 
 
 On September 8, 2013, Applicant was charged with another OUI. His BAC was 
over the legal limit. His license was suspended for five years. He was ordered to 
complete an alcohol education program. During a background investigation interview in 
December 2013, Applicant said that his case was pending and that he was contesting 
the charge. (Items 4, 5.) The record does not contain evidence regarding the final 
disposition of this case or any sentencing terms imposed if he was convicted. 
 
 In his April 2016 Answer, Applicant stated that he did not intend to make excuses 
for the OUI charges. He said he is not an excessive drinker and no longer drives after 
consuming alcohol. He has been the “lead person for 2 ½ years by a majority vote of my 
coworkers and supervisors.” (Item 1.) 
 
 Applicant offered no evidence that he completed court-ordered terms. He did not 
provide documentation that he participated in any treatment programs or courses, or 
established a pattern of abstinence or responsible drinking. There is no evidence to 
corroborate his statements that he is not an excessive drinker and does not drink and 
drive.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
Applicant admitted that he was charged with an OUI in 2009 and 2013. He plead 
guilty to the 2009 crime. Both offenses involved the consumption of alcohol to the point 
of legal intoxication. The evidence raised both disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potentially disqualifying conditions, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG 
¶ 23 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this 
guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under any the above 
mitigating conditions. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. Given the recency of Applicant’s last 
OUI in 2013 and a previous conviction in 2009, insufficient time has passed to 
determine his trustworthiness and good judgment. Applicant failed to acknowledge that 
he has a problem with alcohol, or that he has established a pattern of abstinence or 
responsible drinking, which proof is necessary to apply AG ¶ 23(b). AG ¶ 23(c) does not 
apply because he did not provide evidence that he successfully participated in a 
counseling or treatment program, or, is currently participating in a treatment program. 
There is no evidence relevant for the application of AG ¶ 23(d).  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant admitted that he was charged twice for alcohol-related offenses, and 
convicted for one of them. The evidence raised both disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised in 
this case: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply for the reasons set out under AG ¶ 23(a). The 
evidence establishes minimal mitigation under AG ¶ 32(d). The only evidence of 
relevant rehabilitation is Applicant’s acceptance of accountability for the incidents and 
his assertion that he performs well in his position. He provided no evidence indicating 
that he completed all court-imposed terms for the 2009 conviction, or that the 2013 
charge was dismissed.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 47-year-old 
mature adult, who is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security 
concerns alleged in the SOR. He stated the he has successfully worked for a defense 
contractor since 2013. He accepts responsibility for the two OUIs alleged in the SOR. 
Those are factors in favor of granting him eligibility for a security clearance. However, 
that evidence is not sufficient. There is no corroborative evidence confirming that he 
does not have an alcohol problem or that it is under control. He did not submit evidence 
that he completed sentencing terms imposed on him for the 2009 criminal charges or 
the disposition of his most recent OUI offense from 2013. Overall, the record leaves me 
with questions as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. The likelihood that 
similar problems will continue remains a security issue, which raises questions about his 
 
 
7 
 
 
reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. He did not meet his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guidelines for alcohol consumption and criminal 
conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:                 Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                 
 
   
            SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
