 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03522 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to file his federal tax returns for tax years 2010, 2011, and 2013. 
He also has delinquent debts he has ignored for many years. His evidence is insufficient 
to show that he has good judgment and is a law-abiding person. He knew of his legal 
obligation to file his returns and to pay his debts and he failed to do so. He failed to 
establish a track record of financial responsibility and an ability to abide by rules and 
regulations. The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance 
is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 11, 2014. On 
March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 25, 2016, and requested a decision based on the 
written record. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), adducing the 
evidence supporting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by transmittal letter 
dated June 29, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on July 7, 2016. He was allowed 30 
days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, 
and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM or submit any 
additional evidence. The case was assigned to me on May 9, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included his 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator from 
November 19, 2014. Applicant was informed he could object to the summary of his 
interview and it would not be admitted, or that he could make corrections, additions, 
deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. Applicant was informed that his 
failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any objections could be construed as a waiver, 
and the evidence would be considered by me. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM, 
submitted no documents, and raised no objections. I admitted the document and 
considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer, Applicant admitted the SOR factual allegations: four delinquent 
accounts totaling about $17,000, and his failure to file his federal income tax returns for 
tax years 2010, 2011, and 2013. Applicant’s SOR admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old mechanical engineer employed with a defense 
contractor. He received his bachelor’s degree in 1980. He has been married and divorced 
three times. His most recent divorce was in 2006. Applicant has three children, ages 21, 
19, and 17.  
 
Applicant’s work history shows that he worked for a federal contractor from 1999 
to 2007. He then worked for a private company from 2007 to 2013. He has been working 
for his current employer, a federal contractor, since April 2013. Applicant was granted a 
secret clearance in 1980, which has been continued to present. There is no evidence of 
security violations or issues of concern, except for those in the SOR. 
 
In response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s 2014 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed that he had failed to file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2010, 2011, 
and 2013. Applicant explained that he “haven’t taken the time to file.” He believed that he 
paid any taxes due through his withholdings and that he owed no taxes. (FORM, Item 3, 
Section 26.) Applicant also disclosed that because of his 2006 divorce and a period of 
 
3 
                                         
 
unemployment in 2007, his timeshare was foreclosed in 2013. He disclosed no other 
delinquent debts, claiming he forgot about them. 
 
During his November 2014 interview with a Government investigator, Applicant 
was made aware of the security concerns raised by his failure to file his tax returns and 
by his delinquent debts. Applicant explained that his debts resulted from a contentious 
divorce in 2006, being laid off from his job in 2007, and being underemployed until about 
2013. When he found employment in 2008, it was either part-time work or his salary was 
lower than that of his prior job. He implied that he did not have the income to pay his living 
expenses and his delinquent debts. 
 
After his delinquent debts went into collection, Applicant ignored them. He made 
no further attempts to contact the creditors or to pay them because the creditors wanted 
payment in full and he did not have the income. He has been employed full time since 
2013. He stated that he currently has the income to pay his delinquent debts. He promised 
the investigator that he was going to get a credit report to identify his delinquent debts 
and try to resolve them.  
 
Applicant failed to file his income tax returns because he procrastinated in 
gathering the information needed to file. He guessed he had sufficient income withheld to 
pay any tax owed, but he was not sure whether he owed taxes. Applicant stated he 
intends to file his delinquent tax returns, but he did not provide a timeframe.  
 
In his SOR response, Applicant stated that he intended to take care of some of his 
delinquent debts immediately, and others within 30, 60, and 120 days. He also promised 
to file his delinquent income tax returns within 120 days. As of April 2016, his 2010, 2011, 
and 2013 income tax returns had not been filed.  
 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM and failed to provide any documentary 
evidence of any SOR debts paid, settled, under payment agreements, disputed, or 
otherwise resolved. He presented no documentary evidence to show that he filed any of 
his delinquent income tax returns. There is no information to indicate whether he has 
participated in financial counseling or hired an accountant or a tax professional to assist 
him with preparing and filing the overdue tax returns.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
 
4 
                                         
 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s failure to file his 2010, 2011, and 2013 income tax returns, and his 
delinquent debts are established by his 2014 SCA, SOR response, his 2014 statement, 
and his 2014 credit report.  
 
 
5 
                                         
 
AG ¶ 19 provides disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations;” and “(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, 
or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.” The 
Government established the above disqualifying conditions, requiring additional inquiry 
about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 
6 
                                         
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are recent and ongoing. He presented no evidence to show that he 
filed any of his delinquent tax returns or that he made any efforts to contact his creditors, 
or to pay or resolve his delinquent debts. He presented insufficient evidence to show that 
his financial problems are under control. Applicant alleged that his 2006 divorce and 2007 
period of unemployment contributed to or aggravated his financial problems. 
Notwithstanding, he presented insufficient information to establish that he was financially 
responsible under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant was made aware of the Government’s financial considerations security 
concerns when he completed his 2014 SCA. The Government’s security concerns were 
reinforced during his November 2014 interview, when he received the SOR, and when he 
was provided the FORM. He was allowed a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM 
to produce evidence in extenuation and mitigation. He failed to provide any documentary 
evidence to show he has been in contact with his creditors, or that he attempted to settle, 
pay, dispute or otherwise resolve any of his delinquent debts since he acquired them. He 
failed to provide any documentary evidence to show that he is a law abiding, diligent, and 
financially responsible person. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
I considered that Applicant has worked for federal contractors for many years while 
possessing a security clearance without concerns, except for those in the SOR. 
Notwithstanding, Applicant did not submit sufficient evidence to show his financial 
responsibility. He knew of his legal obligation to file his tax returns, and he failed to do so. 
Questions remain about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to abide by rules and 
regulations and to protect classified information. 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. 
Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security 
clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed 
as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary 
for award of a security clearance in the future. With a track record of behavior consistent 
with his obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his 
security clearance worthiness. The financial considerations security concerns are not 
mitigated.  
 
  
 
7 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:     Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
