 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05312  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 17, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On March 25, 2016, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 18, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 4, 2016.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 4, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 5, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 5, 
 
2 
 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant also testified on his own behalf. The record 
remained opened until close of business on December 30, 2016 to allow the Applicant 
the opportunity to submit additional supporting documentation.  Applicant submitted no 
additional documents.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 
13, 2016.  
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 46 years old and married a second time with two children.  He has a 
high school diploma and five years of college.  He holds the position of Senior Laser 
Technician Engineer with a defense contractor.  He is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance in connection with his employment in the defense industry. 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline E – Personal Conduct)  The Government alleged that Applicant 
is ineligible for a clearance because he made questionable decisions that indicate poor 
self-control, lack of judgment, or an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all 
of which raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security process.  
 
 Applicant denied both allegations under this guideline.  He completed an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing dated October 1, 2014.  In 
response to Section 22, which asked if he has ever been charged with any felony 
offense, he answered, “Yes,” and listed a 1998 arrest for Possession of a Felony 
Weapon.  The Government contends that he failed to disclose additional charges for the 
following felony offenses: Possession, Buy, Sell Narcotic; Possess a Controlled 
Substance for Sale, Transport/Sell Controlled Substance; Possess Controlled 
Substance Paraphernalia; Possess Marijuana Over One Ounce; Possess 
Marijuana/Hashish for Sale; Sell/Furnish/Etc. Marijuana/Hashish; and Possess 
Dangerous Drug without Prescription, which appear on his FBI record.  (Government 
Exhibit 2.) 
 
 During an interview on November 26, 2014, with an investigator for the DoD, 
Applicant denied that he was charged with any of the additional offenses listed in the 
paragraph above.  Applicant testified that he comes from a military family.  His father is 
a Vietnam paraplegic veteran, who served as a Corpsman in the United States Marines.  
Applicant was able to attend school on the GI bill.  He has worked with the Veterans 
Administration Outreach program, as the Outreach Coordinator to help those that have 
dedicated their lives to protecting our country.  Applicant credibly expressed his loyalty 
and respect for the United States.  He also stated that he would never intentionally 
conceal the truth from the Government at any time. 
 
 Applicant stated that on the evening in question, September 5, 1998, he was 
arrested and detained for Possession of a Dangerous Weapon.  Applicant explained 
 
3 
 
that he received a telephone call from an acquaintance who was stranded and needed 
a ride, as a result of an altercation he had with his wife.  Applicant had not heard from 
this acquaintance for two years, but since he was a Desert Storm veteran, father of two 
children, and son of a CHP officer, Applicant decided to pick him up and take him 
somewhere acceptable.  When Applicant picked him up, he noticed that his friend was 
carrying a duffle bag, but thought nothing of it.  Applicant drove his friend to another 
friend’s apartment, but there was no answer at the door.  Applicant then noticed that his 
friend was nervous and agitated and was not right.  Applicant pulled the car over the 
talk with him when a police officer came up behind them.  Applicant opened the door to 
his truck and the officer, who had a flashlight, saw the stick that the Applicant keeps 
near the side of the driver’s door in case of emergency. The stick was a wooden ax 
handle.  The officer told Applicant that it was a felony to carry the ax handle.  Applicant 
apologized to the officer.  The officer asked to search the truck, and Applicant willingly 
obliged, as he had nothing to hide.  The truck was searched and the officers found a 
box of stuff that his friend had put under the seat.  Applicant and his friend were 
arrested and taken to jail, and the truck was towed.  Applicant later learned from his 
attorney that the box contained drug paraphernalia.  Applicant was bailed out by his wife 
that night, and charged with misdemeanor possession of a dangerous weapon.  
Applicant was not aware of the charges brought against his friend, as he never saw him 
again.  The only charge brought against the Applicant in court was a misdemeanor 
charge for Possession of a Dangerous weapon.  This charge was subsequently 
dropped upon the Applicant’s completion of a four hour court-appointed course 
regarding making proper life decisions.  The charge was dismissed, and Applicant has 
no criminal record as a result.  (Tr. p. 74, and Government Exhibits 3 and 4.)  
             
 Applicant further explained that when it came time to complete his security 
clearance questionnaire, in an effort of extreme cautiousness, he told the whole story to 
his security officer who told him to be on the safe side and put all of the charges down 
that pertained to the case, and that the details would be figured out later, since 
Applicant did not have sufficient time to obtain the records of the incident.  Applicant did 
contact his attorney who told him that he was not charged with anything except 
Possession of Dangerous Weapon.  The other charges that were brought against the 
Applicant’s friend were not brought against the Applicant.  (Tr. pp. 35-48.)     
 
 Applicant noticed that his FBI report was erroneous and so he contacted the FBI 
to inform them of the inaccuracies.  He was told that in order for the Department of 
Justice to update the record to correctly reflect the accurate charge brought against the 
Applicant, he must complete certain paperwork.  Applicant filed out the required 
paperwork to have the changes processed and submitted it for processing.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit B.)   
 
 Applicant admits that in answering the questions on his security clearance 
application, and in response to the investigator during his interview, he made a mistake 
by not explaining the entire incident and reporting the particular felony charges that 
were initially made.  Applicant contends that he did not conceal any information 
intentionally, and is sorry about the misunderstanding. 
 
 
4 
 
 Seven favorable performance appraisals of the Applicant for years 2010 through 
2016, show that he is consistently a high performer.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.) 
  
 
        Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal 
in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group. 
 
 Appellant’s behavior, when considered as a whole, demonstrates that he was 
not attempting to conceal material information from the Government concerning his 
police record.  He was truthful.  In fact, it appears that the information in his FBI record 
 
6 
 
is erroneous and he has taken the proper steps to have this corrected.  Applicant has 
no other criminal record, besides this incident, nor is there any other evidence of 
questionable judgment.  Applicant was simply trying to be a Good Samaritan by helping 
someone in need and it ended of bringing him trouble.  Furthermore, Applicant no 
longer has any association with this individual. The above disqualifying conditions have 
not been established. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s misdemeanor conviction for Possession of a Dangerous Weapon, 
occurred over 19 years ago, and he has offered convincing evidence that his behavior is 
fully corrected. I find that any misbehavior is unlikely to recur, given these facts.  As 
stated above, I find that he did not falsify his security clearance questionnaire.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant has learned a 
valuable lesson from this experience, and realizes that he must be very careful with 
whom he associates.  He also knows that he cannot carry an ax handle in his vehicle. 
He is unlikely to find himself in this situation again.  He is not a criminal or a drug user.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the Personal Conduct concerns..  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
