 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07270 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 17, 2014, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) on July 11, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on July 14, 
2016, and had 30 days to submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant responded on August 10, 2016, by annotating in the margins of page four of 
 
2 
 
the FORM. This response was marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and it was admitted 
into evidence without objection. The Government’s documents, identified as Items 1 
through 5 were also admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to 
me on May 1, 2017.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Pakistan. The request and the attached source documents were 
not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in 
the HE I source documents, and incorporated them by reference. The facts are 
summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this decision.  
 
Department Counsel included an Amendment to the SOR incorporated as part of 
the FORM at page two. This Amendment was to conform the allegations to the record 
evidence. It alleged that Applicant had yet a third brother who was a resident and citizen 
of Pakistan. Applicant admitted this allegation at SOR ¶ 1.h in his response to the 
FORM.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old sponsored for a security clearance by a defense 
contractor. He was born in Wazirabad, Pakistan and came to New York City in 1999. He 
was naturalized in 2005. He obtained his bachelor’s degree in August 2014 and has 
been employed by a federal contractor since June 2015. He has been married to a 
fellow-Pakistani native since October 2007, and they live together in the United States 
with their two children, Applicant’s mother, his two brothers, and one sister. All have 
emigrated from Pakistan to the United States.2 
  
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in his Answer to the SOR of April 2016. 
He attached a one-page letter dated April 26, 2016, which provided explanations as 
follows:3 Applicant is studying for his certified-public-accountant designation. Applicant 
sponsored three of his siblings (2 brothers and a sister) to become U. S. citizens. They 
got their visas and came to the U.S. in July 2016. He has a third brother still residing in, 
and a citizen of, Pakistan.4 His mother has applied for U.S. citizenship. Applicant’s wife 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise stated, the basis for these findings of fact is Applicant’s Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) dated June 1, 2015. (Item 3) 
 
2 Item 3, page 20.  
 
3 Item 2, attached letter.  
 
4 Department Counsel included an Amendment to the SOR as part of the FORM. Applicant did not object 
and admitted this Amendment which alleged that Applicant had a third brother, Numan Ahmed Sahi, who 
is a citizen and resident of Pakistan.  
 
3 
 
has a green card and she now teaches in the public schools in Virginia. Applicant has 
no real estate or other assets in Pakistan.  
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
June 1, 2015. Applicant reports having no previous security clearance in his SF 86. He 
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2007, and had approximately $50,000 in 
credit-card-debt discharged because he was affected by the downturn in the real-estate 
market as a condominium owner. So, he used credit cards to make his mortgage 
payments.  
 
 Applicant stated in his subject interview of July 2015 that he previously had two 
Pakistani passports issued in 2003 and 2005 respectively.5 They are now expired since 
January 2015. He last used a Pakistani passport to travel in to Pakistan in late 2004, 
before he became naturalized. He last traveled to Pakistan for a wedding in January 
2015, when he stayed until March 2015. He previously sent $500 per month to his 
brother in Pakistan to help out with housing costs.6 Since that brother and two other 
siblings came to the U.S. in 2016, Applicant no longer has to send money for their 
housing. Applicant’s third brother resides in Pakistan. Applicant does not know how his 
third brother is employed because he frequently changes jobs. His brother-in-law is also 
still residing in Wazirabad, Pakistan and looking for work. Applicant reports having 
quarterly contact with them.7 He has no other contact with Pakistan.  
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
5 Item 4.  
 
6 Item 3, page 38. 
 
7 Item 4, page 4; Item 3, pages 28-29.  
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
5 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s brother and his brother-in-law, are citizens and residents of Pakistan. 
Pakistan continues to have human rights problems, and it has been victimized by 
terrorist attacks. It is axiomatic that corruption and human rights violations are 
widespread in Pakistan. The Federally Administered Tribal Areas are a safe haven for 
terrorism, and have been for at least 15 years. Applicant’s foreign contacts may create a 
potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly and through his wife. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 
7(b), 7(d), and 7(e) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation;  
 
 
6 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Pakistan. Guideline B is not 
limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.8  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 1999. He became a U.S. citizen in 2005. 
His wife is a lawful resident alien, and they have two children who are U.S. citizens. 
Applicant obtained his associate’s and bachelor’s degrees here. He has longstanding 
relationships and loyalties here. Although he has had financial problems, they were 
largely due to the downturn in the real estate market. He is gainfully employed by a 
federal contractor, has sponsored family members for U.S. citizenship, and appears to 
be a solid citizen. He continues to have only fleeting, quarterly contact with his brother-
in-law and the third brother back in Pakistan. There is no indication that they are in any 
way affiliated with the Pakistani Government or intelligence services. His other siblings 
have come to the U.S. and are no longer vulnerable to foreign coercion or exploitation. 
Applicant is committed to his new life here. AG ¶¶ 8(a),(b) and (c) are applicable to 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
7 
 
those remaining two foreign contacts, which are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.h. 
Because of Applicant’s minimal and inconsequential ties to Pakistan, I find that the 
mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are applicable to his remaining family 
members in Pakistan. Those members of his family who have emigrated are 
presumably beyond the reach of Pakistani actors as they are now residing in the United 
States. All foreign influence concerns have been mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – g:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
8 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
________________________ 
Robert J. Kilmartin 
Administrative Judge 
