 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06328 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has significant unresolved delinquent debts. He failed to mitigate the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 26, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 15, 2016, Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including documents 
identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant received the FORM on June 20, 2016. Applicant 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, or object to the 
Government’s evidence. The SOR and the answer (Items 1 and 2) are the pleadings in 
the case. Items 3 through 6 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on April 27, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations but for SOR ¶ 1.f, with explanations. I have 
incorporated his admissions and statements into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 27 years old. He has never married and has no children. From July 
2007 until January 2011, he attended a military academy. He was removed from the 
academy following an honor code investigation. He was then unemployed while awaiting 
transfer to the regular military. He was a military trainee from May 2011 until October 
2011, when he medically discharged.1  
 
Applicant was then unemployed until August 2012. From then until December 
2013, he held a variety of jobs in retail. In December 2013, he was terminated from a 
position at a drug store after several unexcused absences. This occurred after he was 
injured in an auto accident and missed work as a result. He did not have medical 
insurance at the time.2   
 
Applicant returned to college full-time in August 2013. He graduated in May 2015. 
He completed a security clearance application (SCA) in April 2015, in connection with a 
position in the defense industry. At the time of his background interview, in May 2015, he 
had not yet started the position, and had been unemployed since December 2013. There 
is no indication in his answer that he has begun working again.3 
 
While at the military academy, Applicant took out several credit cards which are 
now delinquent (SOR ¶¶ 1.b for $1,713, 1.c for $692 and 1.d for $555), as well as a 
“career kickoff loan” (SOR ¶ 1.a for $33,649), with the expectation that he would pay the 
debts back after he had graduated and begun his military career. After he was removed 
from the service academy, however, he was told to begin making payments on the loan. 
He made three payments, but was not able to continue them after he was discharged 
                                                          
1 Item 2; Item 3 at 2.  
 
2 Item 3 at 3.  
 
3 Item 2; Item 3 at 2-3.  
 
 
3 
 
 
from the military.4 The loan account was charged off in March 2012.5 He disclosed these 
debts on his SCA.  
 
Applicant has contacted the creditors for his credit card debts, and intends to pay 
them after he pays off his medical debts. He received a letter from the creditor for SOR 
debt ¶ 1.a indicating that the debt has been closed or charged off. He has taken no action 
on this debt and does not indicate any intention to do so in the future.   
 
SOR debts ¶¶ 1.g ($83) and 1.h ($26) have been paid. Applicant intends to pay 
SOR debt ¶ 1.e ($120). SOR debt ¶ 1.f ($120) is a duplicate of SOR debt ¶ 1.e. All of the 
debts in the SOR are found on Applicant’s April 2015 credit report.6   
  
 Applicant submitted no documents with his answer, and he did not respond to the 
FORM. He provided no information about his current monthly income or expenses, his 
overall financial situation, his ability to pay his debts, or any action he has taken to do so. 
There is no indication he has been through credit counseling.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
                                                          
4 Item 2 at 32-35; Item 3 at 4-6.  
 
5 Item 2; Item 5.  
 
6 Item 5.  
 
 
4 
 
 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.7 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant took out a loan and several credit cards during his time at the military 
academy. These accounts and others later became delinquent. The record is sufficient to 
establish the application of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s inability to pay his credit card debts and his “career kickoff loan” is a 
direct consequence of his removal from the academy following an honor code 
investigation. That is not a circumstance beyond Applicant’s control. He was medically 
discharged from the military a few months later. He has not had stable employment since 
then. This impacted his ability to pay these debts, and the others that accrued during this 
period. What happened to Applicant since he left the academy was a series of 
circumstances beyond his control, even though his removal from the academy was not. 
The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b), therefore, has some application. For the full application of 
AG ¶ 20(b), however, Applicant must provide evidence that he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances.  
 
 The debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g and 1.h occurred during his recent period of 
employment instability. Applicant is also taking steps to resolve them. AG ¶ 20(b) applies 
 
6 
 
 
to these debts. Applicant incurred the credit card debts and the loan debt (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.c and 1.d) when he was at the military academy, and they became delinquent after 
he was removed. He has not shown sufficient evidence that he has acted responsibly in 
resolving them. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply to these debts.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquencies are ongoing. He provided insufficient evidence to 
conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. His delinquent debts and overall 
financial situation continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
  
 There is no indication that Applicant has participated in financial counseling. 
Without additional evidence, there are not clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant has paid or resolved two of his smaller debts. One of them remains and 
he intends to pay it. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR debts ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g and 1.h. The credit card 
debts and the charged-off loan, however, remain unresolved. As to SOR debt ¶ 1.a, a 
delinquent debt is not considered mitigated because the creditor has charged off the 
account. This is because the creditor’s decision to charge off the debt for accounting 
purposes does not affect the debtor’s obligations to the creditor.8 Applicant has not 
provided sufficient evidence to establish that he has implemented a reasonable plan to 
resolve his remaining debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply to them. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 09-01175 at 2 and fn. 1. (App. Bd. May 11, 2010).  
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. The record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.h:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
