 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-06707 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 9, 2015, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 26, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 14, 2016. He answered the 
SOR in writing on May 10, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request on or 
about that day. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 23, 2016, and I 
 
2 
 
 
received the case assignment on October 14, 2016, after it was transferred from 
another Administrative Judge who was assigned it on June 30, 2016.  
 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on November 21, 2016, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on December 21, 2016. The Government offered Exhibits 1 
through 7, which were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Exhibits A through K, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on January 5, 2017. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until 
January 31, 2017, to submit additional matters. On January 30, 2017, he submitted 
Exhibits L to BB without objection. The record closed on January 31, 2017. Based upon 
a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding Guideline F, 
Paragraph 18, “Concerns” to Paragraph 1 at the beginning of that section. That 
language is: 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend Subparagraph 1.a of the SOR to strike the 
number “7” in the first sentence of the allegation referring to the type of bankruptcy 
Applicant filed in November 2003 and insert instead the number “13” referring to the 
actual type of bankruptcy he filed. This bankruptcy was later converted to a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy and discharged.  
 
Department counsel also moved to amend Subparagraph 2.b by deleting the 
designation “1.u through” and replacing it with the reference “1.x and 1.y” so that it 
makes specific reference to the subparagraphs in Paragraph 1 of the SOR which are 
considered violations of the Personal Conduct guideline. (Tr. 9-13) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant did not object to any of these amendments and I granted the motions. 
Applicant admitted the original and amended Subparagraph 1.a. He also admitted the 
amended Subparagraph 2.b.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in Paragraph 
1 except Subparagraph 1.aa, with explanations. He also admitted the amended 
Subparagraph 2.b. He denied the factual allegations in Subparagraph 2.a of the SOR. 
He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 42 years old, divorced, and has two adult children who are in college. 
He separated from his wife in September 2012. He works for a defense contractor. He 
is a few credit hours short of earning an Associate’s degree. He has had a security 
clearance since 2006. He works at his main job and then has a part-time job to earn 
extra money to support his family. He earned a commercial driver’s license (CDL) so he 
can drive trucks to earn more money. (Tr. 31-45; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant’s wife could not work after her surgery in 2006. That decreased their 
income and caused financial difficulties. His wife received unemployment compensation 
for part of the time she did not work. Then the state government sought to recoup the 
money paid on a legal basis. After appeals Applicant’s wife had to return the $10,000 
paid to her for unemployment (Subparagraphs 1.aa). He claims she is obligated to 
make those payments though the debt appears on his credit report. After the hearing, 
Applicant submitted documents to show that debt was paid. Applicant also supported 
his children’s athletic endeavors and had to devote money for travel, equipment, fees, 
and other costs to enable them to participate in such activities. (Tr. 49-54, 91; Exhibits 
1-6, L, U) 
 
 Applicant has one Chapter 13 bankruptcy alleged in the SOR (Subparagraph 1.a) 
from November 2003, which was converted in October 2004 to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
and discharged in January 2005. Applicant also admitted he filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in November 2016 and was making payments of $111 weekly to the 
bankruptcy trustee. He also stated he paid $485 monthly to the trustee. He referred to 
the bankruptcy as his “repayment plan.”  (Tr. 58, 68, 72, 73; Exhibits 2, 7) 
 
 Applicant has 22 delinquent debts listed in the SOR (Subparagraphs 1.b to 1.w.). 
Those debts total $25,844. The creditors are banks, utility companies, medical service 
providers, car loans, furniture vendors, cellular telephone services, cable television 
systems, and other lenders. The earliest debt dates from 2011. Only four debts are 
greater than $1,000 in amount (Subparagraphs 1.k to 1.n) and after deducting them 
from the amount owed, Applicants remaining 18 debts total $4,967. Those 18 debts 
range in value from $11 to $729. Applicant submitted several exhibits to show he paid 
certain listed debts. He claims in one exhibit he paid 14 delinquent debts. Of these, 13 
debts were verified from other exhibits as being paid (Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.e to 1.g, 1.i, 
 
4 
 
 
1j, 1.m, 1.q, 1.r, 1.t-1.w) totaling $4,725. Many of these debts were medical debts being 
collected by one collection agency. Some debts he paid before March 2016 when the 
SOR was issued and some he paid after that time. The remaining nine debts are in a 
repayment plan, which he later explained was his latest Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Those 
debts are listed in Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.h, 1.k, 1.l, 1.n, 1o, and 1.p totaling $21,116. 
The Department calculates his bankruptcy has $52,874 in it. The bankruptcy documents 
list $69,576 of liabilities in that action. The bankruptcy documents show $20,287 of 
priority claims and $27,289 of non-priority claims, for a total of $47,576. Applicant also 
declared in his bankruptcy petition that he owes $20,287 for Federal income taxes for 
2007, 2008, 2010-2014. An examination of his Schedule F bankruptcy list of creditors 
shows other debts than those listed in the SOR and only four debts listed in the SOR 
were listed in the bankruptcy. Therefore, the Applicant owes a substantial sum to the 
IRS for unpaid income taxes and a substantial amount to creditors listed in the SOR and 
not listed. (Tr. 15, 31, 72-77; Exhibits 3-7, L, M, N, O, R, T) 
 
Applicant also failed to file his Federal and state income tax forms on time as 
required both for the Federal and state tax systems. The tax years for which he did not 
file the required returns are 2007 to 2012. He owes the Federal Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) about $26,000. He started paying on an installment basis in January 2013 
at the rate of $220 monthly. In March 2015 he reduced his payments to $200 each 
month. He did not submit a copy of the installment payment agreement. Applicant did 
not show the balance owed, although one of his exhibits shows he owes $20,289.80 to 
the IRS. (Tr. 76-79; Exhibits 5, L, M, V, W, Y, Z, AA, BB)   
 
Applicant owes his home state about $600 for the unpaid tax years. He told the 
Government investigator that he paid that debt in April 2015 on an installment basis. His 
latest exhibits showed the state could not find the 2010 and 2011 tax returns so he 
refiled them in 2017. None of the tax returns for the years 2007, 2008, 2010, to 2012 
were filed on time, but were filed in 2012, 2014, and 2017. His exhibit also stated the 
state tax authority could not tell him the balance he may owe for the state taxes. 
Applicant thought by filing his Federal tax returns his state taxes were automatically 
filed. He has now learned that he has to file tax returns with the IRS and his home state 
tax authorities separately. The burden of proof is on Applicant to show he filed and paid 
all required income taxes. (Tr. 77-79; Exhibits 5, L, M, V, Y, Z, AA, BB)   
  
 Regarding the Personal Conduct allegations, the SOR states Applicant refused 
to sign release forms to allow Government investigators to obtain his state tax forms. He 
refused on June 16, 2015. Applicant testified he signed all forms requested by the 
investigators and does not remember refusing to sign any document. The government 
investigator’s note on page 13 of Exhibit 5 states three releases for debt and Federal 
tax information were signed. It also states he was asked to sign a release for the state 
tax returns for 2007 to 2012. Applicant told the investigator on June 16, 2015, according 
to the notes, that he paid a lump sum on the taxes and they were paid in full. The next 
and final comments was that “the release was not needed.” It is unclear from the 
context if the investigator or the Applicant made that determination. No state tax 
 
5 
 
 
transcripts were obtained except by Applicant after his hearing date and submitted as 
exhibits. (Tr. 66, 67, 81-85; Exhibits 1, 5, V to BB) 
 
 The SOR also alleges Applicant’s Personal Conduct disqualifying conditions are 
triggered by his failure to repeatedly file his Federal and state income tax returns for the 
years 2007 to 2012. He admitted that allegation. He testified he did not file them 
because he needed the money to take his children to athletic games and competitions, 
and to pay other bills. He stated he has now filed them and has an installment payment 
plan with the IRS. (Tr. 50, 77-79; Exhibits 5, L, M, V, Y, Z, AA, BB)   
  
 Applicant enrolled in a credit counseling service program in “early 2015” and was 
paying into that program. He discontinued that program when he decided to file Chapter 
13 bankruptcy. Applicant had credit counseling as part of his bankruptcy filing 
requirements. (Tr. 60-62; Exhibit A) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Four conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant accumulated $25,844 in 22 delinquent debts from 2011 to the present 
time that remained unpaid when the SOR was issued in March 2016. Applicant also 
 
7 
 
 
filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which was discharged in 2005. He filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in November 2016 for $69,576 of liabilities, including $20,890.80 of tax debt. 
He originally owed about $26,000 in income taxes to the Federal and state 
governments. Applicant failed to file his income tax returns for 2007, 2008, 2010 to 2012 
with the Federal and state governments as required.  
 
 Since 2007, Applicant has been unable to regularly pay his debts and has a 
history of not paying his financial obligations. Applicant spent beyond his financial 
means to repay the debts he incurred, thereby accumulating excessive indebtedness. 
AG ¶ 19 (a), (c), and (e) are established.  
 
 Applicant failed to file Federal and state income tax returns over a period of five 
years. He compounded his failures to comply with income tax statutes by assuming 
when he filed his Federal tax returns his state tax returns were automatically filed. He 
does not understand his legal obligations regarding filing and payment of income taxes. 
AG ¶ 19 (g) is established.  
 
 The evidence raises all of the above security concerns, thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 or separation), and the individual acted  responsibly under the 
 circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
 problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
 being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
 of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
 provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
 dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue;  and 
 
 
8 
 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
Applicant’s wife was ill in 2006, about a year after his first bankruptcy was 
completed. She stopped working. In 2012, they separated and later divorced. Applicant 
attributes his financial difficulties to his wife’s loss of income and other expenses related 
to their divorce.  These were circumstances beyond his control, however, he did not act 
responsibly under the circumstances. He failed to file his income tax returns, he 
accumulated delinquent debt, and diverted his income to supporting his children’s 
athletic endeavors, spending money on travel and equipment. AG ¶ 20 (a) and (b) are 
not established as mitigating conditions.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. He has filed for several 
bankruptcies for debts he cannot pay. His counseling sessions with the consumer 
service in 2015 and early 2016, followed by the bankruptcy required credit counseling, 
are not sufficient to make the mitigating condition in AG ¶ 20 (c) applicable.  
 
Applicant paid 12 of his 22 delinquent debts in no regular order. His exhibits were 
difficult to interpret as they pertained to all of his debts. After a careful reading of all 
exhibits, it appeared he paid certain debts totaling $4,725 while placing the remaining 
debts in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He continues to owe the IRS $20,287 for his unpaid 
income taxes between 2007, 2008, 2010-2012. Applicant did not demonstrate a good-
faith effort to resolve his debt. AG ¶ 20 (d) is established only partially as it applies to 
the 13 debts he paid.   
 
 The remaining mitigating conditions were considered and found not to apply to 
Applicant’s financial situation.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
 (a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and 
 
 
9 
 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. Two conditions may apply: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information: 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
10 
 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
Applicant is alleged to have refused to sign releases for government investigators 
who were researching his background for his security clearance. Applicant also did not 
file his Federal and state income tax returns for five years in a timely manner as 
required by Federal and state law. By failing to comply with Federal and state income 
tax laws, and failing to sign a release to allow government investigators to obtain 
income tax records, Applicant’s actions show a pattern of dishonesty and rule violations. 
His actions support a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information. AG ¶ 16 (d) is established. 
 
Applicant deliberately did not file income tax returns for five years. He chose to 
use the funds for other purposes. This shows a disregard to legal norms that creates a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities 
which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
Repeated deliberate failures to file his Federal and state income tax returns and pay 
required taxes are serious acts that expose Applicant to various forms of exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 16 (e) is established. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. One 
mitigating condition may apply to one of the SOR allegations under this guideline: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
 
11 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 Applicant denies refusing to sign a release for some tax forms. The investigators 
notes in the background investigation states Applicant signed several release forms to 
allow access to his tax records. When asked by the investigators to sign a release for 
his state tax records, Applicant told the investigator he paid his taxes. Then either 
Applicant or the investigator stated a release was not needed. Taking all of the 
evidence into consideration, Applicant did not refuse to sign a release for tax 
information. AG ¶ 17 (f) applies based on the evidence. 
 
Applicant admitted his failure to timely file Federal and state income tax returns 
for five years. There is no mitigation for Applicant’s repeated failure to comply with 
income tax laws.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
12 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant cannot manage his 
personal finances in accordance with law and legal obligations to repay money 
borrowed from others and used to his benefit. He could not comply with the lawful 
requirements to file and pay his Federal and state income taxes for the years 2007, 
2008, 2010 to 2012. These actions demonstrate a deliberate pattern of violations of law. 
These actions are frequent and continue to the present. He voluntarily decided not to 
file his tax returns and not repay his debts. Applicant has not presented any information 
that he has reformed his behavior except to file Chapter 13 bankruptcy to control how 
he repays his debts over the term of the bankruptcy.  
 
 All of his actions for the past nine years do not show the presence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes regarding his finances. 
Applicant’s motivation for the conduct was purely for his own financial benefit. His 
actions create the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. And, finally 
his repeated deliberate failures to pay his debts and taxes show such actions will 
continue in the future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations 
and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e to 1.g:   For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.i, 1j, 1.m, 1.q, 1.r: For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.t-1.w:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.aa:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, c, d, h:  Against Applicant 
 
13 
 
 
 Subparagraphs k, l, n-p, s, x-z:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
