 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
          --------------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06842 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her eligibility 
for access to classified information. Applicant mitigated the security concern raised by her 
problematic financial history. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on April 14, 2015. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On February, 24 2016, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant her eligibility for access to classified information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint. 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
 
2 
 
It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security guideline known as 
Guideline F for financial considerations. Applicant answered the SOR on March 2, 2016, 
and requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On June 28, 2016, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material  
(FORM).2 The FORM was mailed to Applicant on that same day. She was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on July 11, 2016.3 Applicant  
responded to the FORM on August 13, 2016. Applicant’s response to the FORM including 
its attached documents is marked as Applicant’s Exhibit A. The case was assigned to me 
on April 7, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Included in the FORM were three items of evidence, which are marked as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 3.4 Exhibits 1 through 3 are admitted into evidence. 
Exhibit 2 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took 
place during the May 2015 background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated as 
required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.5 Department Counsel’s written brief includes a 
footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not authenticated and that failure to 
object may constitute a waiver of the authentication requirement. The footnote is 
prominently prefaced with a bolded, upper-case notice to Applicant flagging the 
importance of the footnote, which then explains the concepts of authentication and 
waiver. In a case such as this, where Applicant has responded to the FORM, it is fair to 
conclude that Applicant read the footnote, understood it, and chose not to object to the 
ROI. The ROI is, therefore, admissible.   
  
 
                                                          
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG were published in the 
Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals’ (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated July 30, 2016, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated July 11, 2016. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 
days after receiving it to submit information.   
 
4 The first, second, and third items in the FORM are the SOR, the SOR transmittal letter, and Applicant’s 
Answer, respectively. Because the SOR and the Answer are the pleadings in this case, they are not marked 
as Exhibits. The transmittal letter has no evidentiary value and, therefore, is not marked as an exhibit. Items 
4 through 6 are marked as Exhibits 1 through 3.  
 
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016). (In a concurring opinion in that case, 
Judge Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by 
some to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 51 years old and has an associate’s degree. She has never married 
and has an adult son and a daughter (17), who lives with Applicant.6 Since October 2012 
she has worked for a defense contractor.7 
 
The SOR alleged 13 delinquent debts totaling approximately $10,789. Ten of those 
are medical accounts.8 Applicant admitted each of the debts but claimed she had paid 
seven of those debts.9 Her answer included documents evidencing payment of four of the 
debts.10 Applicant’s response to the FORM provided proof of payment of five more debts   
and proof of payment plans for two more debts; Applicant claimed to be disputing two of 
the debts.11 
 
The causes of Applicant’s delinquencies were explored during her interview. 
Sometime in late 2014 or early 2015, she received a notice from the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) that she owed $1,400 in back taxes for two tax years. She did not 
understand why she owed back taxes, because she had always timely filed her tax returns 
and paid any taxes due. Nonetheless, Applicant agreed at that time to pay $200 to $300 
per month to pay those back taxes. Those unexpected monthly payments adversely 
affected her household finances. At about the same time, her car died, which also 
negatively impacted her finances. In addition, Applicant experienced medical problems 
that strained her budget. The combination of back tax payments, the loss of her car, and 
medical problems caused her bills to become “overwhelming,” especially as a single 
parent. Applicant was unaware of those medical accounts, until her interview. She had 
medical insurance through her employer and believed that insurance covered her 
treatments.12 Her health is now under control, and she plans to “stay on top of [her] 
finance[s].”13  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 Exhibits 1 and 2. 
 
7 Exhibit 1.  
 
8 SOR, pp. 1-2.  
 
9 Answer.  
 
10 Answer; Government Brief, p. 2, citing SOR ¶¶ 1.h, k, l, and m. 
 
11 Exhibit A. In all, the debts mitigated by Applicant’s Answer and her response to the FORM are SOR ¶¶ 
1.a through c, e through i, and k through m. Applicant has disputed SOR ¶¶ 1.d and j.  
 
12 Exhibits A and 2. 
 
13 Exhibit A.  
 
4 
 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.14 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”15 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.16 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.17 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.18 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.19 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.20 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.21 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.22 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.23 
 
 
                                                          
14 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (no right to a security 
clearance).  
 
15 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
16 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
17 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
19 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
20 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
21 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
22 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
23 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Discussion 
  
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,24 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about a [person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.25 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) [t]here are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and,  
 
                                                          
24 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
25 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.   
 
The evidence supports a conclusion that as of February 2016 Applicant had just 
over $10,000 of delinquent debt.  This raised security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
(c).  
 
The next inquiry is whether any mitigating conditions apply. The genesis of 
Applicant’s financial problems appears to be the notification she received from the IRS in 
late 2014 or early 2015 that she owed $1,400 in back taxes. Even though she did not  
understand why she owed back taxes, she took responsible action by entering into a 
payment plan requiring $200 to $300 per month. Those payments were unanticipated and 
strained her household finances. Thereafter, to make her financial matters worse, 
Applicant’s car died. Adding to her financial problems, Applicant developed medical 
problems, the bills for treatment which Applicant believed were covered by her medical 
insurance.26 I find that the circumstances that caused Applicant’s indebtedness were 
largely beyond her control and are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s evidence shows that she 
has paid nine of the debts and that two debts are being resolved through payment plans.27 
I find that Applicant acted responsibly in the face of adverse circumstances, that she 
provided clear proof that her financial problems are being resolved or are under control, 
and that she made good-faith efforts to pay overdue creditors. Mitigating conditions AG 
¶¶ 20(a) through (d) apply.28  
 
 The record does not raise doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.29 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met her ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
26 As noted, ten of the SOR debts are for medical accounts. SOR ¶¶ 1.d-m.  
 
27 Applicant is disputing two of the debts which total $2,022.  
 
28 An applicant is not required to show that every debt in the SOR has been paid. Rather, an applicant is 
required to demonstrate that he or she has “established a plan to resolve his [or her] financial problems 
and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2 (App. Bd. May 21, 
2008). See also ISCR Case No. 14-00504 at 3 (Aug. 4, 2014). Applicant has shown an established plan 
to resolve her debts and significant actions to implement that plan.  
 
29 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9).  
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:                   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
