 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05683 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing on 
February 25, 2015.1 On March 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H 
(drug involvement).2 Applicant responded to the SOR on March 16, 2016, and elected to 
have the case decided on the administrative record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
written case was submitted on August 12, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant did not submit any documentary evidence in response. The case was assigned 
to me on May 19, 2017. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM are admitted 
in evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana from approximately September 1980 
to at least March 2015. It also alleges he intends to continue to use marijuana in the future 
when abstinence is no longer required for his employment or security clearance. He 
admitted using marijuana as alleged, but denied future intent to use marijuana. 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old senior executive for a defense contractor. He has been 
employed in this position since December 2014, and held a similar position from 2011 to 
2014. He has served on three non-profit corporate boards. He completed high school in 
1980, earned a bachelor’s degree in 1985, and a master’s degree in 1989.3 He married 
in 1987 and divorced in 2008, and has two children. He resides with a woman since 
February 2011. He is applying for his first security clearance.4 
 
 In his SCA completed in February 2015, Applicant listed his past marijuana use, 
from 1980 to June 2014. He indicated that during this period, he used on occasion and 
“tens of times” since going to college. He noted that he did not intend to use the drug in 
the future because it is a condition of his employment to stay drug-free.5  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator in April 2015. He confirmed his SCA entry that the last time he used marijuana 
was in June 2014, but then stated in the interview that his last use was actually in March 
2015. He claimed to have abstained from use while employed from 1997 to 2011. He 
noted that he did not intend to use while employed in his current position or while holding 
a security clearance, but may use marijuana again if no longer prohibited by his employer 
or to hold a security clearance. 
 
 In his January 2016 response to Government interrogatories, he reported using 
marijuana from September 1980 to March 2015. He reported his use was infrequent, and 
that he has no intention of using illegal drugs while prohibited by his employer or required 
to hold a security clearance.6 
 
                                                     
3 Item 5, Personal Subject Interview (PSI). 
 
4 Item 4.  
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Item 5. 
 
3 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant clarified that he no longer intended to use 
marijuana in any circumstance. He stated his personal situation has changed since his 
divorce, and that he is committed to living drug-free. He noted that he has been active in 
his career and community for 26 years, has shown his reliability and trustworthiness in 
his career responsibilities, and that his security clearance eligibility benefits the 
Government and his employer. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance decision.7 
In Department of Navy v. Egan8, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is 
less than a preponderance of the evidence.9 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” It is well-established law 
that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in Egan, 
“the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the 
                                                     
7 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan.27, 1995). 
 
8 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance). 
 
9 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.10 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to sensitive and classified information. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive or classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of sensitive or classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ Drugs are defined 
in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens).  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Based 
on the evidence, I find that the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 apply: 
 
 (a) any drug abuse;11 and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
Applicant has a history of illegal drug use from 1980 to March 2015. AG ¶¶ 25(a) applies. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially relevant: 
 
                                                     
10 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
11 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged his past drug involvement. Despite completing an SCA 
in February 2015 and stating his last use of marijuana was in June 2014, he continued to 
use marijuana until March 2015. He also gave inconsistent statements with regard to his 
intent for future use. He noted in his SCA that he did not intend to use the drug in the 
future because it is a condition of his employment to stay drug-free. In his OPM interview 
and in his response to interrogatories, he asserted the possibility of use in the future when 
not prohibited by his employer or while holding a security clearance. However, in his 
answer to the SOR, he recanted any future intent to use marijuana. 
 
 Applicant has not shown an ability to consistently abstain from illegal drug use. 
There was no evidence presented of illegal drug counseling or treatment. He has not 
shown sufficient evidence of a changed environment, disassociation from family or friends 
that use drugs, or a signed a statement of intent to refrain from illegal drug use in the 
future. No mitigation credit is warranted.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent 
to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
 
6 
 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated the evidence, my findings of fact, and 
comments under Guideline H in this whole-person analysis. 
 
 Overall, Applicant has acknowledged his past drug use, but has not shown a 
consistent track record of abstinence. His use of marijuana, after completing an SCA that 
specifically inquired into illegal drug use, is inconsistent with behavior expected of a 
security clearance applicant. He was also inconsistent about his intent to refrain from 
future use. He has not shown any evidence that would lead me to find that his personal 
circumstances have changed or that he intends to change his behavior. I considered all 
of the evidence, especially his long work history, significant employment and board 
positions, and stated commitment to live a life free of illegal drug use. However, I am not 
convinced of his intentions.  
 
 Based on the record, Applicant’s history of drug involvement and inconsistent 
statements with regard to future use casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
