 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07663 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 1, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on 
July 6, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
2 
 
 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence identified as Items 2 through 6, 
and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant submitted documents that were 
marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A though D, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection.1 The case was assigned to me on November 4, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.q. She denied SOR ¶ 1.m. She did not 
admit or deny allegations in ¶¶ 1.r though 1. z, but provided comments. I have 
considered her responses as denials. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. She attended college at various times, but has not 
earned a degree. She was married from 1996 to 1999. She has a 19-year-old child. She 
remarried in 2013. Applicant did not list any periods of unemployment in her security 
clearance application. She has worked for a federal contractor since March 2015.2  
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to a chronic medical condition. She 
stated that before 2010, she was a single parent and would spend days in the hospital 
at different times. She would miss work and did not have health insurance. After she 
moved in 2010, her work history became stable, and she was able to get medical 
benefits, which allowed her health to improve. Her son was injured in a school 
altercation, and was having mental health issues, which added to her medical bills. She 
had difficulty paying for necessities and her medical bills were not paid.3  
 
 Applicant stated that after she got remarried in 2013, she started learning how 
not to live paycheck to paycheck. She stated that through a financial counseling 
program she has started to create a clear plan on resolving her debts.4  
 
 In her response to the FORM, Applicant provided a list of the SOR debts and she 
stated that several medical debts were consolidated into the 2013 judgment that was 
entered against her as reflected in SOR ¶ 1.a.($5,705). The law firm handling the 
collection of payments made on the judgment provided a letter dated July 15, 2016, 
indicating that the balance on the account is $5,065, including court costs, attorney 
fees, and accrued interest. In Applicant’s answer, she stated that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.I, were consolidated into the judgment. In her response to the 
FORM, she indicated the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f and 1.z were consolidated into 
the judgment. It appears she has been making payments of approximately $150 toward 
                                                          
1 Each exhibit includes multiple pages.  
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 AE A. 
 
4 AE B. 
 
3 
 
 
the judgment since approximately 2013, and it has been distributed to many different 
medical accounts.5 Without further specific information to identity each account included 
in the judgment, I conclude that the accounts that Applicant indicated in her FORM 
response with the accompanying documents from the attorney are the ones that are 
being paid. 
 
 Applicant stated in her answer to the SOR that she paid or was paying the debts 
in ¶¶ 1.o through 1.z. She did not provide any documented information to substantiate 
her statement. She admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.i, 1.j, 1.n and 1.q, but did 
not provide any information on these debts.6  
 
In her FORM response, she indicated she will pay in the future the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.i, 1.k, 1.l, 1.o, 1.p, 1.s, and 1.t. She merely listed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 
1.h, 1.j, 1.u, 1.v, 1.w, 1.x, 1.y and did not provide any comment as to what her intentions 
were regarding these debts.7  
 
 In Applicant’s FORM response, she stated that she disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.m and had it removed from her credit report. She did not provide a complete copy of 
her credit report to verify it is removed. She stated she disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.n 
because she believes she paid the account, but had not heard from the creditor, and will 
include it in her repayment plan. She also stated that she disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.q and 1.r, but will pay them if they are verified.8 
 
 Applicant provided a worksheet, presumably that is part of her payment plan, that 
included a list of 20 debts with amounts owed, some of which are included in the SOR. 
There is no indication that she has made payments on these debts. There is no 
indication when she anticipates paying the balance of her judgment and when she will 
begin addressing the other delinquent debts. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b. 1.h, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n 
and 1.q are not medical debts. Applicant did not provide any information about her 
current finances.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
5 AE A, B. 
 
6 Item 2. 
 
7 AE A. 
 
8 AE A, C. 
 
9 AE D. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has many delinquent debts that began to accumulate before 2010. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that are unresolved. She stated she is 
creating a plan to repay her delinquent debts, but failed to state if she has started the 
plan, or made payments. She did not include any information about her current 
finances. She is making payments on a judgment that includes some SOR debts, but at 
this time, I cannot find her financial problems are unlikely to recur. Her delinquent debts 
are recent and her failure to show specific actions to resolve them casts doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to a chronic medical problem, medical 
expenses incurred for her son, and no health insurance. These were circumstances 
beyond her control. For the full application of AG 20(b), Applicant must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant stated that after 2010, she had medical 
insurance and a more stable work history. However, she did not begin to make any 
payments on her medical debts until a judgment was entered in 2013. She provided 
evidence that she is making payments on debts that are included in the judgment. She 
stated she is creating a plan for resolving the other debts, but failed to provide evidence 
that she has executed the plan and made any payment debts. AG ¶ 20(b) marginally 
applies.  
 
Applicant indicated she is participating in a financial program. She did not provide 
evidence that she has implemented the program and has begun to make payments 
towards her delinquent debts, other than the judgment previously mentioned. She did 
not provide evidence of her current financial status. I cannot find that her financial 
problems are under control. Only the first part of AG ¶ 20(c) applies.  
 
Applicant is making monthly payments to resolve the judgment entered against 
her. There is no evidence Applicant has made good-faith efforts to repay any of the 
other overdue creditors. Applicant did not voluntarily begin paying her delinquent debts. 
She has had stable employment since 2010 and with her present employer since 2015, 
but did not start paying any creditor until the judgment was entered against her. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve her debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant disputed some delinquent debts alleged as being paid or not belonging 
to her, but if verified she will include them in her payment plan. Applicant provided an 
incomplete credit report. There is insufficient documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of her disputes and evidence of her actions to resolve the issues. AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 41 years old. She explained that before 2010 she had chronic 
medical problems and accrued numerous medical debts. After then she had a stable 
work history and medical insurance. She did not begin to pay any of her delinquent 
debts until after a judgment was entered against her in 2013. She stated she is creating 
a plan to pay her delinquent debts, but there is no evidence the plan has been 
implemented or any of the remaining debts are being paid or resolved. She failed to 
meet her burden of persuasion. She has not established a reliable financial track record. 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.f:  For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.y:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.z:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
