 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01400 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Aubrey M. DeAngelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 2, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision based 
on the written record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) 
on August 17, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on August 29, 2016. He had 30 days 
from his receipt of the FORM to submit additional information in response to the FORM. 
Applicant did not submit matters in response to the FORM. On October 11, 2016, the 
FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on May 26, 2017. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits all SOR allegations.      
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain a security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since June 2011. He has held a 
secret security clearance since 1998. He served on active duty in the United States 
Marine Corps from November 1996 to June 2006, separating with an honorable 
discharge. He is divorced. (Item 4)   
  
On October 22, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application as 
part of a periodic background investigation related to his security clearance. A 
subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant and his then wife filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy on May 30, 2014. He listed assets of $53,422 and liabilities of 
$132,002.76. His monthly income was $6,844.48.  His debts were discharged by the 
bankruptcy court on November 20, 2014. (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 8) Applicant also owes 
approximately $16,297 on a charged-off automobile loan. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 6 at 1; Item 
7 at 2)   
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits he filed for bankruptcy in 2014 with 
his wife. After the bankruptcy was complete, his wife filed for divorce. He admits that he 
co-signed the automobile loan for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He claims the car was 
in his ex-wife’s possession. She arranged to have the car voluntarily repossessed. 
Applicant states the debt remains because his financial situation is being “restructured” 
as a result of child support, alimony, and attorney fees from the divorce that began on 
July 22, 2014. (Item 3) 
 
 The automobile debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a remains on his most recent credit 
report, dated July 19, 2016. (Item 7 at 2) The July 2016 credit report also lists several 
debts that were not alleged in the SOR. The debts include another automobile loan that 
was opened in February 2015, that was charged off in August 2016; a $79 debt for a 
returned check that was charged off in November 2015; and a $5,910 debt owed to the 
Veteran’s Administration related to a government overpayment which was placed for 
collection in June 2015. (Item 7 at 2-3)  In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 
26, 2006), the DOHA Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not 
alleged in an SOR may be considered:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to 
consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; 
(d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis under 
Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-
0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR derogatory 
 
3 
 
 
information accordingly. Applicant’s non-SOR conduct will not be considered for 
disqualification purposes, and consideration will be limited to the five circumstances 
outlined by the appeal board.  
 
 Applicant did not provide updated information on his financial situation.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
incurred several delinquent debts which resulted in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing in 
2014. He incurred an additional delinquent debt after the bankruptcy. Both AG &19(a) 
and AG &19(c) apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control); 
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG &20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue). 
 
AG & 20(a) does not apply because Applicant continued to incur delinquent 
accounts after the bankruptcy. He continues to have issues with financial responsibility.   
 
AG & 20(b) applies, in part, because Applicant’s financial situation was adversely 
affected by his divorce. However, the debts discharged in the bankruptcy were incurred 
during Applicant’s marriage. He did not explain the cause of these financial problems 
He also continued to incur delinquent debts after the divorce and bankruptcy. This 
mitigating condition is given less weight because I cannot conclude Applicant behaved 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
AG & 20(c) applies, in part, because Applicant was required to attend financial 
counseling as a requirement for his Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Despite this counseling, he 
continues to incur delinquent debts. His financial situation is not yet under control. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. While filing for bankruptcy is a legal way to resolve 
one’s debts, it does not demonstrate a good-faith effort to resolve one’s accounts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to the facts of this case. Applicant did not dispute any 
of the issues in the SOR.  
 
6 
 
 
Overall, Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the concern 
under financial considerations.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s honorable 
active duty service in the U.S. Marine Corps. I considered his favorable employment 
with a DoD contractor since June 2011. I considered Applicant’s divorce and his 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  Applicant continued to incur delinquent accounts after his 
bankruptcy. He has not demonstrated that he has adapted to a financially responsible 
lifestyle. A security concern remains under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.b:    Against  Applicant 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
