 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03379 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 22, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on May 4, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on June 22, 2016. Applicant did not respond to the Government’s 
FORM. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 8 are admitted in 
evidence without objection. Other than his Answer to the SOR, admitted in evidence as 
Item 2, Applicant failed to submit any additional documentation. The case was assigned 
to me on April 7, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He obtained an associate’s degree in December 1998, 
and took online university courses from December 2010 to January 2011, but did not 
earn a degree. He is married and has a 14-year-old daughter.  
 
 Applicant worked as a federal contractor from June 2003 to September 2008, 
and was first granted a DOD security clearance in September 2004. He worked as a 
federal employee from October 2008 until he was laid off in June 2011.  
 
 Applicant immediately obtained another job, but had to relocate from state A to 
state B, which had a higher cost of living. He was unable to sell his home in state A, and 
rented it at a loss of $200 to $300 monthly. His wife was unemployed for eight months in 
state B. While his employer in state B paid his relocation costs, Applicant did not realize 
that he had to declare the reimbursement for his moving expenses as taxable income 
on his tax returns. Applicant was also unable, due to his increased income, to claim a 
number of tax exemptions he had previously claimed. When Applicant filed his 2011 
federal and state income tax returns, he owed $20,000 that he was unable to pay. He 
entered into a payment plan of $350 monthly with both the IRS and his then resident 
state. Despite adjusting his tax withholdings for the 2012 tax period, Applicant 
underestimated the amount he would owe. When he filed his 2012 federal and state 
income tax returns, Applicant owed an additional $8,000 that he was unable to pay.1  
 
 In January 2013, Applicant obtained his current job as a federal contractor and 
relocated to state A, as the climate in state B contributed to Applicant becoming 
increasingly ill. In June 2013, Applicant’s employer laid him off for six weeks due to 
budgetary constraints. Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in August 
2013 to resolve his delinquent debts. In October 2014, his employer’s re-bid on the 
contract under which Applicant works resulted in a 10% to 15% pay cut. His bankruptcy 
case was also dismissed due to delinquent plan payments.2  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing and dismissal, a 
federal tax lien of $27,256 entered against Applicant in December 2014, delinquent 
federal taxes of $21,500 for tax years 2011 and 2012, delinquent state taxes of $4,800 
for tax years 2011 and 2012, and nine delinquent consumer accounts totaling $18,857. 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with the exception of SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.i, 
which he denied because he was unaware of the creditors. Credit reports from June 
                                                          
1 Items 2-4, 8. 
 
2 Items 2-4, 8. 
 
 
3 
 
2014, February 2015, and October 2015, as well as Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
documentation, verify all of the SOR allegations.3  
 
 SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b and 1.l concern Applicant’s delinquent federal taxes. In his 
December 2015 response to the SOR, Applicant stated that SOR debt ¶ 1.l is for the 
same debt underlying the federal tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. SOR debt ¶ 1.l stems 
from information Applicant provided in his bankruptcy case, which pre-dated the lien in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. I find that SOR ¶ 1.l is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.b.4 
 
 Applicant received credit counseling in May 2013 through his Chapter 13 
bankruptcy case. He indicated in his October 2014 interview with an authorized DOD 
investigator, that he would contact and establish repayment terms with his creditors, 
and hire an attorney to assist him with resolving his tax issues. In his response to the 
SOR, Applicant stated that he was making payments toward SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b and 1.m 
using legal representation, and SOR debt ¶ 1.h is almost paid. Applicant also stated that 
the remaining SOR debts are closed accounts. Applicant has not provided corroborating 
evidence of actions he may have taken to resolve any of the SOR debts.5  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
3 Items 1-8. 
 
4 Items 1-2, 4-8. 
 
5 Items 1-8. 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy case was dismissed in October 2014 due to 
delinquent plan payments. He has a $27,256 federal tax lien outstanding since 
December 2014, owes $4,800 in delinquent state taxes for tax years 2011 and 2012, 
and has nine delinquent consumer accounts totaling $18,857. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
 
5 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 I find in Applicant’s favor on SOR debt ¶ 1.l, since it is a duplicate of SOR debt ¶ 
1.b. Applicant’s debts, however, remain unresolved. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur, and they continue to cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
 Circumstances beyond his control contributed to Applicant’s financial problems. 
For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must provide evidence that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
protection in August 2013 to resolve his delinquent debts. He received financial 
counseling in May 2013 through his Chapter 13 bankruptcy. However, his bankruptcy 
case was dismissed in October 2014 due to delinquent plan payments, and Applicant 
has not provided evidence of any actions he has since taken to resolve his delinquent 
debts. Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 
20(d) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant worked for a federal contractor from 2003 to 2008, and since 2013. He 
worked as a federal employee from October 2008 to June 2011. He was first granted a 
DOD security clearance in September 2004. Circumstances beyond his control 
contributed to his financial problems. He filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in 
August 2013, but his bankruptcy case was dismissed in October 2014. He has financial 
delinquencies that remain unresolved. His finances remain a security concern. He failed 
to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k and 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.l:    For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
