 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                      )  ISCR Case No. 15-06234 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant surrendered her Turkish passport to her security manager, and foreign 
preference security concerns are mitigated. Applicant’s sister moved from Turkey to the 
United States, and foreign influence security concerns related to Turkey are mitigated. 
Applicant’s spouse’s parents are citizens and residents of Syria. Foreign influence 
concerns relating to Syria are not mitigated. Access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 22, 2014, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 3) On 
January 17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign preference and foreign 
influence guidelines. 
 
On February 4, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and she 
requested a decision without a hearing. (Item 2) On June 29, 2016, Department 
Counsel completed the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On August 22, 2016, 
Applicant responded to the FORM. On May 22, 2017, the case was assigned to me. 
The case file, consisting of six Government exhibits, was admitted without objection. 
(Items 1-6) Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s response to the FORM.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning Turkey 
and Syria (AN). (Items 5, 6) There were no objections, and I granted the AN request. 
Department Counsel’s requests for AN are quoted without introduction, some quotation 
marks, and footnotes in the sections labeled, “Republic of Turkey,” and “Syria,” infra. 
The “bullets” were also removed, and instead paragraph format was used. A few minor 
grammatical corrections were made.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).     
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In her SOR response, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.b. 
(Item 2) Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact. She also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old senior specialist, who has worked for the same DOD 
contractor since 2008. In 1980, she was born in Turkey. In 1995, she immigrated to the 
United States, and in 2001, she was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. In 2000, she 
graduated from high school in the United States. (Item 4) In 2004, she received an 
associate’s degree in software development from a U.S. college. In 2005, she married 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, or 
locations in order to protect Applicant and her family’s privacy. Unless stated otherwise, the sources for 
the information in this section are Applicant’s SOR response (Item 2), her October 22, 2014 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA) (Item 3), or 
her FORM response.   
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
in Turkey. Her spouse was born in Syria. In 2011, her child was born in the United 
States.  Her daughter and husband are citizens and residents of the United States.   
 
In 2011, Applicant was issued a Turkish passport, and she used it to travel to 
Turkey in 2014 to avoid compliance with Turkish visa requirements for dual citizens 
traveling on a U.S. passport. When she had her interview with an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator, she offered to turn in her Turkish passport to her 
security manager.  (Item 4) On August 22, 2016, Applicant’s security manager wrote 
that Applicant provided her Turkish passport to him, and he had retained it.  
 
Applicant’s parents, brother, and sister were born in Turkey, and they live in the 
United States. In 2014, she obtained a U.S. passport. She traveled to Turkey in 2011 
and 2014. Her mother is a naturalized U.S. citizen, and she lives with Applicant. (Item 4) 
Her father is a permanent resident of the United States, and he lives with Applicant. 
(Item 4) 
 
Applicant’s husband was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2009. (Item 4) 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of Syria. Her 
father-in-law is a farmer, and her mother-in-law is a housewife. (Item 4) Applicant said 
she has limited contact with her parents-in-law because she does not speak Arabic, 
which is their language, and they do not speak Turkish. Sometimes she participates in 
conversations with them when her husband contacts them using Skype. (Item 4) She 
visits them once every two years when they meet her in Turkey to see their 
granddaughter. Her husband’s most recent visit to Syria was in 2007. Applicant’s 
husband has weekly telephone contact with his parents. (Item 4)    
 
Republic of Turkey 
 
 Turkey is of strategic geographic significance because it controls the straits that 
link the Black Sea with the Mediterranean and because it borders Iran, Iraq, and Syria.  
 
Effective July 26, 2016, the U.S. State Department issued a Travel Warning, 
advising U.S. citizens of increased terrorist threats throughout Turkey and to avoid all 
travel to southeastern Turkey. Based upon the July 15, 2016 coup attempt, it also 
advised that U.S. citizens reconsider all travel to Turkey and noted its decision to allow 
for the voluntary departure of family members of employees posted to the U.S. 
Embassy in Ankara and the U.S. Consulate General in Istanbul. It also noted that U.S. 
citizens may see an increase of police or military presence and restrictions on 
movement.  
 
There have been violent, terrorist attacks in Turkey, and the possibility of terrorist 
attacks against U.S. citizens and interests remains high. Domestic and transnational 
terrorist groups have targeted and continue to target Turkish citizens and foreigners in 
Turkey. Terrorist groups that operate in Turkey include Kurdish nationalists, Al-Qaida, 
Marxist Leninist, and Syrian groups, including ISIL.  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
By virtue of its location, the international transport hubs on its territory, and its 
long border with Syria and Iraq, Turkey is the main transit route for foreign terrorist 
fighters. Issues with Turkey’s border security are aggravated by its unwillingness to 
impose visa requirements for some major foreign terrorist fighter source countries such 
as Libya. 
 
In 2014 and 2015, Turkey faced significant internal terrorist threats, including 
increased activity by the Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party/Front (DHKP/C), a 
terrorist Marxist-Leninist group with anti-U.S. and anti-NATO views that seeks the 
violent overthrow of the Turkish state. This group threatened the security of both U.S. 
and Turkish interests. A number of attacks occurred, including a suicide bombing of the 
U.S. Embassy in 2013 and an attempted shooting of the U.S. Consulate General in 
August 2015.  
 
Also prominent among terrorist groups in Turkey is the Kurdistan Workers’ Party 
(PKK). Following three decades of conflict with the PKK terrorist organization, the 
Turkish government and PKK leader began talks for a peace process in late 2012. In 
March 2013, the PKK called for a cease fire, which both sides largely observed, apart 
from small-scale PKK attacks. These peace talks continued in 2014. However, in the 
summer of 2015, the PKK resumed widespread attacks against Turkish Security Forces 
in the southeast of Turkey. 
 
In 2014, several notable terrorist attacks occurred in Turkey, including the killing 
of three and wounding of five more by three ISIL gunmen at a checkpoint; the killing of 
40 civilians during two days of protests. Clashes among various Kurdish terrorist groups 
and Turkish security forces occurred; and, in October 2014, the PKK killed three Turkish 
soldiers in two separate incidents. 
· 
In 2015 and 2016, there were also several notable and high profile terrorist 
attacks that occurred in Turkey: a July suicide bombing attack believed to have been 
carried out by ISIL in the town of Suruc that killed 33 people and wounded 100 more; a 
suicide bomb attack believed to have been carried out by ISIL that killed 103 in Ankara 
in October 2015; and another deadly terrorist attack in Ankara in March 2016. 
 
The most significant human rights problems in Turkey in 2015 included 
government interference with freedom of expression, impunity and weak administration 
of justice, and inadequate protection of civilians. Authorities imprisoned approximately 
30 journalists under the auspices of an anti-terror law. Authorities exerted pressure on 
the media through security raids, suppression of publications, criminal investigations of 
journalists and editors, and internet blocking. Authorities applied the law inconsistently, 
made over-broad use of the anti-terror law, made arbitrary arrests, and arguably 
attempted to unlawfully intimidate the judicial branch of the government. Additionally, as 
a result of renewed fighting with the PKK, authorities and the PKK killed and injured 
innocent civilians, intimidated medical workers, teachers, and other civil leaders, and 
imposed curfews that restricted individuals’ access to basic needs for periods of up to a 
week. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Other significant human rights problems in Turkey in 2015 included restrictions 
on freedom of speech, such as arrests and imprisonment for insulting the Turkish 
Nation or its leaders, restrictions on freedom of assembly by deeming many protests 
security threats, and mistreatment of refugees through physical abuse or a lack of 
access to basic needs. 
 
In 2014, the U.S. State Department noted the following abuses of religious 
freedom in Turkey: prosecutions for insulting Islamic beliefs; Turkish elected officials 
making anti-Semitic statements; and discrimination against non-Sunni Muslims, 
including Christians, Jews, and Alevi Muslims. 
 
Syria 
 
The Syrian Arab Republic (Syria) is ruled by an authoritarian regime dominated 
by the Socialist Ba’ath Party, which is currently engaged in a full-scale civil war with the 
armed Syrian opposition. The “regime has used deadly force to quell anti-government 
protests and is engaged in a full-scale civil war with the armed Syrian opposition. The 
government is no longer in control of vast swathes of the country, particularly in 
northern and eastern Syria. Some Syrian opposition groups have utilized car bombs, 
improvised explosive device/indirect-fire attacks, sniper fire, and kidnaping throughout 
the country. Foreign combatants - including Iranian regime elements, Hizballah fighters, 
Islamic extremists, and al Qaida-linked elements - are participating in the hostilities. ISIL 
controls large amounts of territory in the north and east of the country where it has 
committed atrocities against civilians, including U.S. citizens. The Syrian regime’s 
military operations have involved the use of ballistic missiles, aerial attacks, heavy 
artillery, and chemical weapons targeting civilian centers.” 
 
Military attacks from the Assad regime or other groups can happen any time 
without warning and no part of Syria can be considered safe from violence, including the 
risk of kidnapping, sniper attacks, terrorist attacks, military attacks, arbitrary arrests, 
detention, and torture. Throughout Syria, U.S. citizens have experienced and will 
continue to experience a high risk of being kidnaped. 
 
The U.S. intelligence community assesses with high confidence that the Assad 
regime has used chemical weapons, including the nerve agent sarin, on a small scale 
against the Syrian people multiple times over the past year. It also assesses that ISIL is 
likely responsible for several mustard gas attacks in Syria. 
 
The current security situation in Syria is unlikely to change soon. The war has 
caused hundreds of thousands of deaths with many thousands wounded, 4.8 million 
refugees and over 6.5 million internally displaced persons. The U.S. “Department of 
State continues to warn citizens against travel to Syria and strongly recommends that 
U.S. citizens remaining in Syria depart immediately.” 
 
Syria is designated by the U.S. Department of State as a State Sponsor of 
Terrorism, and has been since 1979. Syria continues to provide political and other 
support to a variety of terrorist groups. It has provided political and weapons support to 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Hizballah and Iran while Iran, in tum, has supported the Syrian regime against its 
opposition. 
 
The Assad regime has played a significant role in the growth of terrorist 
organizations such as al Qaida and ISIL. As a result of its permissive attitude towards 
these organizations and others like them, it has acted as a terrorist hub for foreign 
fighters entering Iraq to battle U.S.-led coalition forces. Over the years, Syria's 
encouragement of violent extremists to transit through its borders has resulted in it 
becoming an environment where terrorist groups such as ISIL have planned and 
launched deadly terrorist attacks against countries such as France, Saudi Arabia, 
Lebanon, and the United States.  
 
Syria also continues to generate significant concern regarding the role it plays in 
terrorist financing. Industry experts have reported that 60% of all business transactions 
were conducted in cash and nearly 80% of all Syrians did not use formal banking 
services. This environment has contributed to a vast Syrian black market, estimated to 
be as large as Syria’s formal economy. Regional hawala networks, operating in 
smuggling and trade-based money and facilitated by government corruption, contribute 
to concerns that members of the Syrian government and the business elite are complicit 
in terrorist finance schemes.  
 
The U.S. Department of State’s 2015 Human Rights Report stated that the worst 
human rights violations were caused by the Assad regime’s fundamental lack of regard 
for the well-being of most of its populace. Human rights violations were widespread and 
consisted of the government’s failure to protect its people from deadly violence and 
other abuses by terrorist groups such as ISIL and Jabhat al-Nusra. The Assad 
government has perpetrated indiscriminate and unlawful violence against its citizens, 
including bombings of schools, hospitals, and residential areas, often for the purpose of 
furthering a military goal. The Assad regime also violated its citizens’ basic civil liberties, 
such as the right to a fair trial, and freedoms of movement, expression, and association.  
 
U.S. citizen men over the age of 18, even those who have never resided in or 
visited Syria, but whose fathers are of Syrian descent, are required to complete military 
service or pay the exemption fee. The families of women who are dual Syrian/United 
States citizens have prevented them from leaving the country, often attempting to force 
them to marry while in Syria. Moreover, a Syrian husband may take legal action against 
his spouse to prevent her from leaving the country, regardless of her citizenship.  
 
The Syrian government conducts surveillance of foreign visitors. U.S. citizens 
visiting Syria should expect the potential for monitoring of their activities, and the 
possibility of incarceration for seemingly innocuous actions such as taking pictures, 
using a GPS, or discussing politics or religion.  
   
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of Turkey. She 
moved to the United States, and Applicant’s relationship with her sister no longer raises 
a security concern. Foreign influence security concerns regarding Turkey are mitigated. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.b alleges, and the record establishes that Applicant’s parents-in-law are 
citizens and residents of Syria. The mere possession of close family ties with a person 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, 
if only one relative lives in a foreign country, and an Applicant has frequent, non-casual 
contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. Syria’s relationship 
with the United States places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion 
on Applicant to demonstrate her relationship with her spouse and his relationship with 
his parents do not pose a security risk. She should not be placed in a position where 
she might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and her spouse and 
parents-in-law. With its poor human rights record, political, economic and military turmoil 
and on-going civil war, it is conceivable that the Syrian government or terrorists might 
target or coerce anyone in Syria in an attempt to gather valuable U.S. information from 
a security clearance holder. 
 
Applicant’s connections to her spouse and his relationship with his parents create 
a potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise 
a possible security concern about her desire to help her spouse and his parents by 
providing classified information.  Applicant lives with her spouse, and he is in frequent 
contact with his parents living in Syria. These relationships create “a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 7(d). 
 
The Government produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s husband’s 
contacts and relationships with his parents to raise the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
  
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
None of the mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s relationship with her 
spouse and his relationships and frequent contacts with his parents living in Syria. 
Applicant has been married since 2005, and she has an emotional bond with her 
spouse. He communicates with his parents in Syria weekly. Although her close 
relationship with her spouse and his relationships and frequent contacts with his parents 
are important positive reflections of character, the same close relationships raise 
security concerns for possible foreign influence.     
 
There is no evidence of the following elements that could enhance security 
concerns: (1) Applicant’s spouse and his parents have been political activists, 
challenging the policies of the Syrian government; (2) his parents have ever worked for 
the Syrian government or military or any news media; (3) terrorists or the Syrian 
government have approached or threatened Applicant’s spouse or his parents for any 
reason; (4) his parents currently engage in activities that would bring attention to them; 
and (5) Syrian elements are aware that Applicant works for a government contractor or 
might have access to classified information. As such, there is a reduced possibility that 
Applicant, his spouse, or his parents would be targets for coercion or exploitation.  
 
Applicant deserves some credit because of the reduced possibility that Syrian 
elements will exploit her parents-in-law because of the low profile her parents-in-law 
have in Syrian society. However, Applicant’s close relationship with her spouse and his 
relationships and frequent contacts with his parents as well as the nature of the Syrian 
government and that government’s contentious relationship with the United States, all 
weigh against mitigating security concerns. See ADP Case No. 05-17812 at 2, 3 n.2 
(App. Bd. Jun. 11, 2007) (finding contacts with siblings in PRC “once every two or three  
months” not to be casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 2, 4 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s parents and sisters a total of about 20 
times per year not casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings once every four or five months 
not casual and infrequent).     
 
Applicant’s close relationships with her relatives living in the United States and 
her strong connections to the United States tend to mitigate foreign interest security 
concerns. Applicant moved to the United States more than 21 years ago. She is fully 
inculcated with U.S. values. She has worked for a government contractor for nine years. 
She has no financial connections to Syria. She is a loyal, dedicated U.S. citizen.  
 
In a case where the applicant had limited contacts with his Russian in-laws, as 
he could not speak Russian and they could not speak English, the Appeal Board stated: 
 
[A]s a matter of common sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable 
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate 
family members of the person’s spouse.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 
4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). . . [T]he Judge’s conclusion that, through his wife, 
Applicant has close ties to his Russian in-laws is consistent with the record 
evidence. The Judge’s further conclusion that Applicant had failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from this relationship is also consistent with the record 
evidence. See ISCR Case No. 01-26893 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002). 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009). Applicant’s husband’s 
relationships with his parents who are citizens and residents of Syria raise an 
unmitigated foreign influence security concern. 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference security concern stating, “when an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10(a)(1) describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in Applicant’s case: “(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of 
foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign 
passport.” 
 
In 2001, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen. She obtained a Turkish 
passport in 2011, and used it in Turkey in 2014. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applies to her 
possession of a Turkish passport after becoming a U.S. citizen.    
 
AG ¶ 11(e) provides a condition that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: “(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated.” In August 2016, Applicant surrendered her Turkish 
passport to her facility security officer. AG ¶ 11(e) applies to her possession of a Turkish 
passport. Foreign preference security concerns are mitigated.   
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting a grant of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant is a 37-year-old senior specialist, who has worked for the same 
DOD contractor since 2008. In 1995, she immigrated to the United States, and in 2001, 
she was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. In 2000, she graduated from high school in the 
United States, and in 2004, she received an associate’s degree in software 
development from a U.S. college. In 2011, her child was born in the United States.  Her 
daughter is a resident of the United States. Her husband is a naturalized U.S. citizen.  
She surrendered her Turkish passport to her security manager. Her parents, brother, 
and sister are residents of the United States. Her mother is a naturalized U.S. citizen, 
and her father is a permanent resident of the United States. She has strong connections 
to the United States. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning a foreign country must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation and dangers in that country including from intelligence agents.2 
The danger of coercion from the Syrian government, intelligence agents, or terrorist 
entities is more likely than in many other countries. The devastating civil war in Syria 
continues to cost lives and risks the involvement of the United States, Russia, Iran, 
Turkey, and other countries in the conflict.        
 
The weight of the evidence supports denial of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Syria. Applicant’s husband frequently communicates with his parents.3 “It is not to 
question Applicant’s patriotism to acknowledge that the record in [Applicant’s] case 
raises the reasonable concern that [she] could be placed in a position of having to 
choose between [her] ties to the U.S. and [her] obligations to [her] foreign family 
members.” ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 5 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008) (reversing grant of 
security clearance because of Chinese connections). See also ISCR Case No. 06-
18337 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2008) (reversing grant of security clearance because of Syrian 
connections). The Appeal Board has noted in a case involving an applicant’s in-laws 
living in Russia: 
 
Applicant’s wife appears to be close to her relatives, and Applicant’s 
evidence that he does not speak with these relatives himself, due among 
other things to a language barrier, is not sufficient to rebut the 
presumption that he shares a sense of obligation to them through his wife. 
Neither is it sufficient to mitigate the risk that Applicant’s in-laws could, 
through their frequent contact with Applicant’s wife, become a means of 
foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
ISCR Case No. 11-04980 at (App. Bd. Sept. 21, 2012).   
   
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign preference security concern; 
however, she has failed to mitigate the foreign influence security concern. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant  
 
                                            
3 Applicant has the burden of showing her parents-in-law do not pose a risk to national security.  
ISCR Case No. 11-04980 at 5 (App. Bd. Sept. 21, 2012) (“ISCR Case No. 04-11664 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 
2007)(A paucity of record evidence as to an applicant’s contacts with his foreign in-laws must be resolved 
in the context of the applicant’s burden of persuasion.)”). The evidence about Applicant’s in-laws living in 
Syria was not sufficiently developed to mitigate security concerns. 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
