 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-04294 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for access to classified information. She failed to present sufficient evidence to 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from her problematic 
financial history. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on July 22, 2014. This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on March 8, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
 
2 
 
information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 9, 2016. Her response consisted of a three-
page memorandum in which she addressed each delinquent debt and offered a 
summary explanation for her financial situation; she also included two letters of 
recommendation and proof of payment for the $565 medical collection account in SOR 
¶ 1.k; and she requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On June 17, 2016, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, some of 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, who received it June 29, 2016. She did not reply within 30 days from receipt 
of the information as required under the Directive. The case was assigned to me on 
May 3, 2017.   
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 4, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the November 2014 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, which is expressly 
required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.2 In addition, the Directive provides no 
exception to the authentication requirement. Department Counsel’s written brief 
includes a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not authenticated and that 
failure to object may constitute a waiver of the authentication requirement. 
Nevertheless, the record does not demonstrate that Applicant, who has not replied to 
the FORM, understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also 
does not demonstrate that she understood the implications of waiving an objection to 
the admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 4 is inadmissible and I have not 
considered it.   
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for her 
employment as a federal contractor. She has worked as a senior information security 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG were published in 
the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
2 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.). 
 
 
3 
 
engineer since 2012. The Defense Department previously granted her a secret-level 
security clearance in 2004. Per her security clearance application, she has worked full-
time as a federal contractor since 2004, with periods of unemployment from November 
2005 to April 2006 and from August 2006 to October 2006. She has never married and 
has no children.  
 
In her July 2014 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed an $8,000 
medical account more than 120 days past due. Otherwise, she reported no other 
adverse financial information in response to the various questions.  
 
Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the SOR alleges, in ¶ 1.a through 
¶ 1.r, a history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of 18 delinquent accounts 
ranging in amounts from $52 to $14,222 for a total of nearly $36,000. Twelve of the 
eighteen accounts are medical collection accounts for a total of $9,655. The other six 
accounts consist of a past-due mortgage in the amount of $14,222, a charged-off 
account for $10,925, and four collection accounts for a total of $1,178. In her answer to 
the SOR, she admitted 15 of the 18 delinquent accounts; and she denied a $135 
collection account, a $112 medical collection account, and a $123 collection account. In 
addition to her admissions, the 18 delinquent accounts are established by credit reports 
from August 2014 and November 2015.3 
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant explained that she experienced a major 
financial crisis at the beginning of 2015, when she and her fiancée separated and he 
moved out of the house.4 Her income was insufficient to meet her expenses, and she 
noted that the majority of the accounts are for medical expenses. She further explained 
that she downsized her housing and bills by over half in June 2015, and she has been 
working to rebuild her credit worthiness. She presented proof of payment for the $565 
medical collection account in SOR ¶ 1.k. But she did not present any other 
documentation in support of her statements in her answer that accounts were paid, in a 
payment arrangement, in dispute, or otherwise resolved. Her two letters of 
recommendation are quite favorable.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.5 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”6 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
                                                          
3 Exhibits 5 and 6.  
 
4 In contrary, the August 2014 credit report lists 19 accounts in the collections section of the report, some 
of which were paid or settled.   
 
5 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
6 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
4 
 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.7 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.8 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.9 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.10 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.11 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.12 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.13 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.14 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,15 the suitability of an applicant 
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about a [person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information.16 
 
                                                          
7 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
8 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
10 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
11 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
12 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
13 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
15 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
16 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the [person] initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic 
financial history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. With that said, I 
have given little weight to the 11 medical collection accounts that remain unresolved. It 
is presumed that those debts were incurred for necessary medical care or treatment as 
opposed to frivolous or irresponsible spending or otherwise living beyond one’s means. 
Medical debt is unlike other types of debt. It is usually unplanned, unexpected, and 
nondiscretionary. And it can add hundreds if not thousands of dollars in debt in a short 
period, which can be overwhelming for a debtor. In my view, having less than $10,000 
in unresolved medical collection accounts does not fatally undermine Applicant’s 
security suitability. Accordingly, the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f and 1.j-p are decided 
for Applicant.  
 
 The same cannot be said for the other matters, which consist of a past-due 
mortgage loan, a $10,925 charged-off account, and four collection accounts for a total 
of about $1,200. She did not present any documentation for these six accounts, 
including a realistic plan to resolve them. And there is certainly no track record showing 
that she will adhere to a plan.    
 
 Based on the written record before me, I am unable to credit Applicant in 
explanation, extenuation, or mitigation of her problematic financial history. In reaching 
that conclusion, I note that her financial problems are connected to the breakup of a 
relationship at the beginning of 2015, which was a circumstance largely beyond her 
 
6 
 
control. Nevertheless, she has had ample time and opportunity to initiate the process of 
putting her financial house in order and have supporting documentation showing she 
has in fact done so. Documentation is necessary because the DOD security-clearance 
process, like other large bureaucratic institutions (for example, banks, insurance 
companies, and universities), does not run on word-of-mouth; it runs on paperwork.17 
It’s the responsibility of the individual applicant to produce relevant documentation in 
support of their case.18 Here, Applicant has not met her burden of production because 
she did not present sufficient documentation showing she is making a good-faith effort 
to resolve the remaining six delinquent accounts.  
 
 Applicant’s history of financial problems creates doubt about her reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the 
whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that she did not meet her ultimate 
burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g-1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j-1.p:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.q-1.r:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
17 See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 11, 2010) (it is reasonable to expect applicants to 
present documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts).  
 
18 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
