KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s history of delinquent debt, coupled with a paucity of evidence of debt
resolution, support the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s financial problems raise security
concerns. Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that there is a connection between the
record evidence of his financial delinquencies and a concern that he may fail to protect classified
information. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-04953.a1
DATE: 05/04/2017
DATE: May 4, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-04953
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 7, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On March 15, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant retired from the U.S. military.  He has worked for contractors since at least 2003
and for his current employer since 2011.  Applicant has experienced periods of unemployment from
one to six months between contracts and was unemployed from January 2004 to January 2005.  He
has performed his duties almost exclusively overseas.
Applicant’s SOR alleges nearly $70,000 in delinquents debts, for credit cards, a repossessed
vehicle, a disputed rental agreement, etc.  Applicant denied certain debts and attributed others to
identify theft.  Applicant did not provide documentary evidence of the basis for his disputes nor did
he demonstrate that any of the SOR debts had been paid.  In addition, Applicant and his wife
purchased a house as an investment.  He contended that the second mortgage on the house was sold
and that he did not know whom to pay, so he advised his wife to make no payments until someone
contacted them.  The lender foreclosed on the house.  This debt was not alleged in the SOR.  The
Judge stated that she was considering it for limited purposes, such as mitigation, the whole-person
analysis, etc.  
Applicant claimed that his problems with the house and with the vehicle originated from the
creditors having made mistakes about the appropriate interest rates.  He contended that other
creditors closed accounts without communicating with him and that he was unfairly charged for
damage to rental property.  As noted above, Applicant provided no corroboration for his claims.  
Applicant’s character references describe him as diligent, ethical, reliable, honest, and
patriotic.  He is lauded for his good judgment and integrity.  In his Response to the File of Relevant
Material, Applicant acknowledged that he had not paid sufficient attention to his finances, devoting
his energies to his job.  He stated that he is dedicated to serving his country.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial problems raised two disqualifying
conditions:  19(a) and (c).1  In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation, she cited to a paucity of
evidence of debt resolution or of a basis to dispute the debts.  She stated that Applicant had provided
no evidence to show that his problems originated from circumstances outside his control or that he
had acted in a responsible manner in regard to them.  She noted no evidence of financial counseling
and stated that she could not conclude that Applicant’s difficulties were under control.  Although
Applicant presented some letters to his creditors challenging his debts, she stated that he did not
present evidence substantiating the actual basis for the disputes.  She also cited to certain
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and (c): “a history of not meeting
financial obligations[.]”  
inconsistent statements that Applicant had made.2  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to
evidence of Applicant’s military career and his years of service to the Defense industry.  However,
she stated that his 2012 clearance application and his 2014 clearance interview had placed him on
notice that his finances were of security concern, yet he did nothing to resolve his debts.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge’s findings of fact contain “egregious errors.”  For example,
he denies that he was unemployed from 2004 to 2005.  However, during his interview, he told the
investigator that he had been unemployed from “01/2004 to 01/2005.”  Item 8, Interview Summary,
at 2.  He challenges the Judge’s finding that he had purchased the house for investment purposes. 
In his security clearance application, Applicant stated that he had purchased the house as an
investment.  Item 4 at 68.  He also denies that he had told his wife to stop paying the mortgage on
the property.  However, during his clearance interview, he told the investigator that “he told his wife
to stop paying both mortgages until someone contacted them.”  Item 8 at 4.  The Judge’s material
findings are based upon substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn
from the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01285 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 22, 2016). 
Applicant contends that his circumstances do not raise concerns under Guideline F.  He
denies that he has committed any illegal acts or that he has acquired any unexplained affluence. 
However, the concern under this Guideline is not simply that an applicant might be tempted to
commit illegal acts in order to pay his debts.  A Judge should also consider the extent to which an
applicant’s circumstances cast doubt upon his judgment, self control, and other characteristics
essential to protecting national security information.  This obligation is rooted in the language of the
Directive, which states that failure to meet financial obligations may indicate unwillingness to abide
by rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an applicant’s ability to protect classified
information.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 18.  See ISCR Case No. 15-01737 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 
2017).  Applicant’s history of delinquent debt, coupled with a paucity of evidence of debt resolution,
support the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s financial problems raise security concerns. 
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that there is a connection between the record evidence
of his financial delinquencies and a concern that he may fail to protected classified information.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-02903 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017) .   
Applicant challenges the Judge’s whole-person analysis.  He cites to his many years of
service without incident or concern, his character references, etc.  He notes that his circumstances
implicate only one of the several Guidelines set forth in the Directive, arguing from this that his
good qualities outweigh his unfortunate financial problems.  Applicant also cites to a prominent
person in the news whose circumstances, Applicant contends, did not result in loss of access to
classified information.  On this last point, we cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive
¶ E3.1.29.  Furthermore, we lack jurisdiction to review the merits of cases committed to another
2The SOR alleged a delinquent  charge account.  SOR ¶ 1b.  Applicant initially denied knowing anything about
it.  “I deny because this is incorrect.  There is no balance.  I do not even know who or what company [creditor] is, and
so I do not believe that I owe that unidentified/unknown company anything.”  Answer to SOR.  Compare with the
following:  “My wife returned items she purchased and the credit was not applied as it should have been.  The amount
owed is incorrect.”   Response to FORM.   
Governmental body.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-0007 (App. Bd. Nov. 28, 2000).  Applicant’s
arguments are not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence
in the record.  Neither are they sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner
that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-00502 at 3 (App. Bd.
Mar. 7, 2017).  Applicant states that without a clearance he will lose his job.  The Directive does not
permit us to consider the impact of an unfavorable decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at
3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017).  Applicant cites to a portion of his clearance summary, arguing that the
investigator concluded that he was “not susceptible to blackmail or coercion.”  Item 8 at 5. 
However, this comment reflects Applicant’s answer to the investigator’s question, not the
investigator’s independent judgment about Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  In any event, even
if an investigator offered such an opinion, it would not bind the Government on a matter of national
security.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-00535 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 2017). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
