 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06847 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sean M. Bigley, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 7, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on 
June 28, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
2 
 
 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant objected to 
Item 4, an unauthenticated personal subject interview. The objection is sustained, and 
Item 4 is not admitted into evidence. The remaining Items are admitted. With his 
answer, Applicant submitted exhibits marked as SOR Exhibits (Ex.) A through J, which 
are admitted into evidence without objection. In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he 
submitted additional exhibits marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D. These 
were admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on May 3, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f and denied the 
allegations in 1.b and 1.e. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He is a high school graduate. He has attended an 
online college. He married in 2007 and divorced in 2010. He remarried in 2010 and 
subsequently divorced. There were no children from either marriage. He is remarried 
and recently had a child with his third wife. Applicant served in the military from 2004 to 
2008, when he received a General Discharge under Honorable Condition. The basis of 
the discharge was misconduct. He had several Article 15 nonjudicial punishments under 
the Uniform Code of Military Justice. Applicant has been employed by a government 
contractor since July 2012.1 
   
 Applicant was employed overseas with his present employer during tax years 
2013 and 2014. He believed, based on advice from other overseas employees that he 
was not required to file a federal income tax return if he did not owe taxes because his 
income was earned overseas. Based on the amount of Applicant’s overseas income, it 
was exempt from taxation for both tax years under the foreign earned income exclusion. 
However, he misunderstood that even if his income were exempt, he is still required to 
file tax returns. Once Applicant learned of his error, he filed his 2013 and 2014 federal 
tax returns. Applicant provided documentary proof that he filed the 2013, 2014, and 
2015 federal income tax returns in April 2016, before receiving the SOR. He does not 
owe federal income taxes.2  
 
 Applicant did not file his state income tax returns for tax years 2013 and 2014. 
Under his state’s laws, he is not required to file a return if he is not present in the state 
during the tax year. Applicant was living overseas for the entire tax years.3 
                                                          
1 Item 2. At the time Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA), he was separated from 
his second wife and in the process of obtaining a divorce. Based on information from his answer to the 
SOR and FORM, it is apparent the divorce was completed. He subsequently has remarried and recently 
had a child with his third wife. The dates of these events are unknown. 
 
2 AE A, B, C. 
 
3 Item 1; SOR Ex, C; C (1); AE D. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to having two failed marriages at a 
young age and the stress of military reassignments. He admitted that some of his bills 
did not get paid. The SOR debts are supported by credit reports from October 2014, 
and March 2016.4 
 
 Applicant acknowledged he owed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($220) for a credit card 
that he no longer maintains. In April 2016, when he became aware the debt was not 
paid, he contacted the creditor and paid it. He provided proof of payment.5 
 
Applicant admitted he owed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. He explained it became 
delinquent in 2015 when he was living overseas and the fluctuation of the dollar made it 
difficult to budget and caused financial strain. In August 2015, Applicant initiated a 
payment plan with the creditor to pay $280 monthly. In May 2016, he paid the remaining 
balance and the debt is resolved. He provided supporting documents.6  
 
 Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($16,761), explaining this debt was a 
deficiency balance owed on a repossessed vehicle that was jointly owned by him and 
his ex-wife. The repossession occurred after their separation in 2009, but prior to their 
divorce. Applicant had a verbal agreement with his wife that she would keep the car as 
her property provided she continued to make the payments. Prior to their separation, 
Applicant made the payments on time. He was never contacted by the creditor that the 
account was in default, and he was unaware that the deficiency could be accessed to 
him. Despite believing the debt belonged to his ex-wife, he settled it in May 2016, and 
provided documented proof.7 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f is a personal loan that Applicant and his ex-wife obtained. 
He provided his ex-wife with money after their separation to pay his portion of the loan. 
She had agreed to remit the money along with her share to the creditor. She did not. 
Applicant was unaware that she did not make the payment. He paid the debt in April 
2016.8  
 
Applicant provided certificates of completion for two financial management 
courses. He also provided character letters that describe him as honest, patriotic, 
mature, responsible, professional, and reliable. In addition, he exercises sound 
judgment and has had no disciplinary infractions during his civilian employment. He 
provided a personal financial statement that shows he is living within his means.9 
                                                          
4 Items 1; 5, 6. 
 
5 Item 1, SOR Ex. E. 
 
6 Item 1, SOR Ex. H. 
 
7 Item 1, SOR Ex. I. 
 
8 Item 1, SOR Ex. J. 
 
9 Item 1, SOR Ex. B, F, G. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure to file annual, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant had delinquent debts that began accumulating in 2009. He failed to 
timely file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2013 and 2014. He provided 
sufficient evidence to conclude that he was not required to file state income tax returns 
while living overseas. He has successfully refuted SOR ¶ 1.b. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant was misinformed as to his obligation to file federal income tax returns 
while working overseas. Upon learning of his obligation and before he received the 
SOR, he filed his 2013 and 2014 federal income tax returns. His entire income was 
exempt from federal taxes for both tax years. He also provided proof he filed his 2015 
federal income tax return.  
 
 Applicant has paid all of the debts alleged in the SOR, even those that he 
asserted should have been the responsibility of his ex-wife, and which he was unaware 
had not been paid. He provided documentary proof of payment for all of the debts. 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to two failed marriages at a young age and 
the stress of military reassignments. He admitted that some of his bills did not get paid. 
After his separation from his second wife, he gave her money to pay accounts, and she 
failed to do so. To resolve those disputed debts, Applicant paid them.  
 
 Applicant’s evidence supports that he is living within his means and his financial 
problems happened under unique circumstances that are unlikely to recur. It appears 
Applicant has matured and is taking his financial responsibilities seriously. He has 
participated in financial counseling and his finances are under control. All of the above 
mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He was confused about his obligation to file income tax 
returns while living overseas. He has filed all delinquent federal tax returns and does not 
owe taxes. He has paid all delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, even those that were 
attributed to his ex-wife’s failure to pay her share. Although Applicant had some 
problems while serving in the military, character statements indicate that Applicant has 
matured, is a good worker, and is acting responsibly with regard to his finances. 
Applicant has met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
