 
 
1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  (Redacted) )   ISCR Case No. 15-08029 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett C. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s two brothers are resident citizens of Taiwan, and she has infrequent, 
cordial contact with a former mentor, a senior scientist for Taiwan’s government. Yet, she 
held a security clearance in the past when employed as a research scientist for the U.S. 
military and has shown that she can be counted on to act in U.S. interests. Clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 5, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing a security 
concern under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and explaining why it was unable to grant 
or continue a security clearance to Applicant. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
10865 (EO), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on May 10, 2016, and she requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). On August 19, 2016, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing 
to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
a security clearance for Applicant. On August 22, 2016, I scheduled a hearing for 
September 26, 2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. One Government exhibit (GE 1) was 
admitted into evidence without objection. Additionally, the Government requested that I 
take administrative notice of several facts pertinent to the Republic of China (Taiwan). An 
August 10, 2016 letter from Department Counsel forwarding to Applicant discovery of the 
Government’s exhibit and the Administrative Notice request with extracts of source 
documents was marked as a hearing exhibit (HE 1). The SOR was amended on the 
Government’s motion, as set forth below. Applicant offered no documentary exhibits and 
relied solely on her testimony, which is reflected in a hearing transcript (Tr.) received on 
October 5, 2016. 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 The Government moved under ¶ E3.1.17 of the Directive to add the following 
allegation under Guideline B based on Applicant’s hearing testimony about her foreign 
contacts: 
 
b. Your mentor is a citizen and resident of Taiwan and works for the 
Taiwanese national laboratory. 
 
Finding good cause to amend the SOR, I granted the motion over Applicant’s 
expressed concerns that her contact with this foreign national is not the type to raise 
concerns of foreign influence. I gave Applicant an opportunity to respond to the allegation, 
including by post-hearing submissions and requesting that I reconvene the hearing if 
necessary. Applicant elected to provide additional testimony at the hearing about her 
contacts and relationships with the Taiwanese citizen. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested administrative notice of several facts 
pertinent to Taiwan, as set forth in an Administrative Notice request dated August 10, 
2016. The Government’s request was based on several U.S. government publications 
referenced in the document.1 
                                                 
1 The Government’s request for administrative notice was based on a Congressional Research Service 
publication identified in the request as U.S.-Taiwan Relationship: Overview of Policy Issues dated 
November 26, 2014. However, I was provided an excerpt with the same title but dated December 11, 
2014.The Administrative Notice request was also based on three joint communiques between the United 
States and the People’s Republic of China from February 1972, January 1979, and August 1982; annual 
reports to Congress for 2005 and 2009-2011 by the Office of the National Counterintelligence Center; four 
press releases and an October 2014 summary of export enforcement criminal cases from the U.S. 
Department of Justice; a November 2009 report from the Defense Personnel and Security Research 
 
 
3 
Pursuant to my obligation to take administrative notice of the most current political 
conditions in evaluating Guideline B concerns (see ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. 
Apr. 12, 2007)), I informed the parties of my intent to take administrative notice, subject 
to the reliability of the source documentation and the relevance and materiality of the facts 
proposed. Applicant confirmed her receipt of the Government’s Administrative Notice 
request with extracts of the source documents. Applicant filed no objections to the facts 
set forth in the Government’s Administrative Notice request, and she declined an 
opportunity to submit additional facts for administrative notice. 
 
 Concerning the U.S. Department of Justice press releases and its summary of 
major U.S. export enforcement and economic espionage criminal cases, they were 
presented by the Government apparently to substantiate that Taiwan actively pursues 
collection of U.S. economic and proprietary information. Neither Applicant nor any of her 
family members were implicated in that criminal activity. With that caveat, the facts 
administratively noticed are set forth below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The amended SOR alleges under Guideline B that Applicant’s two brothers are 
resident citizens of Taiwan (SOR ¶ 1.a) and that Applicant’s mentor is a resident citizen 
of Taiwan employed by a Taiwanese national laboratory (SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant admits 
the foreign ties but denies that they present a security concern. After considering the 
pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old native of Taiwan. She was raised and educated in 
Taiwan though undergraduate school, earning her bachelor’s degree in chemistry. She 
came to the United States on a student visa for graduate study at a public university in 
1987. Her parents and her two brothers remained in Taiwan. Applicant entered the United 
States on a Taiwanese passport issued in June 1987. She met her spouse, a U.S. native 
citizen, who was a graduate student in the same department. They married in May 1993 
and have no children. (GE 1; Tr. 34-36.) In September 1999, Applicant and her spouse 
purchased their current residence. (GE 1.) 
 
After finishing her doctoral program, Applicant returned to Taiwan in 1994. Her 
mother, who was a homemaker, was ill. Applicant performed post-doctoral academic 
research at a national laboratory in Taiwan for 1.5 years. Primarily an academic 
institution, the national laboratory was started by a Nobel Laureate recruited by Taiwan’s 
government to establish the laboratory after he retired from his academic position at a 
U.S.-based university. At the laboratory, Applicant was mentored by a senior researcher, 
who is still employed there. Applicant believes her former mentor, now age 70, plans to 
retire in the near future. (Tr. 38-39.) 
 
                                                 
Center; and an annual report from the Office of the Secretary of Defense titled Military and Security 
Developments involving the People’s Republic of China 2012. I was provided the web addresses for the 
full articles. 
 
 
4 
Applicant’s mother passed away in 1995, and in 1996 Applicant returned to the 
United States. (Tr. 36-37.) Her spouse, who performed his post-doctoral research in 
Europe, returned to the United States around the same time. Applicant’s mentor at the 
Taiwanese national laboratory offered Applicant and her spouse positions, but they chose 
to return to the United States. (Tr. 94.) Her spouse accepted a position at a private 
university, and Applicant was awarded a post-doctoral fellowship to perform work for a 
U.S. military laboratory from 1996 to 1999. Applicant was then hired by a college’s 
institute for scientific research for an in-house contractor position at the military laboratory. 
(Tr. 40-43.)  
 
Applicant became a dual citizen of Taiwan and the United States on her U.S. 
naturalization in February 2000. (GE 1.) She had U.S. permanent residency as the 
spouse of a U.S. citizen and did not think about applying for U.S. citizenship until she 
heard that, as a contractor without U.S. citizenship, she would be denied computer 
access. (Tr. 45-46.) In December 2003, she started working directly for the military 
laboratory as a federal civilian research chemist. (GE 1; Tr. 41, 44.) In December 2004, 
Applicant was granted a DOD secret security clearance by the military component’s 
adjudications facility despite her dual citizenship, her possession of a valid foreign 
passport, and her father’s and her brothers’ citizenship and residency in Taiwan. (GE 1.) 
Applicant considered relinquishing her citizenship with Taiwan, but her supervisor told her 
that it was not required for security clearance eligibility at the secret level, so she chose 
to maintain dual citizenship. (Tr. 69.) Applicant acquired her U.S. passport in February 
2008. (GE 1.) She advised a government investigator that she retained her Taiwanese 
passport because she visited her father every year and wanted to avoid having to obtain 
a visa for longer stays. (Tr. 48, 60.) 
 
 Most of Applicant’s work for the U.S. military laboratory did not involve classified 
matters, although she occasionally attended classified meetings. (Tr. 42-43.) Applicant 
traveled to Taiwan on U.S. government business, and she received appropriate security 
briefings. (Tr. 20, 74.) In 2008 or 2009, she attended a conference where she and her 
former mentor presented their respective findings on research funded by the U.S. 
government. Applicant and her former mentor renewed their acquaintance after some 12 
to 13 years of no contact. (Tr. 92-99.) 
 
 Applicant traveled to Taiwan from January 2009 to February 2009 for tourism and 
to see family members, from September 2009 to October 2009 to see her father before 
his death, from March 2010 to April 2010 to visit her brothers, and from September 2010 
to October 2010 for tourism and to visit family. (GE 1; Tr. 60.) 
 
 In April 2011, Applicant renewed her Taiwanese passport for another ten years. In 
July 2011, Applicant resigned from her employment with the U.S. government. The 
research laboratory was moved in a base realignment and closure (BRAC) to another 
military base across the country. Applicant “regrettably” left her job to stay with her spouse 
in her present locale. (GE 1; Tr. 26, 47.) 
 
 
 
5 
   In August 2011, Applicant began working for her present employer, a small 
defense contractor, as its director of applied sciences. (GE 1; Tr. 26, 30.) Her security 
clearance was transferred with no problem. (Tr. 27.) In September 2012 and in October 
2014, she and her spouse traveled to Taiwan for tourism and to visit her family members. 
Applicant testified that she used her U.S. passport to enter Taiwan on all trips after her 
father’s death. (Tr. 70.) However, she indicated on her SF 86 that she last used her 
Taiwan passport in 2012. (GE 1.) In 2014, she used her U.S. passport because her stay 
was only two weeks and so she did not require a visa. However, she also had her 
Taiwanese passport in her possession in case she needed to extend her stay. (Tr. 70-
71.) 
 
 On March 9, 2015, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) to renew her security clearance 
eligibility. (Tr. 24.) She disclosed her dual citizenship and her possession of current 
Taiwanese and U.S. passports. Applicant explained why she holds dual citizenship, as 
follows: 
 
I am a citizen of both the United States and Taiwan. I maintain dual 
citizenship because most of my family is in Taiwan so that I can visit them 
more easily and do not have to apply for visas for longer stays. I have not 
maintained dual citizenship to protect a financial interest in Taiwan. I have 
not traveled to or resided in Taiwan to meet citizenship requirements 
because Taiwan has no requirements. I have not sought or held office in 
Taiwan as a political official. I have not voted in any elections in Taiwan 
since becoming [a] US citizen. I have a Taiwanese passport which I had 
before obtaining my US citizenship and have maintained [it] since then. In 
my previous position as a scientist in the [military research laboratory], I was 
granted security clearance and also allowed to hold dual citizenship 
because it was determined that my association with Taiwan is a family 
association only. 
 
Applicant also listed her foreign travel since 2009, including her several trips to Taiwan. 
(GE 1.) 
 
 After Applicant submitted her SF 86, she was contacted by security personnel at 
work and told that she had to relinquish her foreign passport. She surrendered her 
Taiwanese passport to her facility security officer as part of the application process to 
renew her security clearance eligibility. (Tr. 48, 67-69, 72.)  
 
 Applicant described her relationship with her brothers in Taiwan as “just as close 
as any sibling can be.” (Tr. 29.) Applicant tries to visit them every two or three years. (Tr. 
30.) To her knowledge, nothing has changed about her brothers’ finances or their 
employments in Taiwan since she obtained her security clearance. (Tr. 28.) Her brothers 
are both educators and do not conduct business in Taiwan or have any contact with 
Taiwan’s military or government. (Tr. 22, 54.) The elder brother is a 50-year-old professor 
employed by a private university in Taiwan. He teaches only part time because of his 
 
 
6 
health issues. (GE 1; Tr. 50-51.) Applicant indicated on her SF 86 that she has quarterly 
contact with this brother. (GE 1.) As technology has improved, they have changed their 
means of contact from electronic mail to Skype. Of late, Applicant primarily monitors his 
activities via Facebook. During the first nine months of 2016, Applicant contacted this 
brother twice. She texted him to wish him Happy New Year around the lunar new year 
and on his birthday in August 2016. Applicant’s brother likes to travel with his spouse, 
who is a professor in accounting at another private university in Taiwan. Applicant and 
her brother’s conversations usually involve his travel plans. This brother visited Applicant 
in the United States in approximately 2003. (Tr. 51-53.) 
 
 The younger of Applicant’s brothers in Taiwan is 47 years old. He teaches 
mathematics, but primarily works as an administrator at a high school in Taiwan. His 
spouse was educated as an accountant, but she now stays at home to care for their three 
children, who are all under age 12. (Tr. 56.) Applicant indicated on her SF 86 that she 
had quarterly contact with this brother. (GE 1.) Applicant testified to twice yearly contact 
with her brother and more frequent correspondence with his spouse about their children 
via Facebook instant messaging. (Tr. 56-57.) Applicant contacted her sister-in-law most 
recently in May 2016, when she inquired about a birthday gift for her nephew. (Tr. 57.) 
Applicant stays with her younger brother and her family during her visits to Taiwan. (Tr. 
61.) Applicant has not had any contacts with Taiwanese officials apart from routine 
contact at the border when she travels to Taiwan. (Tr. 62.) 
 
Since renewing her acquaintance with her former mentor, Applicant has contacted 
him by email to exchange New Year’s greetings (Tr. 97-98), and she and her spouse had 
dinner with her former mentor when they were last in Taiwan.2 Her former mentor told her 
at that dinner that he was turning 70 and planned to retire from his employment with 
Taiwan’s government. (Tr. 36-39, 58, 94-95.) He asked her whether she was still involved 
in research, and she told him she works for a small company without much opportunity 
for research. (Tr. 74-75.) He knows where she works, but his knowledge of her work is 
limited to published papers. (Tr. 39-40, 75.) Applicant does not have regular contact with 
her former mentor. (Tr. 39.) 
 
Applicant monitors the activities of some of her high school friends and five college 
friends via Facebook, but she contacts them only when she is in Taiwan and has some 
free time. (Tr. 57-58, 61.) She apparently also has contact with members of her father’s 
family when she is in Taiwan (Tr. 90), but the extent of her contact with these foreign 
family members is unclear. 
 
Applicant and her spouse each earn about $140,000 in annual salary from their 
employments. Their home in the United States is worth about $450,000. Applicant has 
about $200,000 in her retirement account from her former federal civilian employment at 
the military laboratory. Her spouse has 401(k) assets, but Applicant does not know the 
                                                 
2 Applicant testified that she and her spouse went to Taiwan one time after March 2015, but she also testified 
that she has been to Taiwan only twice in the last seven years. (Tr. 60.) She disclosed on her SF 86 trips 
to Taiwan in September 2012 and October 2014. (GE 1.) It is unclear whether Applicant traveled to Taiwan 
more recently than October 2014. 
 
 
7 
amount. They have about $300,000 in bank accounts because they are planning on 
remodeling their home. Applicant owns no foreign real estate. To her knowledge, she 
does not have a foreign bank account. (Tr. 63-65.) 
 
Applicant has published one research paper during her present employment. It 
was for a joint service conference for the U.S. military with attendance restricted to 
government employees and government contractors. Her employer discourages 
publication in academia because of the proprietary nature of their research. (Tr. 76.) 
Additionally, her employer’s product is subject to international traffic in arms regulations 
(ITAR). Applicant is aware of the prohibitions related to ITAR-controlled information. (Tr. 
77.) When asked what she would do if her brothers or their families were to be subjected 
to foreign influence or pressure, Applicant responded, “I don’t think they have the need to 
know it . . . I would say that’s not something I can tell them. (Tr. 78.) If her relatives’ lives 
were in danger, she would tell them to call the police. She has not considered the scenario 
as even remotely possible because her work is “so fundamentally science” or subject to 
licensing agreements with the U.S. government. (Tr. 79-82.) When asked what she would 
do if Taiwan’s government attempted to acquire proprietary information from her through 
threatening one of her brothers, Applicant responded, “if that ever happened, he should 
flee the country.” (Tr. 83.) Having sworn to protect the secrecy of information, Applicant 
indicated that there were no circumstances under which she would reveal information. 
When asked what she would do if her brother was facing jail if she failed to comply, 
Applicant stated, “I’m afraid he may have to go to jail.” (Tr. 84.)  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I take administrative notice that the United States no longer diplomatically 
recognizes Taiwan as a sovereign nation. In joint communiques with the People’s 
Republic of China (PRC), the United States recognized the government of the PRC as 
the sole legal government of China; acknowledged the PRC’s claim that there is but one 
China while not recognizing the PRC’s claim over Taiwan; and refrained from taking its 
own stance on Taiwan’s status. Taiwan continues to be of significant security, economic, 
and political interest to the United States. Taiwan has been described by the United States 
as a “beacon of democracy.” The country is a major recipient of U.S. arms sales and is a 
significant trading partner of the United States. U.S. policy seeks to support security, 
political, and economic interests that foster peace and security in the region and human 
rights in Taiwan as cross-strait relations between the PRC and Taiwan continue to 
improve. In May 2008, Taiwan resumed dialogue with the PRC, which has resulted in 
closer economic engagement between the two countries. The United States and Taiwan 
have put more effort into their respective relations with the PRC, while pursuing a parallel, 
positive U.S.-Taiwan relationship. 
 
 Taiwan has an extensive, pervasive history of engaging in economic and 
technological espionage against the United States. In September 2004, a U.S. State 
Department former Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of State was arrested for trying 
to conceal a 2003 meeting with two Taiwanese intelligence agents in Taiwan. In 
December 2005, this former State Department official pleaded guilty to keeping numerous 
 
 
8 
classified documents in his home and concealing an affair with one of the Taiwanese 
intelligence agents, with whom he had shared sensitive information. U.S. Justice 
Department releases show that U.S. and Taiwanese citizens and corporations have been 
involved in the illegal export or attempted export of U.S. restricted dual-use technology to 
Taiwan. In 2008, two persons were convicted for arms export control violations involving 
the attempted illegal export to Taiwan of infrared laser aiming devices, thermal weapons 
sights, and a fighter pilot cueing system. In August 2010, a Taiwan passport holder was 
sentenced to 3.5 years in prison for conspiring with a Taiwan corporation to illegally export 
dual-use commodities (missile components) to Iran. In April 2012, two Taiwanese 
nationals were charged with seeking to export sensitive U.S. military technology to China. 
In December 2012, a U.S. resident citizen was arrested for allegedly shipping military-
grade protective-coating materials to customers in Taiwan and attempting to ship 
microwave amplifiers to China without the requisite export licenses. In January 2013, 
another U.S. citizen was sentenced to 42 months in prison for altering invoices and 
shipping documents to conceal the classification of national security sensitive items so 
they could be shipped without the required export licenses to several foreign countries, 
including Taiwan. In March 2013, a citizen of Taiwan was sentenced to nine months in 
prison for violating the International Emergency Economic Powers Act by attempting to 
export weapons-grade carbon fiber from the United States to Taiwan. In October 2014, a 
former resident of Taiwan pleaded guilty to defrauding the United States in its 
enforcement of regulations targeting proliferators of weapons of mass destruction. The 
defendant, his son, and an associate in Taiwan with ties to three companies based in 
Taiwan, purchased and exported machinery used to fabricate metals. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be 
considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
 
 
9 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present 
evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B—Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is articulated in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The evidence shows that Applicant’s only siblings are resident citizens of their 
native Taiwan. The elder of her two brothers is a professor at a private university while 
the younger brother works primarily as a high school administrator. Applicant has also 
had contact since 2008 or 2009 with a senior research scientist, who is employed by a 
national laboratory in Taiwan and had served as her mentor during her post-doctoral 
research at the laboratory in the mid-1990s. 
 
Applicant questions why her foreign ties are now at issue, given she was granted 
a secret clearance in 2005 for her duties as a research chemist with the U.S. military 
 
 
10 
when the government was fully aware of her dual citizenship and of her foreign family 
members in Taiwan. Even assuming that nothing has changed about her brothers’ 
employments or finances, the government is not estopped from reevaluating a person’s 
security worthiness. See ISCR Case No. 03-04172 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 7, 2005). Her 
case does not fall within the reciprocity provision of DOD 5220.22M, National Industrial 
Security Program Operating Manual ¶ 2-204, which is predicated on a person having an 
existing security clearance based on a current investigation of a scope that meets or 
exceeds that necessary for the security clearance at issue, and the absence of significant 
derogatory information not previously adjudicated. If Applicant’s security clearance was 
transferred to her defense contractor employment after she separated from federal 
service in July 2011, she was still due for a new investigation in 2015. Her renewal of her 
acquaintance with her former mentor at the Taiwanese national laboratory occurred after 
her previous investigation when they met at a conference to present their respective 
research findings for the U.S. government. Review of Applicant’s contacts and 
connections to Taiwanese resident citizens is warranted to determine whether they 
present a heightened risk under AG ¶ 7(a) or create a potential conflict of interest under 
AG ¶ 7(b). AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) provide: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The “heightened risk” under AG ¶ 7(a) denotes a risk greater than the normal risk 
inherent in having a family member living under a foreign government. The nature and 
strength of the family ties or other foreign interests and the country involved (i.e., the 
nature of its government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record) are relevant in assessing whether there is a likelihood of vulnerability to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government; a family member is associated 
with, or dependent on, the foreign government; or the country is known to conduct 
intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of the foreign 
government, the administrative judge must take into account any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
Despite the peaceful, democratic transition of power in recent years and positive relations 
with the United States, Taiwan has an extensive, pervasive history of engaging in 
economic and technological espionage against the United States. 
 
Applicant’s ties to Taiwan were more substantial when she was granted DOD 
security clearance eligibility in December 2004. Since the death of her father in 2009, 
Applicant now travels to Taiwan to see her brothers every two or three years rather than 
 
 
11 
annually, and she stays for only two weeks. On her January 2015 SF 86, she indicated 
that he was in touch with both brothers on a quarterly basis. She testified at her hearing 
in late September 2016 that she contacts her brothers a few times a year. Even so, she 
described her relationship to her brothers as “just as close as any sibling can be.” 
Applicant stays with her younger brother and his family when she is in Taiwan. She is 
interested enough in her younger brother’s children to inquire about their activities and 
appropriate birthday gifts. Applicant had no contact with her former mentor from 1996 to 
2008 or 2009, when they renewed their acquaintance at the conference. Since then, she 
has extended New Year’s greetings by email and had contact with him in Taiwan. 
Applicant and her spouse had dinner with him during their latest trip to Taiwan. AG ¶¶ 
7(a) and 7(b) apply primarily because of Applicant’s close bonds to her brothers and their 
families. Applicant’s former mentor’s longtime employment with Taiwan’s national 
laboratory heightens the risk somewhat, but they have not had regular contact since the 
mid-1990s. 
 
It is relevant that Taiwan is a democratic country that generally respects the human 
rights of its citizens, and it enjoys good foreign relations with the United States, despite 
the lack of diplomatic relations between the two countries with the United States’ 
recognition of the PRC.3 Yet, it is difficult to apply mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(a) in light 
of Taiwan’s targeting of economic and technological information developed in the United 
States. AG ¶ 8(a) provides: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
 
Applicant has a cordial relationship at present with her former mentor, but there is 
nothing in the infrequent and casual nature of their contacts that suggests loyalty or 
obligation to him. AG ¶ 8(b) provides for mitigation where the sense of loyalty or obligation 
is so minimal to pose no conflict of interest: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
                                                 
3 Presumably because of the U.S. government’s one-China policy, the Government submitted facts for 
administrative notice that show the PRC to be one of the most active and persistent perpetrators of 
economic espionage targeting U.S. technology and economic information.  Applicant is seen as unlikely to 
succumb to any attempt at undue influence by the PRC or to aid the PRC, given she was adamant that 
Taiwanese are not Chinese (“I take the offense that Taiwanese are Chinese because they’re not.”). (Tr. 
81.) 
 
 
12 
However, Applicant’s close bonds to her brothers cannot reasonably be characterized as 
minimal. Applicant’s retention of dual citizenship with Taiwan after her U.S. naturalization, 
and her renewal of her Taiwanese passport in April 2011 for another ten years, could be 
viewed as indictors of loyalty or allegiance to her native Taiwan. Yet, her motivation was 
of convenience in that she would not have to obtain the visa required for an extended 
stay on her U.S. passport. She used her U.S. passport in preference to her Taiwanese 
passport during her trip to Taiwan in October 2014 because she planned a short stay that 
did not require a visa. 
 
Applicant has substantial ties to the United States that establish AG ¶ 8(b).She 
has lived in the United States for 30 years, for the past 17 years in a home that she owns 
with her spouse, who is a U.S. native citizen. She has held U.S. citizenship since 2000. 
As for her 1.5 years of post-doctoral research in Taiwan, she went to Taiwan because her 
mother was ill. After her mother died, Applicant and her spouse were both offered 
positions by her former mentor at the Taiwanese national laboratory, but they elected to 
return to the United States. Applicant then spent about 15 years working as a scientist for 
a U.S. military laboratory, initially with a post-doctoral fellowship, then as a subcontractor, 
and from December 2003 to July 2011 as a federal civilian. She held a DOD secret 
clearance for her duties. There is no evidence that she committed any security violations 
or infractions. Applicant and her spouse have considerable financial assets in the United 
States. Their joint employment income is approximately $280,000 annually, they have 
about $300,000 in bank deposits in the United States, and their home is worth $450,000. 
They have retirement and 401(k) assets in the United States. Applicant receives no 
benefits from Taiwan. She has not voted in Taiwan since her U.S. naturalization. She has 
no financial assets in Taiwan. She surrendered possession of her Taiwanese passport to 
her facility security officer in 2015 when notified of the DOD requirement to do so. Her 
ties to the United States increase the likelihood of her resolving any conflict in favor of 
U.S. interests. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation,” partially applies. Applicant’s contacts with her former mentor have been 
infrequent. Since Applicant returned to the United States from Taiwan in 1996, their in-
person contact has been limited to the government conference in 2008 or 2009 and the 
dinner during Applicant’s latest trip to Taiwan. To the extent that her former mentor’s 
employment with the Taiwanese national laboratory presents a risk, it is noted that 
Applicant voluntarily informed the Government about her contact with this research 
scientist and about her post-doctoral fellowship in the mid-1990s. Her candor allows me 
to accept her account of their present relationship as casual and polite born of their past 
work together. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of her conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
 
 
13 
2(a).4 Furthermore, in weighing these whole-person factors in a foreign influence case, 
the Appeal Board has held that: 
 
Evidence of good character and personal integrity is relevant and material 
under the whole person concept. However, a finding that an applicant 
possesses good character and integrity does not preclude the government 
from considering whether the applicant's facts and circumstances still pose 
a security risk. Stated otherwise, the government need not prove that an 
applicant is a bad person before it can deny or revoke access to classified 
information. Even good people can pose a security risk because of facts 
and circumstances not under their control. See ISCR Case No. 01-26893 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002). 
 
Applicant understandably has close bonds of affection to her only siblings. When 
asked what she would do if a family member in Taiwan was threatened or pressured in 
an attempt to gain sensitive or classified information from her, she responded that they 
would not have a need to know the information and that she could not provide it. She 
sees the issue as “very black and white” in that she cannot reveal information that she 
has sworn not to tell. In the event that her family members’ lives were in danger, she 
would tell them to call the police, although she could not conceive of it happening. If faced 
with the scenario of her brother being jailed unless she cooperated, Applicant indicated 
that her brother would have to go to jail because she would not provide the information 
under any circumstances. While acknowledging that people act in unpredictable ways 
when faced with choices that could be important to a family member,5 Applicant has been 
trusted with U.S. classified information in the past, and she understands the obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information. After considering all the facts and 
circumstances, I find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue security clearance eligibility for Applicant. 
  
                                                 
4 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
5 As stated by the DOHA Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 08-10025 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009), “Application 
of the guidelines is not a comment on an applicant’s patriotism but merely an acknowledgment that people 
may act in unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved-one, such as a 
family member.” 
 
 
14 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the amended 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
