 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04248 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 12, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to timely file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax 
years 2012 and 2013, and is alleged to be delinquent on a medical debt in the amount 
of $538. Applicant has not filed his delinquent tax returns or resolved his delinquent 
account. Concerns about his judgment and trustworthiness remain unmitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 24, 2014, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP.) On December 18, 2015, the Department of 
Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
On February 1, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on March 2, 2016. The Government’s 
submission included Government Items 1 through 6. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on March 7, 2016. He was 
afforded a 30-day opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not submit any documentation within the 
time period of 30 days after receipt of the copy of the file of relevant material, which 
concluded on April 6, 2016. The case was assigned to me on January 26, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He has been employed by his current employer, a 
defense contractor, since October 2013. He is divorced and identified no children on his 
e-QIP. (Item 3.) 
 
 As alleged in the SOR, Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2012 and 2013 in a timely manner, and was delinquent on one 
medical debt. Applicant admitted both of the SOR allegations. His delinquent debt is 
identified in the credit report entered into evidence. (Answer; Item 6.) After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant disclosed on his 2014 e-QIP that he failed to file his Federal and state 
income tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2013. He explained he “didn’t have the time 
to file” in 2012 and “procrastinated” in 2013. He claimed he would file his taxes the 
following week. However, in his Answer, he admitted that he still had not filed his 
Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2013, due to extensive 
hours at work. He claimed to have submitted them to an accountant, but did not provide 
documentation to support his claim. (Item 3; Answer.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a medical creditor in the amount of $538, as alleged in 
SOR subparagraph 1.b. He indicated in his Answer that he paid this debt in 2011, but 
failed to present documentation to substantiate his claim. (Item 6; Answer.)  
 
 Applicant provided no evidence establishing his current income or household 
budget. He offered no evidence of financial counseling or of other indicators of financial 
responsibility. The record lacks any evidence concerning the quality of Applicant’s 
professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record 
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. I 
was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he 
elected to have his case decided without a hearing.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
 
3 
 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by the credit 
reports in evidence, which substantiate all of the allegations. He remains indebted to the 
creditor listed in subparagraph 1,b. He has been unable or unwilling to address this 
delinquency. Moreover, Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns 
for tax years 2012 and 2013, as required by law. The evidence raises security concerns 
under the above disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. Both SOR allegations remain 
unresolved. He has not demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant failed to establish that his delinquency and failure to file his Federal 
and state tax returns were caused by events that were beyond his control. Further, he 
failed to establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(b) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling. There are no clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. He failed 
to demonstrate reasonable or responsible actions with respect to his annual tax filing 
obligations. As a general rule, "[f]ailure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has 
a problem with complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. 
Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
information.”1 Further, Applicant’s history of not fulfilling his legal obligation to file 
income tax returns demonstrates a lack of the judgment and reliability required for 
access to classified information.2 The Appeal Board has noted: "A security clearance 
represents an obligation to the Federal Government for the protection of national 
secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other obligations to the Government has a direct 
bearing on an Applicant's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information as reflected in the Guideline F concerns that were alleged."3 Mitigation 
under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20 (d) was not established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of any dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
not provided evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) has not been established. 
 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016.) 
2 ISCR Case No. 98-0608 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2000). 
3 ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015). 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
financial problems remain largely unresolved. While he was given the opportunity to 
document the status of his debt and income tax returns, he failed to produce evidence 
of any responsible action. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
