 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07699 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, financial 
considerations and E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 26, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received the FORM on July 5, 
 
2 
 
 
2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. Therefore, the Government’s evidence identified as Items 
1 through 9 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me 
on May 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 
1.l, 1.n, 1.o, and 2.a through 2.d, with explanations. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.j and 
1.m. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 2012 and 
bachelor’s degree in 2014. He married in 2004 and divorced in 2012. He has a four-
year-old child from the marriage. He has been in a cohabitant relationship since 2010. 
Applicant was unemployed from approximately September 1999 until he enlisted in the 
military in 2003. He was honorably discharged in 2007. After his discharge he was 
unemployed for five months. He then worked for a government contractor until 2010 and 
then in private industry until 2014. He began his current employment with a government 
contractor in August 2014.1 
 
 Credit reports from October 2007, March 2015 and April 2016 substantiate the 
debts alleged. Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in July 2015 and 
January 2008. He completed security clearance applications (SCA) in October 2007 
and July 2015. Applicant did not disclose in his 2007 or 2015 SCA any financial 
delinquencies, repossessions, debts turned over to collection, or debts over 120 days 
past due.2  
 
 Applicant denied he owed the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a ($456) entered against him 
in May 2013. In his answer, he stated he did not recognize the debt. He did not provide 
evidence of actions he may have taken to dispute or resolve the debt. It is unresolved.3  
 
 In his answer, Applicant admitted he owed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,265) and 
said he was paying it off. He did not provide evidence to support his statement.4  
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($236), 1.d ($99), 1.e ($406), 1.f ($298) and 1.g ($200) 
are accounts held by the same collection agency. Applicant admitted owing the debts, 
but stated that they should have been taken care of by “the VA, or my college medical 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9. 
 
3 Item 1. 
 
4 Item 1. 
 
3 
 
 
insurance.” Applicant provided no information for what actions he has taken to resolve 
the debts or forward them to the appropriate agency for payment or resolution. They are 
unresolved.5  
 
Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($1,612) and indicated to the 
government investigator that it was a medical debt from 2009 when he was sick and did 
not have insurance. He told the investigator that he did not disclose it on his SCA 
because he did not have the account number. He did not provide evidence of actions to 
resolve the debt.6 
 
Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR that he paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i 
($51). He did not provide proof the debt is paid.7  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j is for a vehicle loan that was charged off. Applicant stated 
the vehicle was sold, and he received a letter from the creditor six years ago that he did 
not owe a deficiency balance. He did not provide proof to substantiate his statement. 
During Applicant’s interview with a government investigator in July 2015, he stated that 
the vehicle was repossessed in 2010 due to nonpayment. He did not disclose it on his 
security clearance application because he did not have the account number.8  
 
Applicant stated that he is paying the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k ($976) and 1.l 
($560), but did not provide documentary proof to substantiate his statement. During his 
background interview he acknowledged he owed the debt, but thought he owed $300. 
The amount was for a returned check. He did not disclose it on his SCA because he did 
not have the account number.9  
 
Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($552) owed to a cell phone company. 
He stated: “I have no clue of debt.” During his July 2015 background interview, he was 
confronted with this debt and stated he did not have an account with the creditor and it 
was paid in full. He did not provide proof the debt is paid or actions he has taken to 
resolve or dispute the debt.10  
 
Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.n ($480) and 1.o ($373) to a cable 
provider. He stated he was in the process of returning equipment to the creditor. He did 
not provide proof the debts are resolved. He acknowledged to the government 
                                                          
5 Item 1. 
 
6 Items 1, 5. 
 
7 Items 1. 
 
8 Items 1, 5. 
 
9 Items 1, 5. 
 
10 Items 1, 5. 
 
4 
 
 
investigator that he owed the debt, but did not disclose it on his SCA because he did not 
have the account number.11  
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR ¶ 2. He stated for each 
allegation: I admit, was not sure on how to answer.”12  
 
 In Applicant’s 2007 SCA he did not disclose he had any delinquent or past due 
debts. He was interviewed by a government investigator in January 2008 and was 
confronted with at least eight accounts that were past due or in collection. He admitted 
he could not afford to pay some accounts at the time, so he did not pay them. He was 
contacted by some creditors, but did not reply to them. Others debts he disputed and 
was waiting for the outcome, and if he was responsible he would pay. He told the 
investigator at the time that he was immature and did not realize delinquent debts would 
have such an effect on his life at the time. His intention at the time was to pay his 
delinquent debts and establish good credit.13 
  
 On Applicant’s February 2015 SCA, he failed to disclose he had a vehicle 
repossessed in the past, a judgment entered against him, debts turned over to 
collection or that he was currently more than 120 days past due on any account.14 
 
When interviewed in July 2015, Applicant was aware he had delinquent debts 
that he was not making payments on, he was aware his vehicle was repossessed in 
2010, he admitted owing debts, but for some he disputed the amount owed. He was 
aware he owed creditors for medical debts he did not pay because he did not have 
insurance at the time and that he owed a debt for dental services. His explanation for 
failing to disclose any of his past due debts was that he did not have the account 
numbers.15  
 
In 2008 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator about collection 
accounts and delinquent debts, and he acknowledged understanding the importance of 
paying his debts. At that point, he was on notice that financial matters of this nature 
were a security concern and were required to be disclosed. He failed to do so on his 
2015 SCA. I find his failure to disclose any financial problems were deliberate.16 
 
                                                          
11 Items 1, 5. 
 
12 Item 1. 
 
13 Items 3, 4, 7. Applicant’s past failure to disclosure financial issues in his 2007 SCA and information 
from his 2008 background interview is not used for disqualifying purposes, but will be considered when 
analyzing Applicant’s credibility, in the application of mitigating conditions, and the whole-person analysis.  
 
14 Item 3. 
 
15 Items 1, 5. 
 
16 Item 4 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.17 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has 15 delinquent debts totaling approximately $17,570. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
                                                          
17 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence that he is paying or resolving his delinquent 
debts. He indicated he has paid or resolved some debts, but did not provide supporting 
documents. He disputed some debts, but provided no evidence of actions he has taken 
to resolve them. I cannot find his behavior is unlikely to recur. His conduct is recent and 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply 
 
Applicant has been employed steadily since 2010. He did not provide any 
evidence that his debts were beyond his control or that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
There is no evidence Applicant participated in financial counseling. He did not 
provide any documents to show that he is paying or has resolved his delinquent debts. 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude his financial problems are under control or 
being resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d) do not apply. Applicant disputes some 
debts, but failed to provide evidence of actions he may have taken to substantiate the 
basis of claim. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
8 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Based on information provided during his background interview, I find that 
Applicant was aware he had delinquent debts when he completed his 2015 SCA, and 
he deliberately failed to disclose them. I do not have sufficient evidence that Applicant 
was aware that one of the debts was a judgment. Applicant admitted he owed debts that 
were in collection. There is sufficient evidence that he was aware he had a vehicle 
repossessed, and he had debts over 120 days past due. His explanation for failing to 
disclose delinquent debts was because he did not have account numbers. I did not find 
his explanations for failing to disclose the delinquent debts credible. I find the above 
disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that he made a good-faith effort to correct the 
omissions before he was confronted with the facts. I find AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. I 
find Applicant’s omissions are serious and cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. There is insufficient evidence to raise 
AG ¶ 17(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He served in the military and has been steadily 
employed since 2010 and with his current employer since 2014. He has a long history of 
financial difficulties. He failed to provide sufficient evidence that he is paying or 
resolving any of his delinquent debts. He was aware he had financial problems and 
deliberately failed to disclose them on his 2015 SCA. Applicant failed to provide 
documentary evidence to substantiate any of his claims. Applicant does not have a 
reliable financial track record. He has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The 
record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations, and 
Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
