 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02123 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to submit evidence to show that she has a track record of 
financial responsibility, that she does not have a financial problem, or that her financial 
problem is being resolved or is under control. She failed to mitigate the Guideline F 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility to hold a position of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire (Application) requesting eligibility 
for a position of trust (Automatic Data Processing (ADP) position) on December 11, 
2012. On September 17, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F 
(financial considerations).  
 
DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended 
 
2 
 
 
(Regulation);1 and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. The AG are 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in 
Appendix 8 of the Regulation. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 22, 2015, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record. A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM), adducing the evidence supporting the trustworthiness concerns, was provided 
to her by transmittal letter, dated December 9, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on 
January 8, 2016. She was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and 
to provide material in explanation, extenuation, and mitigation. She failed to respond to 
the FORM and submitted no objections or any additional information. The case was 
assigned to me on May 18, 2017.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included his 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator from 
January 29, 2013. Applicant was informed she could object to the summary of her 
interview and it would not be admitted, or that she could make corrections, additions, 
deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. Applicant was informed that 
her failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any objections could be construed as a 
waiver, and the evidence would be considered by me. Applicant failed to respond to the 
FORM, submitted no documents, and raised no objections. I admitted the document 
and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.d, and 1.f through 1.t. She denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.e. Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, 
including her answers to the SOR, her January 29, 2013 statement, and her Application, 
I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She graduated from 
high school in 1991 and attended college between 2006 and 2007, and between 2010 
and 2012, but did not earn a degree. She has never been married, but has a 19-year-
old son.  
 
                                            
1 On April 3, 2017, DOD Manual 5200.02, Procedures for the DoD Personnel Security Program 
(PSP), (Manual) was published. It cancelled and incorporated the Regulation, but it did not include the 
provisions for ADP cases. ADP cases continue to be adjudicated in accordance with the Deputy Under 
Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, dated 
November 19, 2004. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s employment history shows that she was employed from July 2000 to 
January 2005. She was unemployed between January 2005 and September 2005; 
employed from September 2005 to June 2006; unemployed between June 2006 and 
November 2011; employed from November 2006 to March 2007; unemployed between 
March 2007 and May 2007; employed from May 2007 to February 2008; unemployed 
between February and March 2008; employed between March 2008 and November 
2009; unemployed between December 2009 and July 2011; and employed between 
July and December 2011. Her current employer, a federal contractor, hired Applicant in 
December 2011. There is no information about her employment activities after she 
submitted the application for a position of trust in December 2012. This is her first 
application for a position of trust. 
 
In her 2012 Application (Section 26 – Financial Record), Applicant disclosed that 
she had student loans in deferment. She disclosed she had financial problems, which 
included numerous delinquent medical debts for services she incurred between 2006 
and 2012. She was unemployed or underemployed and did not have medical insurance 
when the services were rendered. Applicant stated her goal was to resolve her financial 
problems once she found full-time employment and had a steady income. In the 
meantime, she was seeking help to pay her delinquent accounts. 
 
During her January 2013 interview with a background investigator, Applicant told 
him that she had kidney problems in 2006-2007 and incurred medical expenses. In 
2009, she was involved in a car accident and required medical treatment. In 2010, 
Applicant had one kidney removed. In December 2011, she developed a kidney stone 
and required surgery for its removal. She missed two weeks of work, and her employer 
told her not to return to work. Applicant’s work history has numerous periods of 
unemployment or underemployment. During those periods, Applicant supported herself 
with her savings, child support, and sometimes unemployment benefits. 
 
Applicant discussed with the investigator that she had 19 delinquent medical 
accounts. She explained that she did not have medical insurance when she received 
the medical services and her income was insufficient to pay for her living expenses, 
necessities, and her old delinquent debts. She made no efforts to pay, settle, or resolve 
the medical debts because she did not have stable employment or income. Most of her 
employment in recent years was part time or on temporary jobs.  
 
Applicant told the investigator that she recently contacted the hospital where she 
received most of her medical treatment and promised the creditor to start a payment 
plan as soon as she had a full-time job. Applicant believes that she is honest and 
trustworthy. She averred that she would never do anything wrong just because of her 
credit. She believes her financial problems were due to circumstances beyond her 
control. She promised to make efforts to resolve all of her delinquent debts. As of her 
interview, she had not received any financial counseling.  
 
The background investigation addressed her financial problems and revealed the 
20 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling over $24,000. Eighteen of the debts 
 
4 
 
 
alleged in the SOR are Applicant’s delinquent medical accounts. Two accounts, totaling 
$1,399, are for cable T.V. and phone services. All of the alleged accounts are 
established by the FORM’s evidence.  
 
In her SOR answer, Applicant claimed she settled and paid the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e, and that she was working on a payment plan with the creditor of the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. She did not submit any documentary evidence to support her 
claims. 
 
Applicant provided no information about her current earnings and financial 
position. She provided little information about her monthly income, monthly expenses, 
and whether her current income is sufficient to pay her current day-to-day living 
expenses and debts. There is no information to indicate whether she participated in 
financial counseling or whether she follows a budget. She presented no documentary 
evidence of any payments made, efforts to contact creditors, establish payment plans, 
or efforts to otherwise resolve her financial problems. 
 
Policies 
 
The DOD considers ADP positions to be “sensitive positions.” For a person to be 
eligible for sensitive duties, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness must be 
such that assigning the person to a sensitive position is clearly consistent with the 
national security interests of the United States. Manual ¶ 7.1a(2); AG ¶ 2.b. Applicants 
for ADP positions are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any 
final unfavorable access determination is made. (Under Secretary of Defense’s 
Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, dated 
November 19, 2004) 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
interest of national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive 
information. The Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States to grant 
or continue his or her access to sensitive information.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government. “[Access to sensitive information] determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” AG ¶ 2(b). Eligibility for a public trust position 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing access to sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the trustworthiness concern is that failure or inability to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is well documented in the file record. 
She acquired the delinquent SOR accounts between 2006 and 2012. She presented no 
documentary evidence of any payments made, efforts to contact creditors, establish 
payment plans, or efforts to otherwise resolve her financial problems. Two of the 
financial considerations disqualifying conditions apply: AG ¶ 19(a): inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts, and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant 
has a long history of financial problems that are recent and ongoing. I carefully 
considered Applicant’s periods of unemployment, underemployment, and her health 
problems. Obviously, her medical services were a necessity and not frivolous spending. 
Applicant’s periods of unemployment, underemployment, and her health problems could 
be considered circumstances beyond her control that may have contributed or 
aggravated her financial problems. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient 
to show she acted responsibly under the circumstances to warrant applicability of AG ¶ 
20(b). She presented no documentary evidence of any payments made, efforts to 
contact creditors, establish payment plans, or of efforts to otherwise resolve her 
financial problems. 
 
 Applicant provided little information about her current earnings and financial 
position. She did not provide any information about her monthly income and expenses, 
and whether her current income is sufficient to pay her current day-to-day living 
expenses and debts. There is no information to show that she participated in financial 
counseling or that she follows a budget. The available information is insufficient to 
establish clear indications that she does not have a current financial problem, or that her 
financial problem is being resolved, or is under control. Applicant failed to establish that 
she has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant started working for a federal contractor in December 2011, and this is 
her first trustworthiness application. She failed to submit evidence to show that she has 
a track record of financial responsibility, that she does not have a financial problem, or 
that her financial problem is being resolved or is under control. She failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F trustworthiness concerns. 
 
 Applicant was made aware of the Government’s financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns when he completed her 2012 Application, during her 2013 
interview, when she received the SOR, and when she was provided the FORM. She 
was allowed a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM to produce evidence in 
extenuation and mitigation. She failed to provide any documentary evidence to show 
 
7 
 
 
she has been in contact with her creditors, or that she attempted to settle or pay her 
delinquent debts since she acquired them.  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of eligibility for such position. 
Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of 
eligibility for a position of trust to Applicant is not warranted at this time. The financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.t:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not in 
the interest of national security to grant eligibility for a position of trust to Applicant. 
Eligibility for a position of trust is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
