 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04939 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
From 2003 to 2011, Applicant occasionally used marijuana.  His marijuana use is 
not recent, and drug involvement security concerns are mitigated. Applicant lied about 
the extent of his marijuana use: on his October 12, 2010 Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA); on his November 8, 
2010 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI); and on 
his August 2013 responses to interrogatories for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). (Items 5, 6, 8) Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 12, 2010, Applicant completed and signed his SCA. (Item 5) On April 
24, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 
2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the drug involvement and personal 
conduct guidelines. (Item 1) 
 
Applicant provided an undated response to the SOR, and he requested a 
decision without a hearing. (Item 4) On June 22, 2016, Department Counsel completed 
the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On June 27, 2016, Applicant received the FORM. 
Applicant did not provide a response to the FORM. On April 25, 2017, the case was 
assigned to me. The case file consists of nine Government exhibits. (Items 1-9) 
Applicant did not object to any of the exhibits. 
 
Findings of Fact1  
 
Applicant admitted the conduct alleged in the SOR, and he provided some 
extenuating and mitigating information. (Item 4) His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who works as a 
designer.2 In 2004, he graduated from high school. He has worked for the same 
employer since 2007. He has no prior military service. He has never married, and he 
has one five-year-old child. (Item 8)  
 
Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct  
 
 Applicant was enrolled in an alcohol and drug treatment program (ADTP) several 
times from 2009 to 2012. On January 10, 2007, Applicant completed a questionnaire as 
part of his entry into an ADTP. (Item 9) The ADTP was in response to an alcohol-related 
arrest after he drove into the ditch. (Item 9) He indicated he first used marijuana when 
he was 18 years old, and he used marijuana once a month for the previous year. (Item 
9 at 1) On July 9, 2009, Applicant completed a questionnaire as part of an ADTP, and 
he said his most recent marijuana use was in July 2009. (Item 9 at 18) On February 3, 
2010, Applicant disclosed he first used marijuana when he was 16 years old, and he 
used marijuana about once a month for a year. His last use was in 2005. (Item 9 at 23) 
On January 10, 2012, Applicant disclosed during an ADTP that he used marijuana twice 
a week for the previous two months; he used marijuana twice between October 26, 
2011 and December 25, 2011; and his most recent marijuana use was on December 
25, 2011. (Item 9 at 34, 41)   
 
                                            
1 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or 
locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific 
information. 
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source for the facts in this paragraph is Applicant’s October 12, 
2010 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 
5)   
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
When Applicant completed his October 12, 2010 SCA, he disclosed that he used 
marijuana four or five times from January 2003 to June 2004, and he said “I quit to get 
my life on track.” (Item 4)  
 
In Applicant’s November 8, 2010 OPM PSI, Applicant reaffirmed his answers on 
his October 12, 2010 SCA and said he tried marijuana while in high school and has not 
had any marijuana since graduating from high school in June 2004. (Item 6) On August 
1, 2013, he affirmed the accuracy of his OPM PSI, and he disclosed he received a fine 
for possession of drug paraphernalia in 2004. (Item 6) On August 13, 2013, Applicant 
responded to DOHA interrogatories and said he most recently used marijuana in June 
2004, he rarely used marijuana; and he has no intention of using marijuana in the 
future. (Item 8) However, he indicated in his response to DOHA interrogatories that he 
associates with friends who use illegal substances. (Item 8) 
 
The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. . . . If you do not file any objections or submit 
any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for 
a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 10) 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Adverse 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Nothing in this decision 
should be construed to suggest that I based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the 
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse;”3 and “illegal drug 
possession.” From 2003 to 2011, Applicant occasionally possessed and used 
marijuana.4 AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply. 
                                            
3 AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
4 AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
                                                                                                                                            
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substances. See Drug Enforcement Administration 
listing at http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/21cfr/cfr/1308/1308 11.htm. See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 
U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any 
evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.”5  
 
There is no evidence of Applicant’s marijuana use after December 25, 2011. AG 
¶ 26(a) applies to his marijuana-related conduct.6   
 
 AG ¶¶ 26(b), 26(c), and 26(d) are not fully applicable. Applicant did not abuse 
drugs after being issued a prescription that is lawful under federal law. Marijuana was 
never lawfully prescribed for him under federal law. He received drug and alcohol 
counseling; however, he continues to associate with marijuana users. 
                                            
5 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated: 
  
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, affirmed the 
administrative judge’s decision to revoke an applicant’s security clearance after considering the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating:  
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
6 In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In sum, Applicant used marijuana from 2003 to 2011. Each time he possessed 
and used marijuana he violated federal criminal law; however, there is no evidence he 
has used marijuana in the previous five years. Drug involvement concerns are mitigated 
because his illegal marijuana use is not recent.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct 
investigations, . . . determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . ;”7 and 
“(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to 
an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official 
government representative.” Applicant admitted that he made false statements about 
the extent of his marijuana use: on his October 12, 2010 SCA; on his November 8, 2010 
OPM PSI; and on his August 2013 responses to DOHA interrogatories. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 
16(b) are established. 
 
                                            
7 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the  
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 17 provides five conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant deliberately and improperly failed to fully disclose his marijuana use 
three times in a security context from October 12, 2010 to August 2013. His 
falsifications by intentionally failing to disclose the full scope of his marijuana use were 
serious, improper, and raised a security concern. No mitigating conditions apply. 
Guideline E concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines H and 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
E are incorporated into my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under Guidelines H and E, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who has worked as 
a designer for the same employer since 2007. There is no evidence of character 
statements or performance evaluations. There is no evidence that he tested positive for 
use of illegal drugs.  There is no evidence of marijuana use after December 25, 2011. 
He received alcohol and drug treatment.   
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial. Each 
time he possessed and used marijuana, he violated federal criminal law. His decision to 
use marijuana was knowledgeable, voluntary, and intentional. He was sufficiently 
mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. Illegal drug use shows a lack of judgment 
and impulse control, and his use of marijuana is relevant to analysis of security 
concerns. Applicant admitted that he made false statements about the extent of his 
marijuana use: on his October 12, 2010 SCA; on his November 8, 2010 OPM PSI; and 
on his August 2013 responses to DOHA interrogatories. His falsifications in a security 
context raise a serious security concern. The protection of national security relies on 
applicants to self-report conduct that jeopardizes security, even when that disclosure 
might damage the applicant’s career. Applicant cannot be trusted to disclose potentially 
derogatory information, and his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information is not established. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant mitigated drug 
involvement security concerns; however, he has not fully mitigated the security 
concerns pertaining to personal conduct at this time.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
