 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07229 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 29, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on July 1, 2016. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
 
2 
 
 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 2 through 9. Applicant responded to the FORM and 
provided documents that are marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through J. There 
were no objections by either side and all evidence was admitted. The case was 
assigned to me on May 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant did not admit or deny each allegation, but provided a narrative of his 
actions to resolve each debt. Therefore, I will consider his comments as admissions to 
all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He served in the military from 1983 to 2003 and retired. 
He attended a technical college, but did not earn a diploma or degree. He married in 
2002 and has an eight-year-old child from the marriage. He has a 19-year-old child and 
two adult stepchildren.1  
 
Applicant disclosed on his March 2015 security clearance application (SCA) that 
he had been employed by a federal contractor since May 2004. He mentioned in his 
answer that the federal contractor he worked for went out of business in December 
2013, and his finances went in a “downward tailspin.”2 Applicant stated that in 2014 he 
enrolled in a financial program (FP) to help him settle his delinquent debts. He stated 
that since enrolling he made progress in resolving his delinquent debts. The debts 
alleged in the SOR are supported by a March 2015 credit report.3  
 
The collection account in SOR ¶ 1.a ($5,178) is the same as the judgment 
alleged in ¶ 1.e. A letter from FP shows that these debts are part of Applicant’s payment 
plan, but are not yet settled. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($7,723) is also part of the plan. FP’s 
letter indicates that payments are being applied to a settlement on this debt.4 
 
Applicant stated that the collection debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($4,520) is settled. He 
provided an email from FP that this debt is settled. The account numbers do not reflect 
the same debt that is alleged in the SOR that is supported by the March 2015 credit 
report. In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he provided a document that shows the 
same creditor obtained a judgment that was entered against him in May 2015. There 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Items 2, 4; AE B. 
 
4 Items 2, 4; AE A. I was not able to confirm the account numbers, but note Applicant had no other debts 
on his credit report to the same creditor. 
 
 
3 
 
 
are no other debts from this creditor that are listed in his credit reports. I conclude it is 
highly likely the same debt. The judgment is paid.5 
 
Applicant indicated that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($6,172) was settled. He provided 
an email from FP in this regard, with a partial account number that matches the last 
numbers of the account. This account is settled.6 
 
Applicant provided statements from FP that show he is making payments on 
other debts that were not alleged. Applicant provided a letter from his credit union to 
show he has made payments to FP since March 2014. Applicant provided an Internal 
Revenue Service Form 1099-C, cancellation of debt for tax year 2014, for a debt that 
was not alleged in the SOR.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 4; AE H, I. 
   
6 Items 2, 4. 
 
7 Item 2; AE F, G, and J. I have not considered any delinquent debts or accounts that were not alleged for 
disqualifying purposes, but will consider them when analyzing Applicant’s credibility, in applying mitigating 
conditions, and in my whole-person analysis.  
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.8 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts and judgments entered against him. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant stated that he has settled or resolved some SOR debts, and other 
debts are part of his ongoing payment plan and will be paid in the future. Applicant did 
not provide any information about his current finances and obligations. He is still paying 
his debts. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to his employer going out of business 
in December 2013. This was a condition beyond his control. For the full application of 
AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
engaged FP in 2014 to help him settle and resolve his debts, which shows he did not 
ignore his financial responsibilities and began to address his delinquent debts. He has 
made consistent payments for more than three years and has slowly been resolving his 
financial delinquencies. I find he acted responsibly and AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
It is unclear if FP provided financial counseling, but his actions in engaging the 
company shows he attempted to address his financial problems. He did not provide a 
current financial statement or a list of his other financial obligations. He provided 
evidence that he is paying other delinquent debts not alleged. I find Applicant has an 
 
6 
 
 
ongoing payment plan and there are clear indications his financial problems are being 
resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
 
Applicant resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to this debt. 
Through an ongoing payment plan, he is resolving his other delinquent debts. Paying a 
debt after a judgment has been entered does not constitute a good-faith effort to resolve 
one’s debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply to the other debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 59 years old. He retired from the military. Applicant experienced 
financial difficulties after his employer went out of business in 2013. Shortly thereafter, 
he began working with a debt resolution company and arranged to settle and pay his 
delinquent debts. He has been making consistent payments for more than three years. 
Applicant paid debts that were not alleged in the SOR. A security clearance adjudication 
is not a debt collection procedure. It is a procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 
21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish resolution of 
every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve the 
financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. There is no 
requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, 
nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). There is also no requirement that 
 
7 
 
 
an applicant pay every debt listed in the SOR, only that he remove concerns about his 
reliability and trustworthiness raised by those debts. See ISCR Case No. 14-00504 at 3 
(App. Bd. August 4, 2014). Applicant has taken significant action to resolve his debts. 
 
I considered Applicant’s personal circumstances. The record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
