 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01837 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 16, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 19, 2016, scheduling the hearing for January 24, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary 
evidence. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He 
did not submit any additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
February 2, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old prospective employee of a defense contractor. He will 
be hired if he obtains a security clearance. He served on active duty in the U.S. military 
from 2006 until he received a general under honorable conditions discharge in 2009. He 
has an associate’s degree, which was awarded in 2008. He has never married, and he 
has no children. His fiancée has three children.1 
 
 Applicant was terminated from a job in 2005 after his cash drawer turned up 
short. Applicant admitted the termination, but he denied the implication that he took 
money.2 
 
Applicant had disciplinary problems in the military. He was frequently late for 
work. He received nonjudicial punishment (NJP) for violating Article 86 of the Uniform 
Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) for failure to report to his appointed place of duty. In 
2009, he pleaded guilty at a special court-martial to wrongful use of cocaine, a 
controlled substance. He was sentenced to a reduction to paygrade E-1, forfeiture of 
pay, and confinement for six months.3 
 
Applicant’s employment history after his military discharge includes multiple 
terminations and reprimands. In 2011, he fell asleep in a company vehicle at a fast food 
restaurant. He was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI). Applicant 
stated that he was drinking the night before, but he slept for several hours, and he did 
not realize that he still had alcohol in his system. His blood alcohol concentration (BAC) 
was well below the legal limit. The charge was dismissed, but he was terminated for 
driving the vehicle with alcohol in his system.4 
 
Applicant was “written up” (reprimanded) or terminated from six jobs between 
2010 and March 2013 for being late or failing to report to work. He was terminated from 
three of the jobs. Applicant has a legitimate explanation for why the 2011 termination 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was not his fault. He admitted being late on multiple occasions at 
the other jobs. Many of the jobs were temporary positions, and his attitude towards the 
jobs was not great. He reported all his adverse employment history on his April 2013 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), and he was open and candid 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26-27, 32, 50, 60; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 20-21, 38-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
4 Tr. at 22-24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
about his issues at his hearing. He stated that he has learned from the experience, and 
his employment record has been much better since 2013.5 
 
In 2014, Applicant was driving home after a long day at work in which he 
essentially worked a double shift. He started to fall asleep and was weaving. He was 
stopped by the police and charged with DWI. Applicant stated that he did not have 
anything to drink, and he blew completely clean on the breathalyzer. The case is still 
pending, but he is convinced it will eventually be dismissed.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 18-20, 33-35, 40-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 53-58. This incident was not alleged in the SOR and will not be used for disqualification purposes. 
It may be considered in the application of mitigating conditions and in the whole-person analysis. 
 
4 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information;  
 
 
5 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources.  
Applicant’s behavior while in the military and his employment-related conduct 
reflect questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) are applicable.  
Applicant was terminated from jobs in 2005 and 2011, but I am not convinced the 
terminations resulted from conduct that would raise a security concern. SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 
1.j are concluded for Applicant. 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 Applicant was open and candid about his issues at his hearing. I believe he is 
sincere that he wants to be a better employee. However, the sheer multitude of his 
issues indicate that he still has work to do. He may get there, but I am not convinced 
now that Applicant has the reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment required of a 
clearance holder. None of the mitigating conditions, individually or collectively, are 
sufficient to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.i:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
