 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01505 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on March 20, 2014. On 
September 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006. The guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they 
replaced the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
  
Applicant answered the SOR on October 19, 2015, and requested a decision on 
the written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on May 18, 2016. On the same day, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
 
 2
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on May 24, 2016, and did not respond. The case was assigned to me 
on May 9, 2017.  
 
The FORM included Item 3, a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) 
conducted on May 12, 2014. The PSI was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ 
E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the 
accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, additions, deletions or updates; or 
object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not authenticated. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. I conclude that he waived any objections to the PSI 
summary. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are 
expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. 
ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant did not expressly admit or deny any of the 
alleged debts. Instead, he submitted handwritten comments next to each allegation. I 
have treated his responses as denials.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old painter employed by a defense contractor since March 
2014. He worked for private-sector contractors from January 2004 to December 2013 and 
was unemployed from January 2014 until he began his current job. He also was 
unemployed from November 2012 to April 2013. He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant married in May 1997 and divorced in June 2006. He married his current 
spouse in March 2007. He has two children from his first marriage, ages 17 and 14. 
 
 The SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts totaling about $51,694. The debts are 
reflected in credit bureau reports from April 2014 (Item 4) and August 2015 (Item 5.) In 
the May 2014 PSI, Applicant told the security investigator that he was unsure how he 
would resolve the debts alleged in the SOR. In his response to the SOR, he asserted that 
he was “fighting in court” the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.j, and 1.k. He asserted 
that he had a payment plan for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, and that he had resolved 
the debt alleged in 1.m. He asserted that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e was resolved by 
foreclosure and that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.h, 1.i, 1.l, 1.n, and 1.o were 
charged off. He asserted that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g were not his debts. 
He did not respond to SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q. He did not provide documentary evidence to 
support any of his assertions. He provided no evidence regarding his current income or 
expenses. 
 
 
  
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 2) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
 4
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau reports are sufficient to establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
 5
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the above mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are numerous and recent. He provided no documentary evidence of his financial 
situation or the circumstances in which he incurred his delinquent debts. He asserted that 
two debts were not his, but he provided no information regarding the basis for his 
assertion. He provided no documentary evidence of payments or payment agreements. 
When an applicant asserts that a debt is resolved, he or she is expected to provide 
documentary evidence to support that assertion. See ISCR Case No. 15-03363 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 19, 2016). Applicant apparently does not understand that a charged-off debt is 
not cancelled or otherwise resolved. 
 
The FORM included Department Counsel’s comments specifically pointing out 
Applicant’s lack of explanation for his financial problems and lack of documentary 
evidence to support his answer to the SOR. Applicant did not avail himself of the 
opportunity to remedy the shortcomings in his answer, because he failed to respond to 
the FORM.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and I have applied the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Because Applicant requested a determination 
on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and 
 
 6
sincerity based on demeanor or to question him about his financial problems. See ISCR 
Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by 
his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.q:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
