 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-07367 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel1 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.2 
 
                                                          
1 This decision was originally issued on May 31, 2017. On June 5, 2017, it came my attention that I had 
erroneously listed my name as both the Department Counsel and the Administrative Judge for this case. 
The name of the Department Counsel has now been corrected. I have made no other changes in the 
decision.  
  
2 ADP Case No. 14-01655 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (“The Guidelines apply to all adjudications under the 
Directive, including both security clearance and public trust cases.”) 
 
 
2 
On May 9, 2016, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR and elected to have 
her case decided on the written record. Her answer included documents that she 
marked as Exhibits A through J. On June 29, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including documents identified as Items 
1 through 6. Applicant received the FORM on July 18, 2016. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. On August 11, 2016, Applicant responded to the 
FORM. She provided a narrative statement and additional documents, which I have 
marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) K through V, following the labeling sequence begun by 
Applicant with her answer.3 Applicant’s exhibits are all admitted without objection. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s exhibits. The SOR and the answer (Items 
1 and 2) are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 6 are admitted into evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on April 10, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR concerns 27 financial allegations. Applicant admitted all the allegations 
but for SOR ¶¶ 1.x, 1.y, 1.z and 1.aa. Her admissions and other statements are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. She is a high school graduate and has attended some 
classes at a local technical college. Applicant was married from 2004 to 2011. Applicant 
has twin girls, born in 2008 (age nine) and a son, born in 2014 (age three).4   
 
 Applicant has worked for the same employer, a defense contractor in the health 
care industry, since 1997. In connection with her employment, she submitted an 
application for a position of public trust in May 2015. In answering questions about her 
financial record, she disclosed various delinquent debts, including a judgment over a 
personal loan, a past-due mortgage, and several medical debts.5  
 
 Applicant attributes her financial problems to her divorce, and health issues. 
Applicant’s twin girls were born several weeks prematurely, and required lengthy 
hospitalization and medical care after they were born. Applicant later had surgery and 
other medical issues. She had to miss work for a period of time, causing a financial 
strain.6  
 
                                                          
3 Applicant marked her FORM Response attachments as Exhibits A through L, but I have re-labelled the 
FORM Response and the attachments so that they run sequentially after the documents she included 
with her answer to the SOR.  
 
4 Item 3; Answer. 
 
5 Item 3.  
 
6 Answer.  
 
 
3 
 During this time, Applicant and her husband took out a personal loan, which was 
later charged off. The creditor obtained a judgment against them in 2009. Applicant 
disclosed the account on her application.7 She denied this debt (SOR ¶ 1.y for $9,104) 
in her answer because it was no longer on her credit report.8 However, with her FORM 
response, she provided a copy of the public record showing the judgment remained 
outstanding.9 There was no indication that she had taken any steps to pay or resolve it. 
SOR ¶ 1.y is unresolved.  
  
 Applicant and her husband separated in 2010 and divorced in 2011. Applicant 
was granted custody of their children. They were to be covered by Applicant’s medical 
insurance, and the parents were to evenly divide any uncovered medical expenses. 
Applicant indicated that she did not receive any such payments from her ex-husband. 
She also had to pursue a garnishment order against him for payment of child support, 
which was increased from $521 a month to $737 a month in 2014.10  
 
 Applicant and her husband jointly purchased their marital home. Their divorce 
decree contained a provision noting that Applicant and her husband had entered into an 
installment sales contract for their home and would transfer it to the purchasers when 
the contract was fulfilled.11 
 
 Their intended purchasers were also their tenants. Under their agreement, these 
tenants were to pay the bank directly (i.e., effectively assuming the mortgage payments) 
rather than to pay rent to Applicant and her (now former) husband. There is no 
indication that the bank approved of this arrangement. These payments proved 
insufficient to cover the mortgage. When Applicant learned in October 2012 that the 
tenants were not making the payments, she evicted them and moved back into the 
home with her children.12  
 
 Applicant attempted to cure the deficiency with a $1,788 payment to the bank a 
month later. The bank returned the money, but allowed Applicant to apply for a loan 
modification. Applicant’s ex-husband remained listed on the mortgage, and he refused 
to participate in the process. Applicant was approved for a loan modification in February 
2013. She made three payments of $720 as required. However, when she learned 
during the closing process that her husband was still listed on the mortgage, she gave 
up and let the home go to foreclosure.13   
                                                          
7 Item 3 at 41-42.  
 
8 Answer, AE B.  
 
9 AE U. The $9,104 figure (which may include interest on the judgment) is taken from Applicant’s June 
2015 credit report, Item 5.  
 
10 Answer, AE G, AE H. 
 
11 Answer, AE G.  
 
12 Answer.  
 
13 Answer, AE C, AE D, AE K. 
 
4 
  
 Applicant remained in the home until January 2014, when she moved in with her 
parents after becoming pregnant. She then rented from a friend for about a year. In April 
2015, she began renting from her brother and his wife. She now lives in that home with 
the boy’s father and her three children.14 As of August 2016, the mortgage for the 
marital home (SOR ¶ 1.i, for $40,260) remained past due and in foreclosure.15 There is 
no indication that she took any action to resolve the mortgage debt since she moved out 
in early 2015.  
 
 The remaining 25 debts in the SOR are medical debts, totaling a combined 
$14,819. SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a-1.k and 1.l -1.x are found on Applicant’s March 2016 credit 
report.16 Applicant denied SOR debts ¶¶ 1.x, 1.y and 1.aa, because they are no longer 
on her current credit report (though they are on an earlier one, from June 2015). The 
debts are for medical care for either Applicant or her children.17 
 
 None of the medical creditors are identified in the SOR, though Applicant named 
each one in her answer. Many of the medical creditors are also identified in Applicant’s 
credit reports from May 2016 and August 2016, which she provided.18 
 
 Applicant’s largest medical creditor is a medical center, to whom she owed about 
$6,378. In March 2015, Applicant entered into a payment plan to resolve that debt by 
paying $20 a month. She made some payments into this plan, but was not able to keep 
up with it.19 The medical center is the creditor for SOR debts ¶¶ 1.m – 1.x, including 
SOR ¶ 1.t ($40), which has been paid.20 
 
 With her FORM Response, Applicant provided bank statements from 2015 
showing that she made small payments towards some of the medical debts in the SOR 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c and 1.m) and other medical accounts. These payments, which total 
about $175, all occurred in 2015 and all pre-date the SOR.21 In her answer and her 
FORM Response, Applicant acknowledged that she was unable to meet the medical 
payment plan, and instead has been focused on her current bills. She indicated that her 
plan going forward is to address the medical debts as she is able, and then to address 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
14 Answer.  
 
15 AE K. 
 
16 Item 6.  
 
17 Answer; Items 2, 5.  
 
18 AE B. AE S. 
 
19 AE K, AE T. 
 
20 AE A.  
 
21 AE K, AE M – AE R.  
 
 
5 
the foreclosure, though she hopes the bank will resolve it.22 There is no evidence that 
she has pursued financial counseling.  
 
 Applicant provided a personal financial statement with her answer. In May 2016, 
she had monthly net income of about $3,000, supplemented by $1,180 in child support 
(for a total of $4,181). She listed $2,467 in expenses, for a monthly surplus of $1,714. In 
the summer, her expenses increase by $1,036 due to her daughters’ daycare (changing 
the monthly surplus to $651).23   
 
 Applicant provided letters of recommendation from three character references 
who have known Applicant for many years. One is from a friend and former landlord, 
who considers Applicant to be honest, dependable, hard-working and an excellent 
tenant. Another letter is from her brother’s wife, also her current landlord. She regards 
Applicant as dependable, trustworthy and an excellent tenant. She trusts Applicant to 
care for her children. A third letter is from Applicant’s former boss. She spoke highly of 
Applicant’s character, integrity, dependability and trustworthiness. She trusted Applicant 
to handle the most complicated and sensitive assignments, and to follow correct 
procedures for quality, privacy and timeliness.24 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. 
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all 
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that 
assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.25  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a DOD 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in the AG.26 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the 
guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable 
information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
In addition to the guidelines, the Directive sets forth procedures that must be 
followed in trustworthiness adjudications. The Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. While an applicant is responsible for 
presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. An applicant has the 
                                                          
22 Answer, AE K.  
 
23 Answer.  
 
24 Exhibits AE I, AE J, AE V.  
 
25 Directive, § 3.2.  
 
26 Directive, Enclosure 2.  
 
 
6 
ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility for a public trust position.27 The 
protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires 
that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.28 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
                                                          
27 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶¶ E3.1.14, E3.1.15. 
 
28 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 The government alleged that Applicant had incurred 27 delinquent debts, 
including medical debts of about $14,819, a charged-off loan of $9,104 and a past-due 
mortgage in foreclosure. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems began after the premature birth of her twins in 
2008 led to unexpected medical complications and related costs. These circumstances 
caused a financial strain on her marriage. Applicant and her husband later divorced, in 
2011. Applicant assumed the medical costs for her children, with little help from her ex-
husband. She had to pursue him in court for child support. These were all 
circumstances beyond her control that contributed to her financial instability. To fully 
apply AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly. Applicant has made an effort 
to pay her medical debts, and provided proof of some payments. AG ¶ 20(b) applies to 
mitigate Applicant’s medical debts, which clearly result from circumstances beyond her 
control.  
 
Applicant and her husband took out a loan during their marriage during a period 
of financial strain. After they were not able to pay it back, a judgment was issued 
against them in 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.y). Since it was accrued during their marriage, 
Applicant’s ex-husband is likely partially responsible for it. Nonetheless, Applicant has 
taken no action to pay or resolve it and it remains outstanding.  
 
Applicant and her husband attempted to dispose of their jointly-owned marital 
home through an installment sales contract with their tenants. The tenants were to pay 
the bank directly rather than to pay rent to Applicant and her husband. The rental 
payments were not enough to cover the mortgage. When Applicant learned that the 
mortgage was in arrears in late 2012, she evicted the tenants and moved back into the 
 
8 
home. She initially undertook responsible steps to seek a loan modification, which was 
approved. However, once she learned that her ex-husband remained on the mortgage, 
she stopped making payments, moved out and allowed the home to go to foreclosure. 
This was not a responsible act. There is no record of what she has done since then to 
resolve this debt, which is significant. As of August 2016, the mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.l) was 
significantly past due and in foreclosure.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. She provided a 
personal financial statement from May 2016, and bank statements from 2015. Her 
budget showed that she had some available funds each month to pay her debts. She 
made some payments on her medical debts, but has not been able to do so for some 
time. Other significant debts remain. There is insufficient evidence to conclude her 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude Applicant has made a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve her debts. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant has an unstable financial 
track record. Without additional explanations, information, and documents, I cannot 
conclude that Applicant’s finances are under control. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F, financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
 
 
 
9 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.l:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.m – 1.x:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.y:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.z - 1.aa:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is not clearly consistent with national security 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
