 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06920 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 19, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 27, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 22, 2016, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including 
documents identified as Items 1 through 7. Applicant received the FORM on July 6, 
 
2 
 
 
2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She submitted a response to the FORM on August 
2, 2016. It is marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and admitted into evidence without 
objection.1 On May 2, 2017, Applicant submitted additional documents. Department 
Counsel noted an objection as to timeliness. The additional documents are marked as 
AE B and admitted. The SOR and the answer (combined as Item 1) are the pleadings in 
the case. Items 2 through 7 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on April 10, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the delinquent debts alleged but for SOR ¶ 1.i, with 
explanations and documents. Her admissions and other comments are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. She is a single parent with a daughter in graduate 
school.2 Applicant has worked as a contract administrator for several federal contractors 
since 2003. She was laid off in August 2009. She returned to school to finish her 
master’s degree. She was hired by her current employer in November 2009.3  
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in April 2015. She 
disclosed that she had delinquent debts and was pursuing credit counseling. Applicant 
fell behind on her own bills while helping her father and sister financially after they lost 
their jobs and became homeless.4 
   
 The SOR alleges 10 delinquent debts totaling about $11,042. Most of them are 
listed on credit reports from January 2014 and April 2015. A credit report from April 
2016 lists one debt.5   
 
The status of each debt is as follows:  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($166), 1.c ($223) and 1.e ($44) are all medical debts. SOR ¶ 1.d 
($101) is a past due phone bill. SOR ¶ 1.h ($130) is an overdue library bill. SOR ¶ 1.j 
                                                          
1 Applicant submitted her FORM Response again by e-mail to Department Counsel on August 16, 2016. 
These documents are part of AE A. 
   
2 AE A.  
 
3 Item 2; AE A.  
 
4 Items 2, 3, 4, AE A.  
 
5 SOR debt ¶ 1.a is found on Items 5, 6 and 7. The remaining debts are found on Items 5, 6, or both.  
 
 
3 
 
 
($1,724) is a past due debt to a department store. Applicant provided documentation 
with her answer that these debts have all been paid.6    
 
 Applicant denies SOR ¶ 1.i, a $215 debt to an insurance company. She provides 
documentation that she is disputing the debt. She says that the insurance 
representative told her that the debt was charged to her in error.7   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f ($5,323) is a collection debt to a computer company. Applicant 
provides a document showing that the debt has now been settled and paid.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($1,724) is a department store credit card account that is in collection. 
SOR ¶ 1.g ($1,259) is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.a. $1,259 is the “high credit” amount for 
the debt, and $1,724 is the balance owed.9 Applicant provides a document showing that 
SOR ¶ 1.a has now been settled and paid.10 
 
Applicant indicates that the financial stability of her family members has 
improved. Her father has found part-time work. Her sister and her family are now able to 
save money. Applicant still helps her family financially, but on a smaller scale. She is 
now able to help pay for her daughter’s education.11   
 
 Applicant states that she paid her debts on her own, without assistance from the 
credit counseling service. She has another credit card which she wants to pay off by fall 
of 2017, and wants to ensure she remains current on her student loans. She remains 
gainfully employed in the defense industry.12    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
6 Item 1.  
 
7 Item 1.  
 
8 AE B.  
 
9 Item 6 at 7, Item 7 at 1. SOR ¶ 1.g is also listed on Item 5 as an account purchased by another lender. 
Item 5 at 7.  
 
10 AE A, B.  
 
11 AE A.  
 
12 AE B.  
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.13 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant fell behind on her own debts when she began providing financial 
assistance to family members in dire financial straits. She accrued delinquent debts of 
about $11,000. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
                                                          
13 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s decision to help family members in financial need was 
understandable, though it caused her to fall behind on her own debts, too. 
Nevertheless, she undertook a documented good-faith effort to repay her creditors. Her 
finances have stabilized, and her family members are also in better financial condition. 
Applicant’s debts are resolved, and no longer cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c) and 20(d) all apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. She has been employed with government contractors 
for many years. She fell behind on her own debts while helping family members who 
were experiencing financial difficulties. Applicant has made a good-faith effort to pay or 
resolve her past due debts. Her finances have improved, and her family’s situation has 
also stabilized. Her finances no longer raise a security concern. She has met her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
