1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-00696 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
       Statement of the Case 
On May 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have her case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on July 11, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on July 16, 2016, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence. She provided a four page 
response to the FORM dated August 9, 2016, plus two reference letters. Her response 
05/17/2017
 
2 
 
 
and the attached letters have been collectively marked as Applicant’s Exhibit A (AE A) 
and are admitted without objection. The Government’s evidence, identified as items 1 
through 8, is admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
May 1, 2017.  
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 78 years old. She obtained her Juris Doctorate degree in 1985, and 
she is admitted to practice law, in good standing, in two states. She was divorced after 
being married from 1959 to 1988. Applicant has been employed by federal contractors 
for over 10 years, and by her current employer since November 2006. Applicant reports 
having no previous security clearance and no military service. Applicant disclosed some 
of her delinquent debts in section 26 of her March 24, 2014, Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Applicant’s only 
explanation for the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, was insufficient income, 
expensive medical bills, and a downturn in the real estate market. Also, her hours were 
reduced in 2010 by her employer.2 
 
Applicant admitted five of the ten delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling 
approximately $51,000. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.e – 1.i, 
which all appear to derive from medical expenses. She stated “these were paid to 
Baptist Medical Services and I thought the matter was resolved. That they have not 
notified the reporting companies is an oversight and I intend to do so.”3 Applicant has 
produced no evidence to show that she paid these delinquent debts, or that she notified 
the creditors or credit reporting bureaus to remove them. These debts are not resolved.  
 
Applicant’s largest delinquent debt, at SOR ¶ 1.b, is a balance of approximately 
$40,000 that was charged off post-foreclosure on the mortgage for an investment 
property that she owned. She was responsible for two investment properties around 
2008 when the real estate market collapsed. In her response to the FORM, Applicant 
stated that she purchased these with the intention of restoring them, and then selling 
them. This plan did not work out and she started having financial stress around 2010, 
around the same time that her employer lost important contracts and cut back 
Applicant’s hours. She had to rent out one of these properties, since she couldn’t sell it. 
In 2010, her tenants abandoned that lease-hold, without notice. They left it in such 
deplorable condition that repair and renovation estimates exceeded $20,000.4  
 
Applicant explained in her response to the FORM that she used credit cards to 
pay for restoration expenses, medical expenses, and personal expenses during periods 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s March 24, 2014, 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or Security Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 3). 
 
2 Item 8, page 3.  
 
3 Item 2, page 2. 
 
4 AE A. 
 
3 
 
 
of low income. However, in early 2012, she realized that she could not keep up, and she 
stopped making mortgage payments on that property. She also stopped paying the 
property taxes.5 In December 2012, Applicant defaulted on the mortgage loan. She also 
tried to negotiate the balances which were overdue on her credit card debts, but the 
creditors were intractable and demanded payment in the full amount of the debts 
reflected at SOR ¶¶ 1.b (mortgage),1.c and 1.d. The creditors obtained judgments in all 
three cases. These have not been satisfied. Applicant was earning only her social 
security in the amount of $895 per month, plus $658 per month from her Roth 
retirement account.6 She could not pay these creditors as her income was insufficient. 
These debts have not been resolved.  
 
 Applicant admitted to filing for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy protection in 2003, in her 
Answer to the SOR. She also stated on the last page of her March 2014 SF 86, that she 
was contemplating filing for bankruptcy protection again. She had her automobile 
repossessed by the creditor in 2014.7 Applicant claims to have had no credit counseling 
or debt-consolidation services.8 Her two reference letters attest to her high moral 
character, honesty and sound judgment.9 She is up to date on all of recent debts since 
2014 according to her credit bureau reports. There is no evidence in the record that she 
has disputed any of the debts alleged in the SOR, or settled them.  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
5 AE A. 
 
6 AE A, page 2. 
 
7 AE A, page 2. 
 
8 Item 8, page 5. 
 
9 AE A, attachments.  
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
 
5 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted to half of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. The 
Government produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.10  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant stated that she paid off the delinquent medical debts, but produced no 
evidence to show this. She admitted to the three judgments filed against her, including 
the one filed by her mortgagee at SOR ¶ 1.b, in excess of $40,000. It resulted from her 
                                                          
10 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
initial speculative investment in real estate, which didn’t pan out due to a downturn in 
the market. Then, when she had to rent-out one of the properties, her tenants trashed 
that lease-hold. While these may have been conditions beyond her control, Applicant 
has not demonstrated that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
indicated she used credit cards to pay for restoration costs, medical bills, and personal 
needs during low income periods. Her employer cut her hours, reducing her income. 
Yet, Applicant did not make adjustments or curb her spending commensurately. She did 
not obtain debt-consolidation services or credit-counseling, and she failed to pay 
property taxes for 2011, 2012, and 2013. This resulted in foreclosure on the property in 
2014. She produced no budget, or payment plan. Her debts remain unresolved. Her 
financial problems are recent and ongoing. Applicant provided insufficient evidence to 
show that her financial problems are under control, and that her debts were incurred 
under circumstances unlikely to recur. The mitigating conditions enumerated above do 
not apply.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There are ample indications that 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. She has not met her burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
7 
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:             Against Applicant 
 
       Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
 
