 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08711 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 11, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 28, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 13, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on January 11, 2017. 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
 
without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and offered exhibits (AE) A through 
W, which were admitted without objection. The record was kept open and Applicant 
submitted AE X through DD, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 24, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶1.a – 1.d, 1.g and 1.h, but denied 1.e, 1.f, 
and 1.i – 1.m. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the 
pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
this employer since August 2015. He has a master’s degree. He is married and has two 
children. He has never held a security clearance.1  
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant failed to file his federal income tax return for tax year 
2013, that he is indebted to the IRS in the amount of approximately $45,321 for tax 
years 2011, 2012, and 2014, and that a federal tax lien was filed against Applicant in 
April 2011 in the amount of $20,371. It also alleged that Applicant was delinquent on 
three charged-off accounts, two past-due student loan accounts, and three collection 
accounts. Applicant’s admissions during his testimony support the tax-related 
allegations (other than the failure to file allegation, explained below). His admissions to 
a defense investigator in October 2015, and a credit report support the delinquent 
collection, past due, and charged-off accounts.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose because of two failed businesses that he 
owned and that incurred federal tax liability that he could not pay. When the businesses 
shut down, he still owed the taxes due, but he did not have the funds to pay them. The 
first business failed in approximately 2006. Applicant began a similar type of business 
with a partner in 2009. This business operated until approximately 2014 when 
Applicant’s partner died and the company lost its major contract to a competitor, which 
caused the business to ultimately close down. Applicant testified that his current federal 
tax debt is approximately $98,000. He stated to a defense investigator that he retained 
a tax attorney in June 2014 to handle his tax issues. The attorney provided a letter in 
December 2016, stating he was working towards establishing a payment plan with the 
IRS to resolve the tax debt for years 2008 to 2015. He opined the matter would be 
resolved by January 2017. In February 2017, the attorney provided a follow-up letter 
stating that an agreement had been reached with the IRS whereby Applicant would pay 
$1,184 monthly for 84 months, beginning in March 2017, to resolve his tax debt. A 
written copy of the agreement was not provided. Applicant did not provide proof of any 
additional payments. Applicant’s federal tax debt is not resolved.3   
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 35, 38; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 40-41; GE 2-3. 
 
3 Tr. at 36-42, 52-54; GE 3; AE H, CC. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant provided written documentation showing he timely filed his 2013 
federal tax return. The Government also conceded this issue. SOR ¶ 1.e is resolved in 
Applicant’s favor.4 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that the charged-off and collection 
debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.k and 1.m were all paid. These debts are resolved.5 
 
 Applicant and his wife both incurred student loan debt. Applicant estimated his 
debt between $50,000 and $60,000. He claimed that his loans were in forbearance and 
not currently delinquent. He admitted that they were delinquent from time to time 
starting in 2006. A September 2015 credit report indicated that his loans were 90 days 
past due. Applicant documented that he entered into a repayment plan for his student 
loans. He currently owes approximately $98,850 and his monthly payments under the 
agreement are $314. He has made four or five payments under the plan, the most 
recent was in February 2017. Applicant has started to resolve this debt.6 
 
 Applicant disputed the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.l. He claims he has no idea about 
this debt. He provided documentation showing his action disputing this debt and the 
credit report in evidence also noted his dispute of the debt.7 
 
 Applicant’s two charged-off bank debts (¶¶ 1.f and 1.h) were for an overdrawn 
bank account and a car loan. Applicant worked with the bank when he had difficulty 
making the monthly payments. For a time the bank agreed to accommodate Applicant, 
however, at some point a business decision was made to “write off” the debts. Applicant 
was never contacted after that point and did not make any further payments. These 
debts are resolved.8 
 
 Applicant testified that he and his wife have combined gross income of about 
$120,000 annually. He also receives income from a second job. He provided a budget 
showing two months’ worth of income and expenses. In both cases, the net 
discretionary income each month was under $100. Applicant took a financial course 
from a nationally known financial personality and practices those learned concepts in 
his financial affairs.9 
 
 Applicant presented character statements and witnesses who described him as 
highly thought of in his community and as a person who has earned an excellent 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 43-44, 82; AE H. 
 
5 Tr. at 45, 47-48; AE E, J, L, Y, Z, DD. 
 
6 Tr. at 46-47, 58-59; AE K, BB. 
 
7 Tr. at 47; GE 2; AE M. 
 
8 Tr. at 44-45, 57-58; AE X. 
 
9 Tr. at 48-49, 51, 60; AE U, AA. 
 
 
4 
 
reputation as having a strong work ethic. He is described as honest and loyal. All his 
witnesses described him as trustworthy. I considered all of Applicant’s positive 
character traits.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 65-79; AE A, F. 
 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
  
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
  
 Applicant has been delinquent paying his federal taxes over an extended period. 
He also accumulated several other debts that became delinquent. The evidence does 
not support the failure to file his 2013 federal tax return. That allegation is resolved in 
his favor. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) for the remaining 
allegations.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s tax debts are recent events and cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. His tax issues have been unresolved since at least 
2008. Although he provided correspondence from his attorney who is working towards a 
payment plan with the IRS, Applicant did not present a documented plan to pay his 
delinquent federal taxes, nor did he show proof of any payments on his $98,000 of 
federal tax debt. Similarly, he has only recently established approximately six months of 
continuous payments on his $98,000 worth of student loan debt. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
Applicant’s business failures (death of business partner), were events beyond his 
control. However, these events took place a number of years ago. Applicant’s tax issues 
go back as far as 2008, long before his partner passed away. He also failed to engage 
professional tax assistance until August 2014. No progress was made in terms of 
reaching an agreement with the IRS until February 2017. His delayed response to his 
tax problems was not responsible. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
Applicant received financial counseling by participating in a financial planning 
course in November 2016. Given Applicant’s delayed reaction to dealing with his tax 
problems and his current tax debt that remains unaddressed, there are not clear 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Concerning SOR ¶¶ 1.f 
– 1.h, 1.k and 1.l, Applicant resolved those debts. He also successfully disputed ¶ 1.l. 
All those debts are resolved in favor of Applicant by applying AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 
20(e). It is too soon to tell whether Applicant’s student loan debts are being resolved or 
otherwise under control since he has yet to establish a meaningful track record of 
payment for those debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant’s tax situation came to be an 
issue as well as his student loan debt. I also considered all the positive character 
evidence he presented. However, I also considered that he failed to timely resolve his 
tax obligations. Although he resolved several delinquent debts, he has not established a 
meaningful track record of financial responsibility in paying his student loans or his 
federal income tax debt.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.e – 1.h:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.i – 1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.k – 1.m:  For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
