1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
  (Redacted)  )   ISCR Case No. 15-03999 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett C. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
As of March 2014, Applicant owed a $1,582 judgment debt and an $8,202 collection 
debt. Applicant admitted the debts when he answered the Statement of Reasons (SOR). 
He has yet to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns raised by the 
delinquencies. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On December 7, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations, and explaining why it was unable to find it clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security clearance eligibility for 
him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On March 8, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On August 19, 2016, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to 
 
2 
 
determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. On August 25, 2016, I scheduled a hearing for September 
29, 2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Four Government exhibits (GEs 1-4) and four 
Applicant exhibits (AEs A-D) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on October 11, 2016. I held the record 
open for one month after the hearing for post-hearing submissions from Applicant. No 
documents were received by the October 30, 2016 deadline.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline F that, as of December 7, 2015, Applicant owed a 
$1,582 judgment from 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and an $8,202 credit card collection debt (SOR ¶ 
1.b). When he answered the SOR allegations, he admitted both debts without explanation. 
After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old college graduate, who began working as a project 
manager for a nonprofit community work service program in December 2013. (GE 1; Tr. 
26-27.) He applied for his first DOD security clearance for a contract that the nonprofit has 
with the U.S. military. (AEs C, D; Tr. 16.) 
 
A native of Thailand, Applicant immigrated to the United States with his parents 
when he was two years old. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in April 2002. (GE 1.) 
After graduating from high school, he moved to his present area for college in September 
1993. In June 1997, he began working part time as a security officer for a baseball 
franchise. After earning his bachelor’s degree in June 1998, he worked full time for the 
baseball club until July 2006, when he was released for violating an employee policy. He 
had obtained an autograph from a baseball pitcher while he was on duty. (GEs 1, 2.)  
 
Applicant then worked in commercial sales for an automobile dealer from August 
2006 to May 2007. He resigned due to job dissatisfaction. In May 2007, he went to work in 
the nonprofit sector, initially as a job coach and then as a rehabilitation project director in a 
program for adults with special needs. Over his seven years with that organization, his 
salary increased from $33,000 to $38,000. (Tr. 28-29.) In August 2013, he was terminated 
from that employment after he was found to have improperly restrained a disruptive and 
non-cooperative client. (GEs 1, 2.)  
 
To supplement his income, in September 2007 Applicant began working a second 
job at night, 20 to 30 hours a week, for a multinational technology company in one of its 
retail outlets. In October 2013, Applicant was terminated for not following the store’s check 
                                                 
1 On May 4, 2017, in response to an inquiry about any post-hearing submissions, I learned that Applicant had 
separated from his employment with the nonprofit sponsoring him for security clearance eligibility. A JPAS 
entry confirmed an employment separation date of February 1, 2017. Applicant’s hearing had been conducted, 
so I retained jurisdiction under ¶ 4.4.1 of DOD Directive 5220.6. 
3 
 
policy. He accepted a return for cash from a customer who had paid by check when store 
policy required refunds of check purchases by mail. (GE 2.) Applicant was unemployed 
from October 2013 to December 2013, when he started working for the nonprofit 
community organization at an annual salary of $43,500. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 28.) 
 
On March 3, 2014, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86). Applicant responded negatively to 
the financial record inquiries concerning any delinquencies involving enforcement in the 
last seven years and any delinquencies involving routine accounts in the last seven years. 
(GE 1.) 
 
As of March 15, 2014, Applicant’s credit report showed that a $1,582 judgment 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) had been filed against him in November 2008 in a court near his parents’ 
home. Disposition of the judgment was listed as unknown. Additionally, a credit card debt 
had been settled for less than its full balance in May 2007, but another credit card debt of 
$8,201 had been charged off in September 2007 and placed for collection in approximately 
March 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant was making timely payments on one credit card with a 
$300 limit and a $192 balance, but that account had been 120 days past due in July 2013. 
(GE 3.) 
 
On March 21, 2014, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Regarding his financial record, he indicated that 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) had garnished his entire paycheck in April 2013 to 
resolve a $1,500 federal tax debt for 2012. When confronted by the OPM investigator 
about the 2008 judgment and $8,201 collection debt, Applicant denied any knowledge of 
them. He volunteered that he had missed a few payments on his one open credit card 
account previously, but it was now current. Applicant asserted that he was able to meet his 
expenses (cell phone, electric bill, Netflix, and his one open credit card), given that his 
fiancée was helping to pay the household finances. (GE 2.) 
 
On March 28, 2014, Applicant was re-contacted by the OPM investigator to sign 
releases. At that time, he volunteered that he learned from his parents that the 2008 
judgment was for missed payments on an automobile loan. He indicated that he had 
purchased a 2002 model-year vehicle and that his parents took over the car, but they failed 
to keep up with the payments. He maintained that his parents had paid the judgment in full, 
but he provided no proof of payment. (GE 2.) 
 
Between September 2014 and November 2015, Applicant opened 11 revolving 
credit card accounts. Applicant had applied for some of the credit cards to cover expenses 
for his wedding to his fiancée set for November 2016. (Tr. 55.) As of November 2015, he 
owed balances totaling $10,861 on eight of the 11 accounts. One of those credit accounts 
had a $5,254 balance on a credit limit of $6,500. The 11 accounts, which had a total credit 
limit of $32,150, were all rated as current. Neither the judgment debt in SOR ¶ 1.a nor the 
collection debt in SOR ¶ 1.b were on his credit record as reported by Equifax in December 
2015. (GE 4.) 
4 
 
  At his hearing in September 2016, Applicant testified that he never received 
documentation of either the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a or the collection debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. He 
assumes that any court documents or collection letters were sent to his parents’ address. 
(Tr. 23-24, 38-39.) He testified that he would not have used his parents’ address on any 
accounts after he moved and that he would have notified his creditors of his new address 
so that he could be billed. (Tr. 39.) He denied knowing why a judgment would have been 
filed against him in 2008 and, discrepant from what he had indicated in March 2014, he 
surmised that it might be an unpaid credit card. (Tr. 31.) After learning about the two debts 
from the OPM investigator, he sent an email to the company now holding accounts for the 
creditor named in SOR ¶ 1.b. He had yet to receive any response.  (Tr. 23-24, 31-32, 37.) 
Applicant explained his failure to follow up on his initial inquiry in the past two years, stating 
“I don’t have an answer for that. It’s been just busy with work and other assorted things.” 
(Tr. 54.) At Applicant’s request, I held the record open for one month for him to submit 
documentation about the debts in the SOR. No documentation was received. 
 
 As of late September 2016, Applicant’s salary with the nonprofit organization was 
$44,000 annually. (Tr. 28.) His take-home pay was $1,100 every two weeks. (Tr. 30.) He 
earned an additional $1,600 in the summer of 2016 on a side job for another nonprofit 
organization. (Tr. 58.) 
 
 Applicant and his fiancée began a cohabitant relationship in November 2013. (GE 
1.) They currently live in a house that she purchased. He gives her $900 toward her $2,000 
monthly mortgage payment. (Tr. 42-43.) They split some other expenses, including utilities 
and cable/Internet costs, and his share is approximately $300 a month. Applicant pays his 
own cell phone expenses of $180 a month. Applicant does not own a vehicle, but he has a 
transit pass for public transportation that is $85 a month. (Tr. 43-45.) He reported about 
$300-$400 in discretionary income each month. As of September 2016, Applicant had 
$750 in his checking account and $900 in his savings account. (Tr. 46.) He was paying 
$377 per month toward credit card balances of approximately $10,000. (GE 4; Tr. 47-48.) 
 
 Applicant was notified by the IRS in 2016 that he owes $1,200 in federal taxes for 
2014. As of September 2016, Applicant had no repayment plan in place for the tax debt. 
(Tr. 50-51.) 
 
Character References 
 
 The nonprofit’s director of job training services, who also serves as the facility 
security officer for the organization’s government contracts, first met Applicant in 2010 on a 
service trip to New Orleans to assist in the cleanup and rebuilding of the city after a 
devastating hurricane. She hired Applicant in 2013 to manage their mailroom contracts with 
the government. Applicant has proven to be reliable, trustworthy, and hardworking. He 
takes his work responsibilities seriously and takes pride in his work as an advocate for his 
staff, who all have significant disabilities. She believes Applicant poses no threat to 
security, safety, or his contractual obligations, and is confident that he can handle the 
obligations of a secret clearance. (AE C.) The nonprofit’s executive director likewise 
5 
 
endorses granting a secret clearance to Applicant based on her observations of his work 
performance since 2013. (AE D.)  
 
 A lieutenant commander in the U.S. military has known Applicant since 2002 when 
both worked for the baseball organization. She witnessed Applicant “conduct himself with 
unparalleled discipline, composure, and professionalism.” In her opinion, Applicant is an 
“extremely gifted manager of people” with high ethical standards. (AE B.) 
 
 Applicant’s fiancée, a teacher at a charter school, has known Applicant for over five 
years. She has never known him to share confidential personal information about his 
disabled clients. Applicant is generous in donating his time and talents to multiple local 
nonprofit organizations. She has no reservations about recommending Applicant for 
security clearance eligibility. (AE A.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
6 
 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 As of March 2014, Applicant’s credit report listed a $1,582 judgment with disposition 
unknown and an $8,201 credit card debt in collection. Applicant claimed no knowledge of 
the debts when he was first interviewed for security clearance eligibility in March 2014. The 
Appeal Board has held that adverse information from a credit report is normally sufficient to 
meet the substantial evidence standard to establish a debt. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
03612 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015.) Applicant admitted the debts when he answered the SOR. 
The delinquent debts raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.” Applicant has the burden to mitigate those security concerns. 
 
 Financial delinquency may be mitigated under AG ¶ 20 by one or more of the 
following conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is resolved or is under control;  
 
7 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is applicable in that the delinquencies were infrequent and not incurred 
recently. Likely because of their age, they were no longer on his credit report as of 
December 2015. Applicant was able to open 11 new credit card accounts between 
September 2014 and November 2015. However, AG ¶ 20(a) does not mitigate Applicant’s 
disregard of the debts. As of his OPM interview in March 2014, he was on notice that the 
delinquencies on his credit record were of concern to the DOD. Apart from sending an 
initial inquiry about the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, he has done nothing toward 
investigating or addressing the debts. He had 2.5 years between his OPM interview and his 
hearing to obtain documentation proving that the debts had been paid or to arrange 
repayment terms. When asked to explain his inaction, Applicant responded that he has 
been busy with work “and other assorted things.” His failure to give priority to  addressing 
the DOD’s security concerns raises doubt about whether he can be counted on to attend to 
the obligations that come with security clearance eligibility. 
 
 When re-contacted by the OPM investigator in late March 2014, Applicant indicated 
that his parents had assumed responsibility for repaying his car loan, and that their failure 
to do so led to the financial judgment. He denied receiving any notices about the judgment, 
which was listed on his credit report. He now discrepantly claims that it may have been a 
credit card debt. Assuming it was for a car loan and that his parents promised to make the 
loan payments, a good-faith reliance on his parents’ promise would only partially implicate 
AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant did not act responsibly by ignoring the judgment debt, especially 
after learning it was of concern to the DOD. AG ¶ 20(b) was not shown to apply to the 
credit-card collection debt. There is no evidence of any unforeseen circumstance that 
mitigates the $8,202 credit-card collection debt. When asked to explain the adverse credit 
information on his record, he stated, “Again, I think it was just my own irresponsibility of 
paying them [sic] at the proper time.” (Tr. 25.) 
  
 The Appeal Board has held that an applicant is not required to establish that he has 
paid off each debt in the SOR, or even that the first debts paid be those in the SOR.2 
                                                 
2 The DOHA Appeal Board stated in ISCR Case No. 07-06482, decided on May 21, 2008, in part: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of 
“‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). 
However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate[s] that he has “. . . 
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The 
8 
 
However, an applicant needs to show that he has a plan to resolve his debts and that he 
has taken significant steps to implement his plan. Without any documented progress 
toward paying the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a or the credit card collection debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, I 
cannot apply AG ¶ 20(c) or ¶ 20(d). Moreover, he presented no evidence to prove that he 
is not legally liable for the debts, so AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. 
 
 About his finances generally, Applicant has a timely record of payments on the 11 
new credit card accounts opened since September 2014, which shows some financial 
responsibility. The aggregate balance on his open credit card accounts totaled $10,861 as 
of December 2015. He owed approximately $10,000 on the accounts as of late September 
2016, despite monthly payments of $377, so he has not significantly reduced his debt 
burden. He was under his credit limit of $32,150 on the accounts. After his hearing, if not 
before then, Applicant should have understood that the DOD was concerned about the lack 
of demonstrated progress toward resolving the issues in the SOR. He presented no 
evidence of payments or of filing disputes. His evidence of recent financial responsibility is 
undermined to the extent that he continues to ignore his old debts. The financial 
considerations concerns are not sufficiently mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In evaluating the whole person, the administrative judge must consider an 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a).3 The analysis under Guideline F is incorporated in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some 
warrant additional comment. 
 
 The security clearance adjudication is not aimed at collecting an applicant’s 
personal debts. Rather, it involves an evaluation of an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness in light of the security guidelines in the Directive. See ISCR Case No. 09-
                                                                                                                                                             
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his 
actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr.4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that 
the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the 
SOR. 
 
3 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
9 
 
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). His fiancée and work colleagues at the nonprofit endorsed 
him for security clearance eligibility. His outstanding delinquency is manageable, which 
makes it more difficult to understand why he has failed to address it. Concerns persist 
about whether Applicant can be counted on to fulfill security responsibilities without regard 
to his personal interests. He has known since his OPM interview in March 2014 that the 
DOD was concerned about the delinquent accounts on his credit record. He had an ample 
opportunity to either disprove his liability or arrange for affordable payments toward the 
judgment and credit card debt. His handling of his tax issues was not alleged, but some 
concern arises because he owes the IRS $1,200 with no plan in place to repay his 
delinquent taxes for 2014. It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an 
applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990). For the reasons noted above, I am unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
