 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  ISCR Case No. 15-08764 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the foreign influence security concern raised by his 
mother-in-law in Syria. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 26, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 7, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on August 4, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the Government’s FORM and responded by letter dated August 31, 2016, 
 
2 
which I have marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1. The case was assigned to me on May 
4, 2017. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
The Government exhibits identified as Items 1 through 3 and AE 1 are admitted 
in evidence without objection.   
 
Amendment to the SOR 
 
 The Government amended ¶ 1.c of the SOR pursuant to ¶ E3.1.17 of DOD 
Directive 5220.6, to render it in conformity with the evidence. Accordingly, ¶ 1.c alleges 
that Applicant’s sister is a citizen of Jordan, residing in the United States. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Syria and Jordan. The requests were included in the record as Items 4 and 5. 
Applicant did not object. The requests are not admitted in evidence but I have taken 
administrative notice of the facts regarding Syria contained in Item 4. The facts 
administratively noticed are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below. I have not taken 
administrative notice of the facts regarding Jordan contained in Item 5, for reasons set 
forth below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant did not specifically admit or deny the SOR allegations in his response 
to the SOR. I considered the SOR allegations to be denied.1  
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old electrical engineer employed by his current defense 
contractor since December 2014. He previously worked for the same company from 
May 2013 to August 2014. He worked for two prior defense contractors from April 2001 
to August 2012, during which time he experienced four periods of unemployment. He 
has never held a DOD security clearance. He obtained a bachelor’s degree from a U.S. 
university in 1986. He was previously married from April 1990 to November 1991, and 
remarried in June 1992. He has three children, two adults and a 17-year-old, who are 
native-born U.S. citizens residing in the United States. He has owned his home in the 
United States since 1998.2 
 
                                                          
1 Item 1.  
 
2 Item 2. 
 
 
3 
Applicant was born in Jordan. He immigrated to the United States in 1981. He 
was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in May 2000, and obtained a U.S. passport in 
November 2009.3   
 
Applicant’s wife was born in Syria. She is a dual citizen of Syria and the United 
States, residing with Applicant in the United States. Since becoming a U.S. citizen, she 
has not held a Syrian passport, and has held a U.S. passport for 16 years. She works 
from home as a part-time medical billing associate. She is aware that Applicant is 
applying for a security clearance.4 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Syria. She is 77 years old 
and a widow of a Syrian-born U.S. citizen. Applicant disclosed in his January 2015 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (SF 86), that he has had in-
person and telephonic contact with his mother-in-law annually between June 1994 and 
June 2010. He indicated in his May 2015 interview with an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator, that he does not have any contact with his mother-in-
law. He acknowledged that his wife has frequent contact with her mother in Syria. 
Applicant traveled to Syria with his wife and children in June 2010, to visit his mother-in-
law and the holy sites.5 
 
Applicant has one sister who is a citizen of Jordan residing in the United States. 
She was born in Israel, is 57 years old, and widowed. She has a green card, is a 
permanent U.S. resident, and is in the process of applying for U.S. citizenship. Applicant 
has telephonic contact with her a couple of times weekly. She is the caregiver for their 
82-year-old mother. Like his mother, Applicant’s other sister and one brother are 
citizens and residents of the United States.6 
 
Applicant’s two sisters-in-law are citizens of Syria residing in Canada. In his 
response to the FORM, Applicant stated that one of his sisters-in-law and her family 
applied and were approved for a green card, and are pending a visa to come to the 
United States. One sister-in-law is a housewife. Both are married to doctors. Applicant 
indicated that he does not have any contact with them, but his wife telephones them 
weekly. They are unaware that Applicant is applying for a security clearance.7   
   
Applicant stated that he is a law-abiding U.S. citizen. For the past 30 years, he 
has worked as an engineer, protecting his employer’s intellectual properties, designs, 
and data.8 
                                                          
3 Items 2-3. 
 
4 Items 1-3; AE 1. 
 
5 Items 1-3; AE 1. 
 
6 Items 1-3; AE 1. 
 
7 Items 1-3; AE 1. 
 
8 AE 1. 
 
4 
Syria 
 
Syria is ruled by an authoritarian regime dominated by the Socialist Ba’ath Party, 
and is currently engaged in a full-scale civil war with the armed Syrian opposition. The 
regime has used deadly force to quell anti-government protests, and the regime’s 
military operations have involved the use of ballistic missiles, aerial attacks, heavy 
artillery, and chemical weapons targeting civilian centers. The Syrian government is no 
longer in control of vast parts of the country, and the Islamic State in Iraq and the 
Levant (ISIL) controls large amounts of territory in the north and east.  
 
Some Syrian opposition groups have utilized car bombs, improvised explosive 
devices, indirect fire attacks, sniper fire, and kidnapping throughout the country. Foreign 
combatants, including Iranian regime elements, Hizballah fighters, Islamic extremists, 
and al Qaida-linked elements, are participating in the hostilities. ISIL has committed 
atrocities against civilians, including U.S. citizens.  
 
Military attacks from the Assad regime or other groups can happen any time 
without warning, and no part of Syria can be considered safe from violence, including 
the risk of kidnapping, sniper attacks, terrorist attacks, military attacks, arbitrary arrests, 
detention, and torture. Throughout Syria, U.S. citizens have experienced and will 
continue to experience a high risk of being kidnapped.  
 
The U.S. intelligence community assesses with high confidence that the Assad 
regime has used chemical weapons, including the nerve agent sarin, against the Syrian 
people multiple times since 2015. It also assesses that ISIL is likely responsible for 
several mustard gas attacks in Syria.  
 
The current security situation in Syria is unlikely to change soon. The war has 
caused hundreds of thousands of deaths, with many thousands wounded, 4.8 million 
refugees, and over 6.5 million internally displaced persons.  
 
The U.S. State Department continues to warn citizens against travel to Syria. It 
has designated Syria as a state sponsor of terrorism since 1979. Syria continues to 
provide political and other support to a variety of terrorist groups. It has provided 
political and weapons support to Hizballah and Iran, while Iran, in turn, has supported 
the Syrian regime against its opposition. The Assad regime has played a significant role 
in the growth of terrorist organizations such as al Qaida and ISIL. As a result of its 
permissive attitude towards these and similar organizations, Syria has acted as a 
terrorist hub for foreign fighters entering Iraq to battle U.S.-led coalition forces. It has 
become an environment where terrorist groups, such as ISIL, have planned and 
launched deadly terrorist attacks against countries such as France, Saudi Arabia, 
Lebanon, and the United States. 
 
Syria also continues to generate significant concern regarding the role it plays in 
terrorist financing. Industry experts have reported that 60% of all business transactions 
were conducted in cash, and nearly 80% of all Syrians did not use formal banking 
services. This environment has contributed to a vast Syrian black market, estimated to 
 
5 
be as large as Syria’s formal economy. Regional hawala networks, operating in 
smuggling and trade-based money and facilitated by government corruption, contribute 
to concerns that members of the Syrian government and the business elite are complicit 
in terrorist finance schemes. 
 
The U.S. State Department’s 2015 human rights report stated that the worst 
human rights violations were caused by the Assad regime’s fundamental lack of regard 
for the well-being of most of its populace. Human rights violations were widespread and 
consisted of the government’s failure to protect its people from deadly violence and 
other abuses by terrorist groups, such as ISIL and Jabhat-al-Nusra. The Assad 
government has perpetrated indiscriminate and unlawful violence against its citizens, 
including bombings of schools, hospitals, and residential areas, often for the purpose of 
furthering a military goal.  
 
The Syrian government conducts surveillance of foreign visitors. U.S. citizens 
visiting Syria should expect the potential for monitoring of their activities. They should 
also expect the possibility of incarceration for seemingly innocuous actions such as 
taking pictures, using a GPS, or discussing politics or religion. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
6 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a trustworthiness concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but 
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information 
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in 
a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire 
to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
and 
 
 
 
7 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
One of Applicant’s sisters, while a Jordanian citizen, is a permanent resident of 
the United States. She holds a green card and is in the process of applying for U.S. 
citizenship. She is widowed and is the caregiver for their 82-year-old mother. The 
record does not contain any evidence that she has any other ties to Jordan. Given 
these facts, none of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 apply, and I find SOR ¶ 
1.c in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Applicant’s wife, mother-in-law, and two sisters-in-law are citizens of Syria. His 
mother-in-law resides in Syria. Syria is an authoritarian regime that has used chemical 
weapons against the Syrian people. It is engaged in a civil war with the armed Syrian 
opposition. Military attacks from the Assad regime or other groups can happen at any 
time without warning, and no part of Syria can be considered safe from violence. The 
government is not in control of vast parts of the country, and ISIL controls large 
amounts of territory in the north and east. Syria is designated by the U.S. State 
Department as a state sponsor of terrorism. It is a terrorist hub and terrorist groups 
have planned and launched deadly attacks from Syria.   
 
Applicant’s foreign contacts through his wife create a potential conflict of 
interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided  
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
 
8 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s wife, while a Syrian citizen, is also a U.S. citizen residing in the 
United States. As of Applicant’s January 2015 SF 86, Applicant’s wife last traveled to 
Syria in 2010. In addition, Applicant’s two sisters-in-law, while Syrian citizens, reside in 
Canada. One has applied and been approved for a green card for herself and her 
family, and they are pending a visa to come to the United States. Accordingly, AG ¶ 
8(a) is established, and I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law, however, is a Syrian citizen residing in Syria. 
Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(a) is not established for the reasons set out in the above 
discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d). While Applicant’s wife has not visited her 
mother in Syria since 2010, she nonetheless maintains frequent contact with her 
mother. AG ¶ 8(c) is not established.  
 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1981 and became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 2000. His three children are native-born U.S. citizens residing in the 
United States. His mother, one brother, and one sister are U.S. citizens residing in the 
United States. He has owned his home in the United States since 1998. He is law-
abiding, and has worked for the past 30 years as an engineer, protecting his 
employer’s intellectual properties, designs, and data. These are factors that weigh in 
Applicant’s favor. However, Applicant’s ties to his mother-in-law through his wife are 
equally as strong. Applicant failed to meet his burden to demonstrate that he would 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. AG ¶ 8(b) is not 
established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
9 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has no t  mitigated the security concerns raised by his mother-in-law in 
Syria. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR:  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
   
 
 
_______________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
