 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-06473 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is participating in counseling for his alcohol issues and is 
demonstrating a pattern of abstinence or responsible use. He has mitigated the alcohol 
involvement trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 20, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline G, alcohol involvement. The action was taken under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On May 16, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record, in lieu of a hearing. On July 11, 2016, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including Items 1 
 
2 
through 6. Applicant received the FORM on August 6, 2016. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM and did 
not object to the Government’s documents. The SOR and the answer (combined as 
Item 1) are the pleadings in the case. Items 2 through 6 are admitted into evidence. The 
case was assigned to me on May 4, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g, and 1.i. He neglected to 
answer SOR ¶ 1.h, probably due to oversight, so I will consider the allegation as if he 
had denied it. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k. I have incorporated his admissions into 
the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1988. He has never 
married and has no children. He is employed in information technology. Since about 
September 2013, he has worked for a defense contractor in the health care industry.1 In 
connection with his employment, Applicant submitted an application for a position of 
public trust. He disclosed a 2001 arrest for driving under the influence of alcohol or 
while impaired (DUI/DWI), as well as counseling (2007-2013) and inpatient alcohol 
rehabilitation (2011).2   
  
 Applicant pleaded guilty to the DUI in May 2001. He was placed on six months of 
unsupervised probation and fined. (SOR ¶ 1.a). The SOR allegations otherwise concern 
his multiple periods of alcohol treatment in the years since (SOR ¶¶ 1.b - 1.i), a 
diagnosis of alcoholism or alcohol dependence in 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.j) and his continued 
consumption of alcohol despite that diagnosis (SOR ¶ 1.k). Applicant admitted the DUI 
and the various treatments, but denied allegations ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k, as he referenced 
“alcohol abuse” rather than “alcohol dependence” in his answer. 
 
 In response to an interrogatory, Applicant disclosed several periods of inpatient 
and intensive outpatient alcohol treatment between 2002 and 2012. This included 
inpatient treatment from February 9 to April 8, 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.b); outpatient treatment 
from October 28, 2003 to January 8, 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.c); inpatient treatment from 
October 14 to November 8, 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.d); inpatient treatment from March 12 to 
April 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.f); inpatient treatment from June 17 to July 8, 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.h); 
and inpatient treatment from November 15 to December 28, 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.i).3 This list 
did not include alcohol treatment in 2007 and 2010 (SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g), both of which 
Applicant “admitted” but which are not otherwise supported by record evidence.  
 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3.  
 
2 Item 2 at pp. 26, 27, 30.  
 
3 Item 5 at 10.  
 
 
3 
 Applicant first attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) after his 2001 DUI. 
According to his October 2013 background interview, he has participated in AA 
regularly, once or twice a week, since November 2004.4 Applicant was a moderate 
social drinker between 2001 and 2007. During this period, he also voluntarily sought 
alcohol counseling and treatment on multiple occasions. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c and 1.d.)5   
 
 Between June 2007 and June 2011, his drinking increased due to work-related 
stress. During this period, he consumed alcohol two to three times a week, and he 
would consume five or six beers as well as three or four shots of jaegermeister or 
tequila at meals or in social situations. As a result, his family encouraged him to seek 
alcohol counseling.6 
  
 Applicant attended inpatient alcohol treatment in June and July 2011. He 
completed it successfully and began reducing his alcohol consumption. In November 
2011, he was notified by his employer that his position would be relocated to another 
state. He had recently purchased a home, so he chose to accept a severance package 
rather than move.  
 
 Most recently, Applicant voluntarily entered inpatient alcohol treatment from 
November 19 to December 28, 2012. At the time, he had been drinking six shots of 
tequila and six beers once or twice a month for several months. He was considered a 
“binge drinker.” He was diagnosed both on intake and at discharge as suffering from 
alcohol dependence.7  
 
 Applicant detailed his alcohol use and rehabilitation efforts in his July 2015 
interrogatory response. He disclosed that he consumed alcohol once or twice a week, 
on days when he was not working. He had most recently consumed alcohol the week 
before. He noted that he consumed alcohol upon learning that his mother had a heart 
condition, and when his father passed away in January 2013. He acknowledged that his 
drinking problem stems from a family history of alcoholism. He noted that he was 
attending AA two or three times a week, and had a sponsor to help him work on his 
recovery goals. He also said the following:  
 
My recovery is and will continue to be a 1-day-at-a-time process. Help 
from my higher power, my sponsor and family help me stay connected 
                                                          
4 Item 3 at 3, 5.  
 
5 Item 3 at 3-4.  
 
6 Item 3 at 4.  
 
7 As detailed in Item 6, Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol dependence, 303.90 under the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR), which contained 
the criteria for alcohol dependence and alcohol abuse. The DSM-IV-TR has been replaced by the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), which was published in May 
2013. The DSM-5 replaced alcohol dependence and alcohol abuse disorders with alcohol use disorder, 
with severity levels of mild, moderate, and severe. 
 
4 
and aware of my disease. Recently, I have had relapses that take me off 
my recovery goals. I am motivated and communicate with my psychologist 
[name omitted], my issues and my coping skills dealing with cravings and 
consequences. I have a strong awareness of untreated alcoholism and 
would like to continue working with my sponsor . . .”8 
 
 Applicant began seeing a licensed professional counselor (LPC) in September 
2008. Records show Applicant had fairly regular counseling regular sessions in 2008 
and 2009, then again from fall of 2012 until spring of 2014.9 
 
 Applicant’s answer included a May 2016 letter from the LPC. She indicated that 
she has been seeing Applicant “intermittently” since September 2008. She noted that he 
had voluntarily entered treatment for alcohol abuse several times in the past. She noted 
his diagnosis as alcohol dependent but questioned it given what she knew of his 
drinking pattern. She noted that Applicant rarely drank more than two or three beers and 
did not drink and drive. She noted that his drinking had not led to either legal trouble 
and had not interfered with his employment. She noted that he was continuing to 
participate in AA as well as another recovery program. She noted that Applicant had not 
had a drink since summer of 2015 and did not turn to alcohol as a coping mechanism 
during periods of family stress. Applicant was “doing well in maintaining his abstinence 
and staying involved with his support networks.”10 
  
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for  
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
                                                          
8 Item 4.  
 
9 Item 5.  
 
10 Item 1.  
 
 
5 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The trustworthiness concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
 
6 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; and  
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program 
 
Applicant has had one DUI, in 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.a). AG ¶ 22(a) applies to that 
conduct, as it is old and has not been repeated. Since then, he has had numerous 
periods of alcohol treatment and counseling, both inpatient and intensive outpatient, 
between 2002 and 2012. He entered many of these treatments voluntarily. These 
treatment periods are alleged in the SOR (¶¶ 1.b - 1.i), as Guideline G security 
concerns. Applicant either disclosed them in his interrogatory response, admitted them 
in his answer, or both. However, participation in alcohol counseling or treatment is not 
disqualifying conduct under Guideline G. Indeed, such participation is mitigating.  
 
Applicant last completed alcohol treatment in 2012. He was found to be a binge 
drinker and diagnosed as suffering from alcohol dependence (SOR ¶ 1.j). There is 
evidence of some relapses since then (SOR ¶ 1.k), though all of Applicant’s subsequent 
alcohol consumption has been moderate. AG ¶¶ 22(c), 22(e) and 22(f) apply.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption trustworthiness concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant has a single DUI, which occurred 16 years ago. He has never had any 
alcohol incidents at work. Since then, while he has struggled with alcohol and will 
continue to do so, he has been involved in Alcoholics Anonymous, and has pursued 
both inpatient and outpatient alcohol treatment on numerous occasions. To his credit, 
 
7 
he has recognized for many years that he has a problem with alcohol and has 
developed a long track record of taking steps to deal with it. He has continued in 
counseling with a treatment provider who has seen him for many years. Though he has 
had instances of relapse, he was abstaining from alcohol as of May 2016, and his most 
recent alcohol consumption was moderate. He supplemented his AA with an additional 
recovery program. AG ¶¶ 23(a), 23(b) and 23(c) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. The record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of public 
trust. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness 
concerns arising under Guideline G, alcohol involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is clearly consistent with national security to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
