1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-07312 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Available information is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns about 
Applicant’s ties to family members in Iraq, his employment at an Iraqi university, and his 
possession of an Iraqi identification card. Applicant also mitigated the security concerns 
about his omission of information from his security clearance application. His request for 
a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On January 5, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a security clearance.1 
 
                                                 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
2 
 
 On June 16, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guidelines2 for foreign influence 
(Guideline B), foreign preference (Guideline C), and personal conduct (Guideline E). 
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision based solely 
on the written record. However, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) timely requested a hearing.3  
 
 I received this case on December 8, 2016, and convened the requested hearing 
on December 27, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel 
presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 3. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (Ax.) A – N. After the hearing, Applicant submitted Ax. O - R. I admitted all 
exhibits without objection. DOHA received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 3, 
2017. 
 
 At hearing, both parties asked that I take administrative notice of facts about Iraq 
that may be pertinent to my decision. I granted those requests and have considered jointly 
the information presented in the record as Ax. N and Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 2. (Tr. 16) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline C, the Government alleged that Applicant possesses an Iraqi 
identification card (SOR 1.a). In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR 1.a, but 
stated that he relinquished his Iraqi passport, which expired in 2015, to his company’s 
security office in June 2016. After becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant used only his U.S. 
passport for travel. The Government acknowledged these facts at the hearing. SOR 1.a 
is resolved for Applicant. (Answer; Gx. 3; Ax. A; Tr. 22, 45 – 46, 79) 
 
 Under Guideline B, the Government alleged that Applicant’s father, stepmother, 
siblings and half-siblings, brothers-in-law, uncles, and cousins are citizens of, and reside 
in, Iraq (SOR 2.a). The Government also alleged that his father served in the Iraqi Army 
for 26 years (SOR 2.b); that one of his brothers is a police officer in an Iraqi province 
(SOR 2.c); that another brother served in the Iraqi army and is now an employee of an 
Iraqi utility ministry (SOR 2.d). Additionally, it was alleged that one of his half-brothers is 
a contractor supporting the Iraqi government (SOR 2.e); that one of Applicant’s uncles 
was a general in the Iraqi army (SOR 2.f); that another of his uncles is a colonel in the 
Iraqi defense ministry (SOR 2.g); that three of Applicant’s uncles (SOR 2.h), two cousins 
(SOR 2.i), and another brother (SOR 2.j) all work for Iraqi ministries. The Government 
further alleged that Applicant owns property in Iraq (SOR 2.k); that he provides financial 
support to one of his brothers (SOR 2.l); and that he was employed by an Iraqi university 
for nine months in 2014 (SOR 2.m).  
 
                                                 
2 The Department of Defense implemented the adjudicative guidelines on September 1, 2006. These 
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
3 Directive, E3.1.7. 
 
3 
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant denied, with explanations, the allegations at 
SOR 2.g and 2.k. He admitted, with explanations, the remaining allegations. As to SOR 
2.g, available information does not show Applicant has an uncle working for the Iraqi 
defense ministry. SOR 2.g is resolved for Applicant. As to SOR 2.k, the record shows 
Applicant bought a small, undeveloped lot for his wife in 2007. She (not Applicant) still 
owns it, but she is trying to sell it. SOR 2.k is resolved for Applicant. (Answer; Gx. 2; Gx. 
3; Ax. Q; Tr. 31 – 34, 66) 
 
 Finally, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified an answer in 
an e-QIP question when he omitted his ownership of property in Iraq as alleged in SOR 
2.k (SOR 3.a). In response to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR 3.a and averred he did not 
intentionally omit from his e-QIP, information about a property interest in Iraq. That 
property belongs to Applicant’s wife, but he was still required to disclose it in his e-QIP. 
Applicant claimed he did not read the pertinent question closely enough, and that when 
he realized his mistake he tried to correct it. In fact, he disclosed it during a counter-
intelligence screening in February 2015. The Government acknowledged at hearing that 
Applicant did not intend to conceal information from the Government. SOR 3.a is resolved 
for Applicant. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 3; Tr. 79 – 80) 
  
 In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions under Guideline B, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He was born, raised, and educated in Iraq, where he 
received bachelor and master’s degrees in agricultural economics. He and his wife, who 
was born and raised in Iraq, have been married since November 2002. They have three 
children (9, 11, and 12), all of whom were born in Iraq. (Gx. 1) 
 
 Applicant is one of six siblings (he has one younger sibling, a brother). His mother 
died when Applicant was two years old. Applicant’s father subsequently remarried and 
had four more children (Applicant’s half-siblings). Applicant also has several uncles and 
cousins. He describes his cousins as “fourth degree,” meaning that they are distant 
cousins several times removed. All of Applicant’s and his wife’s relatives are Iraqi citizens 
and still reside in Iraq. (Answer; Gx. 1 – 3; Tr. 25 – 26) 
 
 Before 2003, Applicant and several of his male relatives served in the Iraqi army 
as part of compulsory service at the time. Applicant only served a few months because 
of his higher education level. His brothers, half-brothers, cousins and uncles all served 
longer periods. Applicant’s father was a career Iraqi army warrant officer, a rank Applicant 
described as similar to a U.S. military non-commissioned officer. Applicant’s father served 
for 26 years before retiring in 1989. He still receives a retired pension from the Iraqi 
government. Applicant also has an uncle who was a general in the Iraqi army before 2003. 
His uncle’s duties, in both the military and later as a civilian, are best described as public 
works engineering. Available information shows that none of Applicant’s male relatives 
has served in the Iraqi army since 2003. Applicant has not had any contact with most of 
his relatives in Iraq since 2014. In some cases, as with uncles and distant cousins, he 
has not had contact with them since 2003. (Answer; Gx. 1- 3; Tr. 26, 31, 48, 52 – 54) 
4 
 
 
 One of Applicant’s brothers worked as a contractor at the Iraqi Ministry of Irrigation 
and Water. His contract ended and Applicant does not know where that brother now 
works. Three of Applicant’s uncles, including the uncle who was a general in the Iraqi 
army, work for the Iraqi Ministry of Industry. Applicant has had no contact with them since 
2003. In addition to his younger brother, two of Applicant’s distant cousins are police 
officers. Applicant has had no contact with them since 2003. (Answer; Gx. 2 – 3; Tr. 25 – 
27, 28, 31, 50 - 56)  
 
 In 2013 and 2014, Applicant sent a total of about $900 (in $300 increments) to his 
younger brother, who lives with their father. The money went to help their father obtain 
private medical care he could not afford on his military pension. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 3) 
 
 In July 2003, not long after the U.S. invasion of Iraq, Applicant was hired by a U.S. 
company to be a linguist and translator embedded with U.S. military units in combat 
zones. During one of the first combat missions on which he worked, Applicant suffered 
injury when an improvised explosive device (IED) detonated near him. His work with 
Americans also resulted in threats against him and his family by Iraqi insurgents that 
caused him to move his wife and children to a more secure area in Iraq. Notwithstanding, 
he continued to work in support of U.S. military operations in Iraq for the next five years. 
Applicant participated in over 50 combat missions during this period. In 2008, U.S. military 
authorities approved Applicant’s request to participate in the Special Immigrant Visa 
program. That decision arose from Applicant’s work for the U.S. military in Iraq. Applicant 
and his family immigrated to the United States as legal aliens in February 2008. They 
have lived in the United States since then. Applicant, his wife and their children became 
U.S. citizens in March 2013. Applicant and his wife have bought a house in the United 
States, and all of their financial, professional, and personal interests lie in the United 
States. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 3; Ax. A; Ax. I - M; Tr. 19 – 20, 32) 
 
 Since 2008, Applicant has continued his work with different companies as a linguist 
in support of the U.S. military. He returned to Iraq where he worked with the U.S. military 
from June 2009 until November 2011. Thereafter, he continued to work in the United 
States as a linguist training troops at a military installation. He also worked at a nearby 
state university as a language instructor teaching classes tailored to the needs of military 
and other government personnel. In December 2014, Applicant’s current employer hired 
him for work as a linguist in Iraq. In February 2015, Applicant completed a counter-
intelligence (CI) screening. The CI screening contains most of the information about 
Applicant’s family, friends, associates and work in Iraq. It also contains information about 
his travel to Iraq. Applicant provided all of that information. After completing the CI 
screening, the Army approved Applicant for deployment to Iraq in support of highly 
classified U.S. military missions to train and support Iraqi troops and security forces in the 
effort to combat the Islamic State in the Levant (ISIL) in northern and western Iraq. He 
has been doing that job since December 2015. Applicant’s work now requires his eligibility 
for access to classified information so that he can operate with forward-deployed military 
personnel. Applicant’s wife also works as a defense contractor providing linguistic 
5 
 
services at a stateside U.S. military facility. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 3; Ax. H; Ax. M; Ax. O; Ax. 
R; Tr. 44 – 45, 62) 
 
 Applicant also travelled to Iraq in early 2014 because his father had a heart attack. 
He remained for about nine months. Before immigrating to the United States, Applicant 
had also worked as an adjunct professor at an Iraqi university. When he was in Iraq in 
2014, Applicant returned to work at that university on a part-time basis. Applicant returned 
to the United States in September 2014. Applicant has not seen or had contact with any 
of his family members since then. As a result, Applicant is unaware of any changes in the 
available information about his family and other associations in Iraq. None of his family in 
Iraq know what he currently does for a living. Applicant believes they think his only job is 
as a language instructor with the aforementioned university in the United States. (Answer; 
Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Ax. H; Ax. M; Tr. 24, 25 – 27, 42) 
 
 In October 2013, the U.S. Army accepted Applicant for enlistment in the Army 
Reserve under a special program for recruits with certain linguistic skills. However, 
Applicant missed his date for reporting to basic training because he had returned to Iraq 
to tend to his father. The Army program expired before he returned. (Gx. 1 – 3)  
 
 Applicant’s work with military units before he immigrated to the United States drew 
extensive praise from several sources. His military commanders, many of whom have 
served with Applicant in sensitive combat missions, and others with whom he has worked 
hold Applicant in high regard for his commitment to the missions assigned to the units 
with whom he worked, and he has received several expressions of gratitude and 
recognition. This trend has continued in his current employment. (Ax. E; Ax. F; Ax. L) 
 
 To assess properly the security significance of these facts within the adjudicative 
guidelines at issue, I have taken administrative notice of certain facts regarding Iraq. 
Among the most pertinent of these facts are that Iraq=s newly and freely elected 
government has been unable, without assistance from the U.S. military, to quell violence 
that has engulfed parts of Iraq, fueled and perpetrated, initially by Al-Qaeda terrorists, as 
well as Sunni insurgents and Shiite militias, and more recently by ISIL. As a result, some 
parts of Iraq remain wholly unstable. Even the city of Baghdad is still subject to random 
acts of sectarian violence. Nonetheless, the Iraqi government remains aligned with the 
United States in its efforts to improve the ability of Iraqi military and police forces to 
combat ISIL and protect the Iraqi populous. Iraq also remains committed to advancing a 
democratic form of government that is accountable to its people. (Hx. 1; Ax. N) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of 
the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
                                                 
4 See Directive. 6.3. 
6 
 
 
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, administrative judges 
should follow specific applicable guidelines whenever it possible to measure a case 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. 
 
 The principal purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden 
of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government 
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her 
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Available information shows Applicant and his wife have extensive family ties who 
are citizens of and live in Iraq. It also has been established that he was recently employed 
by an Iraqi university; that some of his male relatives served in the Iraqi military and have 
worked as civilians in support of various Iraqi ministries; that one of his uncles was a 
general in the Iraqi army; and that Applicant bought a small piece of land for his wife 
                                                 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
7 
 
before they immigrated to the United States. This information presents the following 
security concern expressed at AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 More specifically, these facts support application of the following AG ¶ 7 
disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
  
  Available information shows that large parts of Iraq, including the northern parts of 
Iraq near where Applicant and his family are from, remain unstable and beset by sectarian 
violence. The presence of Applicant’s family members presents a heightened risk that 
Applicant could be pressured or coerced to act contrary to U.S. interests. Applicant’s ties 
to relatives who served in the Iraqi army and still are connected to the Iraqi government 
through their civilian work presents the potential for a conflict of interests. The record 
supports application of both of the above-named disqualifying conditions. Balanced 
against this is the applicability of the following AG ¶ 8 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign  individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
8 
 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and  
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 Applicant’s ties to the Iraqi military are either attenuated by the passage of time or, 
as in the case of SOR 2.g, unsupported by the record. Applicant’s father is a pensioner 
from his service in an army that no longer exists. So too, his uncle is a retired general 
whose service predates the 2003 U.S. invasion. Applicant’s military service and that of 
his brothers, stepbrothers, uncles and cousins was through compulsory military service. 
None of them made a career of the military, and their service ended before the invasion. 
Even if those military connections were still current, they would involve an Iraqi military 
and police force whom the United States is actively supporting.  
 
Applicant’s relatives who work or worked for various Iraqi ministries do not appear 
to be high level officials, and many of them were employed by civilian contracting firms 
as opposed to the Iraqi government itself. As to Applicant’s employment at an Iraqi 
university, his last work there was part-time while he was tending to his ailing father. 
Applicant is again in Iraq, but is solely engaged with his linguist duties for his U.S. 
employer and not likely to work for that university again. Applicant has had no contact 
with most of them since 2003. 
 
The February 2015 CI screening of the same facts and circumstances presented 
here served as the basis for his authorization to deploy to Iraq in support of the current 
U.S. mission there. Ostensibly, that screening found no conflict between Applicant’s Iraqi 
relationships and his work for the U.S. military at home or abroad. Those conclusions are 
bolstered by the information about his performance while embedded with combat forces 
in Iraq before he immigrated to the United States in 2008. Further, Applicant has no 
property or financial interests in Iraq. He and his immediate family now have deep roots 
as American citizens whose livelihood arises from their work for and commitment to the 
U.S. military. Applicant always has been candid and forthcoming about his personal ties 
to Iraqi citizens and about all aspects of his background. He is cognizant of the security 
concerns related to someone in his position, so much so that he stopped communicating 
with his family after receiving the SOR.  
 
All of the foregoing supports application of the above-named mitigating conditions. 
I conclude it is also sufficient to mitigate the security concerns under this guideline. 
  
9 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
 Available information submitted by the Applicant shows that he relinquished his 
expired Iraqi passport in June 2016. He also established that he had not used that 
passport after becoming a U.S. citizen in 2013. As Department Counsel acknowledged 
at hearing, this information is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns under this 
guideline. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Available information shows that Applicant omitted from his 2014 e-QIP the fact 
that he had purchased property in Iraq in 2008. The record also shows that Applicant 
quickly realized his mistake and tried to correct it. To be disqualifying, such an omission 
must have been intentional. Further, Applicant tried to correct his omission before being 
confronted with the facts. As Department Counsel acknowledged at hearing, this 
information is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns under this guideline. 
 
 I also evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG 
¶ 2(a). From 2003 to 2008, Applicant worked in support of U.S. interests, often at great 
personal risk to him and his family. For that work, the United States government approved 
Applicant’s request for Special Immigrant Visas for him and his family. Applicant has 
continued that work since arriving in the United States in 2008. A recent CI screening did 
not raise any issue that precluded the U.S. military from approving his continued work 
with military personnel in Iraq. Current and former military associates and civilian co-
workers uniformly and overwhelmingly praise Applicant’s character and his suitability for 
a clearance. All of the foregoing far outweighs security concerns about his family ties in 
Iraq. A fair and commonsense assessment of this record resolves any remaining doubts 
about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.m: For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:  For Applicant 
  
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
