 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02995 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. While Applicant’s financial problems may have been 
caused by events beyond his control, he failed to provide any evidence to mitigate the 
concerns raised by his history of delinquent debt.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 30, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended his case be submitted 
to an administrative judge for consideration. 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on January 26, 2016. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received 
the FORM on February 4, 2016, and did not respond. The case was assigned to me on 
August 23, 2016. The documents appended to the FORM are admitted as 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 2, and 4 through 5, without objection. GE 3 is 
excluded as explained below.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 GE 3 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing the interview Applicant had 
with an investigator in October and December 2014. The interview, which contains 
adverse information, is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. 
Footnote 1 of the FORM advises Applicant of that fact and further cautions him that if he 
fails to object to the admission of the interview summary in his response to the FORM 
that his failure may be taken as a waiver of the authentication requirement. Applicant’s 
failure to respond to the FORM or, specifically, to Footnote 1 does not demonstrate that 
he understands the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does 
not establish that he understands the implications of waiving an objection to the 
admissibility of the interview. Accordingly, GE 3 is inadmissible and I have not 
considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 38, has worked for a federal contractor since October 2005. He has 
held a security clearance for the duration of his employment. Applicant completed his 
most recent security clearance application in December 2015. He did not disclose any 
derogatory information. The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant owes 
approximately $23,800 on six delinquent accounts. The delinquent accounts and 
Applicant’s failure to disclose them on his security clearance application served as the 
basis for the SOR allegations.3  
 
 Applicant admits that between 2005 and 2007, he and his wife experienced 
financial problems. They incurred debt during their efforts to adopt their daughter. In 
August 2007, Applicant enrolled in a debt consolidation program to resolve all of his 
debt. Believing his debt was resolved through the debt consolidation program, Applicant 
did not disclose any derogatory accounts on his security clearance application. 
Applicant did not learn that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b. and 1.f, remained 
outstanding until his December 2014 interview with a background investigator. He 
claims to have resolved the debts in January 2015. Applicant did not provide any 
documentation to corroborate his claim. When he received the SOR in October 2015, 
Applicant learned about the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e. He believes the 
accounts became delinquent during the time he and his wife were experiencing marital 
problems, which ultimately ended in their separation in January 2014.  
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 2. 
 
3 
 
 Despite an admonishment in the FORM that documentation regarding the 
alleged accounts would be useful in adjudicating his case, Applicant did not provide any 
additional information about the status of the SOR accounts.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”5  
 
                                                          
4 GE 1.  
 
5  AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
4 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant owes over $23,800 in delinquent accounts. 
Applicant’s admissions and GE 4, the credit report dated July 2014, establish the 
Government’s prima facie case, that Applicant has a history of financial problems that 
remain unresolved.6 The record is unclear about the current state of the debt. Applicant 
did not provide any documentation to corroborate his past efforts to resolve his 
delinquent accounts or their ultimate resolution. Although none of the alleged debts 
appears on GE 5, the most recent credit report in the record, this fact does not prove or 
establish that the debts have been resolved. The resulting ambiguity must be resolved 
in favor of the Government. While Applicant’s financial problems were partially caused 
by events beyond his control, he did not provide enough information to warrant the 
application of the financial considerations mitigating conditions.  
 
Personal Conduct, Guideline E 
 
Conduct involving a lack of candor or dishonesty,  particularly, a failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security process, raises questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.7 The 
SOR also alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his delinquent debt on his 
July 2014 security clearance application. Applicant denies the allegation. Proof of 
omission, alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when 
he completed the application. The record does not establish that Applicant intended to 
conceal adverse information from the Government. None of the personal conduct 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s ongoing suitability for 
access to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant’s favorable security clearance history is not 
enough to outweigh the security concerns raised by his derogatory financial record. 
Applicant failed to meet his burden of production and persuasion to refute or mitigate 
the SOR allegations. Applicant did not provide any evidence to show financial 
rehabilitation or reform. Accordingly, his request for continued access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 AG ¶ 19(c). 
 
7 AG ¶ 15. 
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied.                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
