 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 15-03932  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to resolve any of the 48 alleged delinquent debts. Resulting 
security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On May 31, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 13, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On 
May 18, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on the same day. He received it on May 23, 2016. The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. He did 
not file any objection to the Government’s FORM, or submit new material in response 
thereto. DOHA assigned the case to me on March 27, 2017. Items 1 through 5 are 
admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all 48 allegations concerning his 
delinquent debts. His admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old and divorced. He has two children. He began working 
with his employer in 2012. Prior to this position, he was unemployed from 2009 to 2012.  
(Item 2.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from June 2013, April 2015, January 
2016, and May 2016, the SOR alleged 48 delinquent debts, which totaled about 
$90,000. The debts became delinquent between 2009 and 2015. They include unpaid 
medical debts, student loans, utility bills, and judgments. (Items 3, 4, 5.) There is no 
evidence that any of these debts have been paid or resolved. 
 
 Applicant offered no evidence of financial counseling, a workable budget, or 
other documentation to show that he is meeting his financial obligations.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The  
 
 
3 
 
 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of delinquent debts. From 2009 to 2015, he accumulated 
48 delinquent accounts totaling over $90,000. His financial history and ongoing pattern 
of inability or unwillingness to pay his debts raise security concerns under the above 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s ongoing financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are numerous, and ongoing. They continue to 
reflect unreliability and poor judgment. He was unemployed for three years, from 2009 
to 2012, which may have been a circumstance beyond his control. He did not provide 
any documentation that he attempted to responsibly manage his debts while they were 
accumulating or pay them once he was employed. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) do not provide 
mitigation of the security concerns.  
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant participated in financial counseling or that his 
financial problems are under control. Thus, he failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(c). He submitted no evidence that he resolved any of the SOR-listed debts, 
indicating a good-faith effort to repay them. No mitigation was established under AG ¶ 
20(d).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns 
alleged in the SOR. The 48 alleged delinquent debts arose between 2009 and 2015, 
total approximately $90,000, and remain unresolved. He did not present evidence of 
credit or financial counseling, a budget, or a plan for addressing the debts that might 
demonstrate rehabilitation or behavioral change. The likelihood that similar problems 
will continue remains a security issue, such that the potential for pressure, coercion, or 
duress is undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet 
his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.vv:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                 
 
 
   
          SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
