 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06434 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 13, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM), mailed it to Applicant, and it was received on May 27, 2016. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
 
2 
 
 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government evidence. The 
Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 3. Applicant provided a 
statement in response to the FORM, and it is marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. The 
Government did not object and all exhibits are admitted. The case was assigned to me 
on April 6, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant did not admit or deny the sole SOR allegation, but provided a narrative 
explanation that is considered a denial. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He has been employed by his present employer since 
2001. He has been married since 1982 and has two grown children.  
 
 Applicant was arrested on October 31, 2014, and charged with assault-first 
degree, felony; assault-second degree, misdemeanor; and firearm use/felony/violent 
crime. He pled guilty to assault-second degree, misdemeanor, and was sentenced to a 
five-year suspended prison term, with three-years supervised probation. He was also 
ordered to attend anger management and substance abuse programs; forfeit all 
firearms; and have no unconsented contact with the victim. The other charges were 
nolle prossed. Applicant is on probation until May 2018. Applicant was represented by 
an attorney when he pled guilty to the lesser offense.1 
 
 Applicant provided a detailed chronology of a domestic disturbance he had with 
his son that involved several altercations between October 30, 2014 and October 31, 
2014. He stated that his son was abusive, and threatened his and his wife’s life with 
severe bodily harm and death. The police were called several times, but his son was not 
arrested. Applicant stated his son had several weapons and he was worried his son 
would dismember him. He stated that his son was attempting to gain entry into 
Applicant’s house and his wife called the police. Applicant had a legally purchased and 
registered firearm. He stated he could see his son’s shadow through an inside doorway, 
and his son had something about three feet long in his hand. Applicant believed it was a 
machete. He saw his son’s shadow move closer. Applicant fired a single “warning shot” 
into the wall.2  
 
 Applicant provided documents to show he completed anger management and 
substance abuse ordered treatment. The only evidence provided by Applicant was his 
statement.3 
 
 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 3; AE A. 
 
2 Items 1, 3; AE A. 
 
3 Item 1. 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern for criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under criminal conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 Applicant was arrested on October 31, 2014, and charged with assault-first 
degree, felony; assault-second degree, misdemeanor; and firearm use/felony/violent 
crime. He pled guilty to assault-second degree, misdemeanor, and was sentenced to a 
five-year suspended prison term, with three-years supervised probation; ordered to 
attend anger management and substance abuse programs; forfeit all firearms; and have 
no unconsented contact with the victim. He remains on supervised probation until May 
2018. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant was represented by an attorney at his court proceeding. He pled guilty 
to a lesser offense. The judge ordered Applicant to be on supervised probation for three 
years and sentenced him to five years in prison, which was suspended. He also was 
ordered to attend anger management class and a substance abuse program. Applicant 
does not elaborate on the reasons he was ordered to attend these programs. 
 
5 
 
 
Presumably the court was made aware of all of the circumstances surrounding 
Applicant’s offense. The only information provided in mitigation was Applicant’s version 
of the altercation. The seriousness of the offense is reflected by the sentence and 
lengthy supervised probation which runs until May 2018. Although there is no evidence 
of additional criminal behavior, there is insufficient evidence to overcome the concerns 
raised by Applicant’s criminal conduct. Therefore, not enough time has elapsed since 
the criminal behavior occurred. AG ¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant had a serious domestic altercation with his son. He provided an 
explanation for his conduct. However, he pled guilty to second-degree assault. 
Applicant received a five-year jail sentence that was suspended, and supervised 
probation until May 2018. Insufficient evidence was presented to conclude that 
Applicant’s conduct is no longer a security concern. He is still on supervised probation. 
Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the criminal conduct guideline.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
