 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06525 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 27, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 28, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 13, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on January 12, 2017. 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
 
without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant testified, and offered exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted 
without objection. The record was kept open and Applicant submitted AE F through H, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
January 24, 2017.  
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR based upon evidence adduced 
at hearing. Applicant testified that he owed federal income taxes in the approximate 
amount of $26,000. Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding ¶ 1.i, 
which would contain the following language: “You owe the IRS approximately $26,000 
in delinquent taxes for tax years 2013 to 2015. As of the date of the SOR, these taxes 
remain unpaid.” I provided Applicant an opportunity to object to the amendment or 
request additional time to respond to it, but he affirmatively declined to do either. The 
motion was granted and the SOR was so amended.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
this employer as an engineer since 1985. He has a high school education and has 
taken some college courses. He is divorced. He has two adult children from the 
marriage and one step-child. He has no military service. He has held a security 
clearance for 31 years.2  
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant failed to file his federal and state income tax returns 
for tax years 2013 and 2014, and that he is indebted to the IRS in the amount of 
approximately $26,000 for tax years 2013-2015. It also alleged that Applicant was 
delinquent on five collection accounts and one charged-off account. Applicant’s 
admissions in his SOR answer support the tax-related allegations and two credit reports 
support the delinquent collection and charged-off accounts.3  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose because of a contentious divorce with his 
ex-wife. He claimed she failed to cooperate with him so that he could not timely file his 
federal and state tax returns. He and his ex-wife separated in March 2014, but the 
divorce was not finalized until sometime in 2016 (although the record is not clear as to 
the exact date of divorce). In the summer of 2016, Applicant claimed he filed his 2013 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 39-42; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 6, 17, 19-20; GE 1. 
 
3 Answer; GE 2-3. 
 
 
3 
 
and 2014 federal and state tax returns. He testified he could provide copies of those 
returns, was given an opportunity to do so when the record was left open, but failed to 
produce any returns. In addition to his admitted federal tax liability of $26,000 for tax 
years 2013 to 2015, Applicant provided a letter from his tax professional, whom he 
retained in October 2016, stating that the IRS has filed a tax lien for unpaid federal 
taxes for tax years 2007, 2009, 2010, and 2011. He also has federal tax debt for tax 
years 2012 to 2015. Applicant estimated this total debt at approximately $59,000.4 His 
tax professional contacted the IRS about a payment arrangement, but no specific 
details or documentation was provided about a payment plan. The tax professional 
made no mention of whether Applicant’s 2013 and 2014 tax returns were filed. 
Applicant’s tax issues are unresolved.5   
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that the collection debts listed in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h were all paid. These debts are resolved.6 
 
 Applicant and his ex-wife were co-borrowers on a timeshare loan. They stopped 
making payments and the property was foreclosed. A deficiency debt remained and 
under the terms of the couple’s divorce settlement, they were equally responsible for 
this debt in the amount of approximately $10,947 (SOR ¶ 1.e). Applicant testified that he 
thought he received an IRS form 1099-C (cancellation of debt) regarding this debt, but 
failed to supply a copy of it. This debt remains unresolved.7 
 
 Applicant produced evidence showing that he will receive a substantial retirement 
pension valued at over $1 million. He is eligible to retire in five years. He has $30,000 in 
a 401K retirement account. His monthly income is approximately $3,500. In 2014 and 
2015, he paid his ex-wife approximately $22,959 per year in spousal support payments. 
He claimed to have a written budget that he could provide, but which he failed to submit. 
He has not sought financial counseling.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
4 The tax debt, other than stated in SOR ¶ 1.i will only be used as it might relate to accessing 
Applicant’s credibility, and the application of mitigating and whole-person factors.  
 
5 Tr. at 21-25, 32, 44, 46-48; AE F-G. 
 
6 Tr. at 26-27, 30-32; AE A-B. 
 
7 Tr. at 28-29; AE F. 
 
8 Tr. at 37, 51-52, 54-55; AE C-E. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
  
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
  
 Applicant has been delinquent paying his federal taxes over an extended period 
and he failed to timely file his 2013 and 2014 federal and state income tax returns. The 
record also establishes Applicant accrued other delinquent debts. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s tax debt and failure to file his tax returns are recent events and cast 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Although he claimed to 
recently file these tax returns, he failed to provide documentation of such filings. He has 
not provided evidence of a plan to pay his delinquent federal taxes. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
Applicant’s family circumstances (divorce, ex-wife’s refusal to cooperate with tax 
filings), were events beyond his control. However, these events took place a number of 
years ago. Applicant’s tax issues go back as far as 2007, long before his divorce. He 
 
6 
 
also failed to engage professional tax assistance until October 2016, months after the 
SOR was issued. His delayed response to his tax problems was not responsible. AG ¶ 
20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
Applicant did not seek financial counseling. Given Applicant’s delayed reaction to 
dealing with his tax problems and his current tax debt that remains unaddressed, there 
are not clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. The 
evidence does not show that Applicant put forth good-faith efforts to file his federal and 
state income tax returns and pay the resulting income tax debt. He also has not 
resolved SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant has otherwise resolved the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply and AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant’s tax situation came to be an 
issue and his lengthy contractor service. However, I also considered that he failed to 
timely resolve his tax obligations. He has not established a meaningful track record of 
financial responsibility when addressing his federal income tax issues.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.c – 1.d:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.f – 1.h:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.i:   Against Applicant    
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
