 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00808 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance. While Applicant’s financial problems may have been 
caused by events beyond her control, she failed to provide documentation corroborating 
her statements that she has taken steps to resolve her delinquent debts.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 5, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security 
clearance and recommended her case be submitted to an administrative judge for 
consideration. 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on February 25, 2016. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. She  
received the FORM on March 4, 2016, and provided a response. The documents 
appended to the FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 
without objection. GE 8, is excluded as explained below.  Applicant’s FORM response is 
admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, without objection. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 GE 8 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing the interview Applicant had 
with an investigator in October 2012. The interview, which contains adverse information, 
is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Footnote 1 of the 
FORM advises Applicant of that fact and further cautions her that if she fails to object to 
the admission of the interview summary in her response to the FORM that her failure 
may be taken as a waiver of the authentication requirement. Applicant’s failure to 
respond to the FORM or, specifically, to Footnote 1 does not demonstrate that she 
understands the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not 
establish that she understands the implications of waiving an objection to the 
admissibility of the interview. Accordingly, GE 8 is inadmissible and I have not 
considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 58, has worked for a federal contractor as a project manager since 
December 2011. She completed a security clearance application, her first, in August 
2012. She disclosed a state tax lien, now resolved, and eight delinquent accounts. The 
SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $57,500 on seven delinquent accounts.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in 2005, when the youngest of her two 
children, then 15, began experiencing problems at school. Applicant and her husband 
incurred significant costs related to a wilderness intervention program as well as private 
school tuition for their son. In 2006, Applicant’s husband decided he no longer wanted 
to spend money on his son’s education. Applicant began using credit cards to pay the 
tuition. That same year, her parents were both diagnosed with serious illnesses, 
requiring Applicant to provide them with financial assistance.  By the time their son 
graduated from high school in 2008, Applicant and her husband were separated. He did 
not provide any financial support to Applicant. Without his income, Applicant struggled 
to make ends meet.  
 
 In 2011, Applicant shuttered her consulting business, accepting full-time 
employment as a federal contractor. She then began working on resolving her debts. 
Applicant stated that she paid the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e in March 
2014 and July 2008, respectively. She also stated that she made settlement 
arrangements for SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g for less than the amounts owed. Applicant is 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
disputing SOR ¶ 1.a; however, she did not provide a basis for doing so. The same 
creditor holds SOR ¶ 1.b. The debt is old and the creditor is not pursuing collection of 
the account. Applicant intends to pay the debt in the future. Despite an admonishment 
in the FORM that such documentation would be helpful to the adjudication of her case, 
Applicant did not provide any evidence to corroborate her claims of debt resolution.  
 
 Applicant believes that her current finances are stable. She lives within her 
means and has not incurred any new debt.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”3  
                                                          
3  AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant owes approximately $57,500 in delinquent accounts. 
Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports in the record establish the Government’s 
prima facie case that Applicant has a history of financial problems that remain 
unresolved.4 The needs of Applicant’s youngest son, her parents, and the dissolution of 
her marriage contributed to her financial problems. However, her claims that she has 
taken steps toward the resolution of the SOR accounts is not supported by the record. 
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s ongoing suitability for 
access to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant failed to meet her burden of production 
and persuasion to refute or mitigate the SOR allegations. Applicant did not provide any 
evidence to show financial rehabilitation or reform. Accordingly, Applicant’s request for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied.                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
4 AG ¶ 19(c). 
 
