 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-08887 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns stemming from his financial problems. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 29, 2016, and he requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 25, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, 
scheduling the hearing for March 9, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-4 were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and 
 
2 
 
presented documents, and the record remained open until April 10, 2017. Applicant 
submitted 15 documents, which were admitted into evidence as Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A-O, without objection. I received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 27, 2017. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent student-loan accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.c.), four 
medical accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 1.e., 1.h, and 1.i.), and three other collection accounts 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.f., 1.g., and 1.j.).  Applicant admitted all 10 alleged debts. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He graduated from high school in June 2006 and 
attended college from 2006 to 2009. Since March 2007, he has had full-time 
employment with several different employers without any periods of unemployment. He 
has been employed by a DOD contractor since September 2014. He also currently 
supplements his income with part-time employment.1 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his February 2015 and May 2016 credit reports 
establish the 10 alleged debts. His three student-loan accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.c.) were 
incurred while in college. He made one or two payments on his school loans in about 
2012. In February 2017, he initiated a payment arrangement for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. and 1.c. As to the student loan in SOR ¶ 1.b., he entered into a Department of 
Education loan-rehabilitation program. His recent federal tax refund ($526) was applied 
to his delinquent student loan, he entered into a payment agreement, and he made two 
payments in accordance with that nine-month rehabilitation plan.2 
 
 Applicant’s four medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 1.e., 1.h., and 1.i.) are copay 
amounts for medical expenses incurred from emergency-room visits between April 2010 
and January 2015. His minimal health insurance coverage and low-paying jobs 
contributed to these debts becoming delinquent. With his current employment, he has 
much better health insurance, and he has automatic payments set up for any medical 
expenses not covered by insurance. He has also established weekly payments to the 
collection agency which holds these four delinquent accounts. He has made payments 
totaling $333 on his medical collection accounts, and he has scheduled payments going 
forward.3  
 
 As to Applicant’s three consumer debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.f., 1.g., and 1.j.), he has fully 
paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f. and 1.j. He has made a partial payment on SOR ¶ 1.g., 
and he has a monthly payment arrangement with the creditor to resolve the remaining 
balance. 4 
                                                          
1 GE 1; Tr. 26, 43. 
 
2 AE C; AE D; AE F, AE N; Tr. 43, 46-48. 
 
3 AE A; AE B; AE O; Tr. 31-32. 
 
4 AE E; AE H; AE I; Tr. 39-42, 53. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to low-paying jobs and inadequate 
health insurance. More recently, he had a failed personal relationship that required him 
to find a new residence, and he had to purchase a new vehicle when his previous 
vehicle broke down. His current pay rate is nearly double his pay rate with previous 
employers.  He has been current on his car payments, rent, and utility payments for at 
least the past 12 months, and he has attended some financial counseling.5 
  
 From 2006 to 2016, Applicant served with his community’s fire department. 
Between 2011 and 2016, he volunteered approximately 40 hours per week as a deputy 
fire chief. His fiancée testified as to steps taken by Applicant to be more financially 
responsible and more proactive with his health care. She further testified that he had 
financially supported her during 2016 while she finished school. 6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
5 Tr. 37-38, 54-55, 57, 65. 
 
6 Tr. 27, 61, 69-70. 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s 10 delinquent debts total approximately $18,342. These debts 
became delinquent between 2010 and 2014. The Government produced substantial 
evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting 
the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.7 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
                                                          
7 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts were incurred between 2010 and 2014, while he 
was employed with low-paying jobs and had inadequate health insurance coverage. He 
has since found employment at nearly double his previous pay rate, taken steps to be 
proactive with his health care, and has acquired part-time employment to supplement 
his income. These positive changes in circumstances and Applicant’s actions to 
address his delinquent debts remove doubts as to his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances beyond his control, and (2) Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant’s medical issues, inadequate health 
insurance, and low-paying jobs contributed to his financial problems. These events may 
constitute circumstances beyond his control in the context of AG ¶ 20(b). 
  
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant paid two of the alleged debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.f. and 1.j.). He 
developed a reasonable debt-resolution plan addressing all of the alleged debts, 
entered into several payment agreements, and made payments in accordance with 
each of these agreements.8 AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
Applicant has received some financial counseling. He credibly testified that he 
has remained current on his monthly expenses for over 12 months. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”9 
Applicant paid two debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.f. and 1.j.) and made payment arrangements and 
payments on all of the alleged delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) applies. 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) (“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s low-paying employment hindered his ability to address and resolve 
his delinquent debts. Within the last year, he has found additional income through 
supplemental employment and taken significant steps towards resolving his delinquent 
debts. I find that Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant generously volunteered his time on his community’s fire department for 
several years. He has developed and implemented a debt-resolution plan and is 
responsibly handling his current monthly obligations. The totality of the record evidence 
leaves me with no doubts as to his financial responsibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. I conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.j.:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
