 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04173 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 8, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on 
June 20, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
2 
 
 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM. Therefore, the Government’s evidence 
identified as Items 1 through 5 were admitted into evidence without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on May 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the sole allegation in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1988 and a master’s 
in business administration degree in 1996, both from prestigious universities. He served 
in the military from 1984 to 1994. He is married. He has children ages 21, 17, and 14, 
from the marriage. He has worked for his present employer, a federal contractor, since 
1999.1  
 
 In Applicant’s May 2014 security clearance application and during his 
background interview with a government investigator, he disclosed a charged-off 
second mortgage delinquent debt in the amount of $91,694 that remains unpaid. This 
debt remains on credit reports from May 2014 and March 2015.2 
 
 During his background interview, Applicant explained the circumstances of the 
second mortgage debt. In 2007, he obtained a mortgage in the amount of approximately 
$494,000 and a second mortgage for $91,694.3 In May 2010, Applicant stopped making 
payments on both mortgages because he purchased another house through a short 
sale and moved into this new house. His new residence had a mortgage that was 
$250,000 less than the mortgages owed on his first home. He voluntarily let his first 
home’s mortgage foreclose. His explanation was that the mortgage on his first home 
was worth more than the value of the house at that time. Applicant did not recall the 
monthly payments.4 
 
 In January 2011, the creditor for the first mortgage foreclosed on the home, and it 
was sold at auction for an unknown amount. Applicant’s credit report shows there is a 
zero balance on that account. The second mortgage, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, is in 
collection. Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to the downward trend of the real 
estate market during that time.5  
 
                                                          
1 Item 2.  
 
2 Items 2, 3. 
 
3 There is no evidence that the second mortgage lender was involved in predatory practices. 
 
4 Item 3. 
 
5 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated he has not defaulted on a debt 
before or after his voluntary foreclosure. He has been current on payments for his 
present mortgage since 2010. He has no other debts. He is funding his child’s college 
education. He has no vehicle loans. He is working to repair his credit, live debt-free, and 
pay his bills. He explained he made a financial mistake. He did not provide information 
about any attempt he made to pay, settle, or resolve the delinquent debt alleged in the 
SOR.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
6 Item 1. 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.7 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides a condition that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
 Applicant has a $91,694 delinquent debt that he is unwilling to pay. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying condition. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 In 2010, Applicant made a strategic financial decision to default on his first and 
second mortgages and purchase another home at a short sale. The first mortgage was 
foreclosed and there is a zero balance owed. The second mortgage remains in 
collection as a charged-off account. Although this event is unlikely to recur in the future, 
the debt remains unpaid. It is clear from the evidence that Applicant does not intend to 
pay the debt. His decision may have made financial sense at the time, but it does not 
absolve him of his duty to pay his delinquent debt. He presented no evidence of any 
attempt to settle the debt or resolve it with the creditor. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply 
because the facts cast doubt about Applicant’s reliability and good judgment.  
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to the real estate market. There is no 
evidence that Applicant was unable to make his mortgage payments. Rather his first 
house had lost its value; he purchased a second house by short sale; and he voluntarily 
let his first house foreclose. Based on Applicant’s answer to the SOR, there is sufficient 
evidence to conclude he has the financial means to address the delinquent debt, but 
chooses not to do so. I am unable to find these conditions were beyond his control, and 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
There is no evidence Applicant participated in financial counseling. Applicant has 
not presented any evidence that he made a good-faith attempt to settle, pay, or resolve 
the delinquent debt alleged in the SOR. The problem is not under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old educated man. He served in the military and has been 
steadily employed with the same federal contractor since 1999. In 2010, Applicant made 
a strategic financial decision to voluntarily stop paying two mortgages because his 
house had lost its value, and he decided to purchase a second home that was more 
affordable. Although, his decision may have made sense from a financial standpoint, it 
did not relieve him of his responsibility to pay the loan he secured for a second 
mortgage and did not pay or resolve. Applicant provided evidence that he is financially 
stable, but did not provide evidence of any attempt to contact the creditor to resolve the 
collection account. He has not acted responsibly in addressing this debt. Instead, he 
has ignored his financial responsibility to this creditor, fully understanding the debt was 
charged-off, and at some point will drop off his credit report. He has failed to meet his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
