 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ADP Case No. 15-00859 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
May 23, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 29, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 4.) On August 15, 2015, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 
1987, as amended (Regulation); DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
On October 13, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 3.) On March 7, 2016, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received 
the FORM on March 11, 2016, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
 
2 
 
 
submit additional information.1  Applicant elected not to submit additional information. 
On November 1, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned 
the case to me.      
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old and married. In July 2013 he began working for a 
defense contractor. (Item 4.) 
 
 The SOR contained eleven allegations under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The allegations relate to a court-martial in 1989, his failure to file or pay 
Federal taxes, and eight delinquent debts. In his Answer, Applicant admitted all of the 
allegations. (Item 3.) 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted that he was tried by a Special Court-Martial in 1989 for 
the offense of Uttering Worthless Checks under Article 123A of the Uniform Code of 
Military Justice while in the Marine Corps. His adjudged sentence included six months 
confinement, reduction to the lowest enlisted pay grade (E-1), and a Bad Conduct 
Discharge. (Item 4 at Section 15.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted that he failed to file his Federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007. He stated on his e-QIP, “Behind on filing, all 
taxes filed as of August 2013.” No other information was provided. (Item 4 at Section 
26.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted that he owed the Federal government at least $70,650 in 
back taxes, due to a tax lien filed in 2012. In his e-QIP Applicant stated, “Tax filings 
brought current,” and that the tax lien may be $80,000. Applicant did not provide any 
documentation from the IRS setting forth with particularity the amount he owes in back 
taxes.  
 
 1.d through 1.k. These eight allegations concern alleged delinquent debts of 
Applicant. He admitted each of these allegations. The total amount of the delinquent 
debt is $5,096. Support for the existence and amounts of these debts can be found in 
credit reports of the Applicant dated June 6, 2013; and January 12, 2015. (Items 5 and 
7.) These debts consist of bank and other commercial accounts, with past-due amounts 
ranging from $74 to $1,404.  
 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel submitted seven Items in support of the SOR allegations.  Item 6 is inadmissible. It 
will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of 
Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on July 16, 2014. 
Applicant did not adopt the summary as his own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an 
authenticating witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions and other admissible evidence in the record, it is 
also cumulative. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant did not provide a workable plan or budget from which his ability to 
resolve the tax delinquencies, pay his other delinquent debts, or avoid additional debt 
problems can be predicted with any certainty. He submitted no evidence concerning the 
quality of his professional performance, or the level of responsibility his duties entail. He 
provided no character references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or 
reliability.  
 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.” (See 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
4 
 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to fully satisfy his Federal tax 
obligations. Applicant admits failing to file his Federal income tax returns for at least five 
years, and having a tax lien since 2012. He states that the tax returns have all been 
filed, but supplied no evidence to support that statement. The amount of taxes he 
currently owes is unknown, but he admits it to be between approximately $70,000 and 
 
5 
 
 
$80,000. In addition, Applicant owes eight other creditors at least $5,000 for past-due 
debts. Finally, he admitted to committing earlier financial crimes, which resulted in 
Applicant being court-martialed while on active duty with the Marine Corps. The 
evidence raises all four security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant submitted no information that would show what his current 
indebtedness is to the Federal government, how much he has paid, or how he intends 
to finally resolve his tax issues. In addition, he supplied no information about how he 
intended to resolve his other debt issues. Finally, though it is in the past, the 
background of his court-martial offense makes it of continuing security concern. There is 
insufficient information to demonstrate that his financial problems are unlikely to 
continue or recur, calling into question his reliability and trustworthiness. The evidence 
does not support the application of any of the mitigating conditions in this case. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 43-year-old man, who 
started working for a national company that handles defense contracts in 2013. He has 
a long history of tax problems, which evidently began in about 2003, and may continue 
to date. Applicant failed to submit sufficient information from which to conclude that his 
financial obligations are being responsibly managed and that similar problems are 
unlikely to recur. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not meet his burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
arising from his financial problems. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs  1.a to 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
