 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-07052 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems that began in 2008. She failed to 
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Her eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On March 17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within 
the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
On April 18, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) On May 18, 2016, 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five 
Items, and mailed it to Applicant the following day. Applicant received the FORM on 
June 2, 2016, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. Applicant did not submit any additional information or file objections to the 
Government’s evidence; hence, Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence. On 
March 2, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case 
to me.      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged 15 delinquent debts. Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h, and denied the other 11 allegations. She submitted some 
documents with her Answer. (Item 2.) Her admissions are incorporated into these 
findings. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old and unmarried. She is a high school graduate and 
attended a technical college for one semester. In April 2015, she began a position with 
a government contractor. Prior to this job, she worked for a retail store for over four 
years. She was unemployed from May 2009 to August 2010. (Item 3.) 
  
 On March 4, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). During a background interview with a government 
investigator on May 21, 2015, she discussed information in the e-QIP, including 
delinquent debts. She acknowledged her student loans, but disputed owing some of the 
medical debts. (Item 5.) 
 
 Based on a credit bureau report (CBR) from April 2015, the SOR alleged 15 
delinquent debts that totaled $37,684, and arose between 2008 and 2012. They 
consisted of 11 unpaid medical bills, 2 student loans, a cell phone bill, and a utility bill. 
(Item 4.)  
 
 In her April 18, 2016 Answer, Applicant stated that she made payment 
arrangements for the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($9,948) and 1.f ($313). On April 14, 
2016, she agreed to pay $25 a month until the debts were paid. She also stated that the 
defaulted student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($113) and 1.h ($70) had been resolved 
in July 2015. As proof, she submitted a copy of her agreement and an April 2016 CBR 
that reported the loans as having no outstanding balance. She denied owing the 
remaining 11 debts because she said they were not listed on the April 2016 CBR. 
(Answer: Encl. B, C.)  
 
 The Government notified Applicant in its May 18, 2016 FORM, that she had not 
submitted sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial concerns. It gave her an 
opportunity to submit additional information about the status of her debts, which she did 
not do.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant did not provide documentation that she obtained credit or financial 
counseling, or sought assistance for managing her debts. She did not provide a budget 
from which to determine her ability to resolve the delinquencies and avoid additional 
debt problems in the future.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP-I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.” (See 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DOD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. DOD contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to satisfy financial obligations, 
which began in 2008 and continues to date. The evidence raises both disqualifying 
conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial delinquencies: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant failed to demonstrate that her ongoing financial problems are unlikely 
to continue or that her reliability and trustworthiness are not in question. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. She provided some evidence that the delinquent debts may have arisen 
during periods of unemployment, which may have been the result of circumstances 
beyond her control. However, she did not submit evidence that she responsibly 
attempted to manage the debts under those circumstances. The evidence establishes 
partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she participated in credit or financial 
counseling or established a budget. Four days before filing an Answer, she entered into 
a payment agreement to resolve two medical debts with monthly payments. While that 
was a positive step toward resolving debts, her overall actions to date are insufficient to 
conclude that her financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. She 
submitted evidence that she made a good-faith effort to resolve two student loans in 
July 2015. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to those debts. Applicant did not provide evidence that 11 
alleged debts from 2008 to 2012 were not her responsibility, other than to rely on the 
fact that they were no longer on her current credit report. She did not provide proof that 
she successfully investigated or disputed any of those debts. The evidence does not 
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 33-year-old woman, who 
has a history of financial problems that began in 2008. In May 2015, she spoke with a 
government investigator and discussed her delinquent debts. In March 2016, she 
received the SOR. In April 2016, she answered the SOR and included a repayment plan 
for two medical debts that she negotiated four days prior and evidence that two student 
loans were resolved. Despite having a subsequent opportunity, she failed to provide 
additional substantiating documents. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a public trust position, as she has not established a reliable record of 
resolving her delinquent debts and demonstrating responsible judgment. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns arising from her financial problems. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:                Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.g and 1.h:      For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.i through 1.o:       Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
