1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )   ADP Case No. 15-07124 
   ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Given Applicant’s unresolved income tax delinquency and her history of financial 
problems, her bankruptcy discharge does not mitigate the trustworthiness concern. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations, explaining why it was unable to find it clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to 
occupy an automated data processing position. The DOD CAF took the action under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On June 12, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations, admitting 12 of them, 
and denying 1.a, 1.f, 1.g, 1.k, 1.p, 1.q, and 1.s through 1.u. She requested a hearing before 
 
2 
 
an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The 
case was assigned to me on February 13, 2017. On March 16, 2017, I scheduled a hearing 
for April 21, 2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. I received nine Government 
exhibits (GE 1 – 9), nine exhibits from Applicant (AE A – AE I), and I considered Applicant’s 
testimony. The transcript was received on May 1, 2017.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s eligibility to work in an automated 
data processing position under the new AG.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old woman with two adult children. She has been married for 
three years. A previous marriage, from 1987 to 2007, ended in divorce. She has earned 
some college credits. For the past 15 years, Applicant has worked for various contractors 
processing service referral requests for military members and their families, and educating 
them about their medical benefits. (Tr. 17) 
 
 Applicant is highly respected on the job. Her supervisor, who has overseen her since 
2003, regards her as his most productive worker. (AE A) A previous supervisor lauded her 
“confidence, integrity, and professionalism.” (AE B) Over the years, she has earned 
multiple achievement certificates. (AE E – AE G) 
 
 Over the past 20 years, Applicant incurred more than $100,000 of delinquent debt, 
including approximately $40,000 of delinquent car loan payments (SOR subparagraphs 1.d 
and 1.l), and $60,000 of delinquent federal income taxes from 2002 through 2004. 
(Answer; Tr. 34, 37; GE 6 at 34, 43)  The SOR also reflects a lien filed against Applicant’s 
property in 2008 for her outstanding federal income tax debt, incurred between 2002 and 
2004, totaling $17,030 (SOR subparagraph 1.a). (GE 5 at 2). In addition, as of January 
2015, she had not filed her 2011 and 2012 federal income tax returns. (Answer at 1; GE 1 
at 27).  
 
 Applicant attributes much of her financial problems to her troubled first marriage. 
Specifically, her ex-husband was a spendthrift that did not manage money well. (Tr. 20) 
Her financial problems worsened after the divorce, as she sought to re-stablish herself 
financially and did “not really have the resources to do so . . . .”  (Tr. 20) 
 
 In May 2016, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. (GE 6) On 
November 2, 2016, the bankruptcy court discharged all of the commercial SOR debt, 
totaling $60,000, and federal income tax debt totaling $44,000, stemming from tax years 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
2002 through 2004. (GE 6 at 43) The court did not discharge the interest that had incurred 
on the tax delinquencies, totaling $23,000. (Tr. 37) Approximately one month after the 
bankruptcy discharge, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) released the tax lien, as alleged 
in subparagraph 1.a. (GE 5 at 2) 
 
 Applicant filed her federal income tax returns for 2011 and 2012. (GE 1 at 27)  It is 
unclear from the record when she did so. She does not owe any delinquency for tax year 
2012. (GE 1 at 27) She owes $9,000 for tax year 2011. (GE 1 at 27) In sum, Applicant 
currently has $32,000 of remaining delinquent federal income tax debt, constituting the 
interest from the income tax delinquencies incurred between 2002 and 2004 ($23,000) and 
2011. ($9,000) All of her federal income tax filings are up to date. (Tr. 27) The IRS has 
applied overpayments from tax years 2012 through 2015 to her delinquency. (Tr. 31) 
Shortly after the bankruptcy discharge, Applicant arranged a payment plan with the IRS to 
address her income tax delinquency. The first payment of $255 was scheduled to post a 
few days after the hearing. After that payment, Applicant will make $115 monthly payments 
for the next four to five years. (Tr. 33, 44) She did not submit a copy of the payment plan. 
.  
 Applicant has paid her $140 state income tax delinquency, alleged in subparagraph 
1.k. (Tr. 37) Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 1995. In May 1997, the 
court discharged approximately $18,000. (Tr. 20; GE 6 at 70) Applicant has approximately 
$2,100 deposited in two savings accounts. (Tr. 51) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a trustworthiness position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. These guidelines are 
not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under this guideline, “failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, [and] trustworthiness . . . .“ (AG ¶ 18)  Applicant’s delinquencies trigger the 
application of disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 
19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s failure to file her income 
tax returns for 2011 and 2012, as of the date of the SOR, triggers the application of AG ¶ 
19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.”  
 
 The IRS released the 2008 tax lien approximately one month after Applicant’s 
bankruptcy discharge. I resolve subparagraph 1.a in her favor. Currently, all of Applicant’s 
federal income tax returns are up to date, including those for tax years 2011 and 2012. I 
resolve subparagraph 1.c in her favor.   
 
 As for the remaining allegations, the following mitigating conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit  
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s financial troubles did not occur because of extravagant or foolish 
spending. Instead, they initially stemmed from Applicant’s marriage to a spendthrift spouse, 
and initially worsened after her divorce, as she struggled to adjust financially. Conversely, 
in 2016, nine years after their divorce, Applicant still had more than $100,000 of delinquent 
debt, including $60,000 of delinquent federal income tax payments. Moreover, the record is 
unclear as to why she did not file her 2011 and 2012 federal income tax returns on time. 
This is particularly troubling, given her previous history of income tax delinquencies. AG ¶¶ 
20(b) and 20(c) do not apply. 
 
 Applicant satisfied the $140 state income tax delinquency, alleged in subparagraph 
1.k. I resolve it in her favor. Using the Chapter 7 bankruptcy process, Applicant obtained a 
discharge of all of the commercial SOR debts, together with the principal on all of her 
delinquent federal income debt incurred through 2004. Discharging one’s debts through the 
federal bankruptcy process is a legitimate method of eliminating debt, and constitutes a 
good-faith effort “to otherwise resolve debts” under AG ¶ 20(d). However, given Applicant’s 
history of trouble filing her income tax returns on time, the amount of remaining delinquent 
income taxes that remain outstanding, and the brief period of time since she implemented 
a tax payment plan, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) applies, but has limited probative value.   
 
 Applicant has developed a payment plan to satisfy her tax delinquency; however, 
payments under the plan were not scheduled to begin until after the hearing.  Under these 
circumstances, AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In assessing the whole person, the administrative judge must consider the totality of 
an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2 Applicant is an exceptional worker and a person of good 
character. Much of her debt stems from her previous marriage to a spendthrift husband. 
Through the Chapter 7 bankruptcy process, she has obtained a release of all of the SOR 
debts and approximately two-thirds the amount of the IRS debt. Conversely, approximately 
$32,000 of income tax delinquency remains outstanding, and payments were not 
scheduled to begin until after the hearing. Under these circumstances, it is too soon to 
conclude that Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns. 
 
 
 
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.l – 1.v:   Against Applicant    
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive 
information. Eligibility to access to sensitive information is denied. 
  
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
