 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06800 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline H, drug involvement. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 3, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
 
2 
 
 
relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on 
June 8, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not provide a response or documents within that time period. The 
Government’s evidence identified as Items 2 through 8 are admitted into evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on May 3, 2016.  
 
Procedural Matter 
 
 Department Counsel amended the SOR in the FORM in accordance with the 
record evidence by adding SOR ¶ 1.k. It reads: 
 
You are indebted on a Federal Tax Lien filed against you in October 2015, 
in the approximate amount of $17,109. As of the date of this File of 
Relevant material, the account remains delinquent.  
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM. He did not respond to the FORM and did 
not admit or deny this debt. His failure to respond will be considered a denial.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR, except ¶¶ 1.d, 1.i, and 1.k. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He was married from 2008 to 2010. He has been in a 
cohabitant relationship since 2010. Applicant has children ages 33, 25, and 19. He 
began employment with a federal contractor in 2014. Applicant had periods of 
unemployment and short-term employment before then.1  
 
 All of the debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit reports from March 
2016, March 2015, and September 2014. The drug involvement activity is supported by 
Applicant’s admissions in his security clearance application (SCA), his interview with a 
government investigator, and an FBI identification record from September 2014.2 
 
 Applicant admitted he failed to file his 2009 and 2010 state income tax returns. In 
his September 2014 background interview with a government investigator, he stated he 
was in the process of filing his delinquent state tax returns. Applicant did not provide 
evidence that he filed the returns. Applicant is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) for delinquent federal taxes for tax years 2009 and 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.b-$6,000). He 
told the investigator that he provided the IRS with paperwork in 2014 to setup a 
payment plan. He did not provide evidence of the payment plan or payments made. 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s most recent credit report from March 2016, reflects a federal tax lien in the 
amount of $17,109 that was filed in October 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.k).3  
 
 Applicant stated that he disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.i. He did not 
provide evidence of his actions to dispute these debts or the basis of the disputes. The 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.f is for delinquent child support payments. Applicant stated in his 
answer that he was making payments on the debt, but did not provide documentary 
proof. Applicant admitted the remaining SOR debts, but did not provide any information 
or documents of his actions to pay or resolve the debts.4  
 
 Applicant admitted that from approximately 1985 to 2013, he used marijuana on 
various occasions. He admitted he illegally used the prescription drug Xanax from 
approximately 2009 to 2014. He obtained the drug from his mother and used it about 
once or twice a month when he was nervous or anxious. He indicated on his security 
clearance application that he did not intend to use this drug in the future.5  
 
 In approximately July 1987, Applicant was charged and convicted of possession 
of a Class D controlled substance. In approximately August 1988, he was charged with 
possession of a Class D controlled substance. There is insufficient evidence of the 
disposition of the charge. In approximately May 1994, he was charged with possession 
of a Class D controlled substance and violated the terms of a previously imposed 
probation period. In approximately June 1996, Applicant was charged with possession 
of a Class D controlled substance (marijuana). He was convicted of the offense. In 
approximately June 2004, he was charged with possession of a Class D controlled 
substance (marijuana). Applicant told the government investigator that he went to court, 
pled guilty to the offense, was fined, placed on two years probation, and was required to 
attend a drug education class. In approximately June 2008, he was charged with 
possession of a Class D controlled substance. He was convicted of the offense and 
placed on probation for two years. He attended court-ordered drug counseling in 2008. 
No other information was provided by Applicant regarding his drug use and 
possession.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
3 Items 2, 3, 4. 
 
4 Items 2, 4. 
 
5 Items 2, 3, 4. 
 
6 Items 2, 3, 4, 5. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.7 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant failed to timely file his 2009 and 2010 state tax returns and failed to pay 
federal taxes for 2009 and 2010. He has an unpaid $17,190 federal tax lien from 
October 2015, and owes numerous other delinquent debts. There is sufficient evidence 
to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of the actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant did not provide any evidence of efforts to pay, resolve, or dispute any 
of his delinquent debts. He did not provide an explanation for failing to timely file his 
2009 and 2010 state tax returns. He did not provide documents to show the delinquent 
state tax returns have been filed, or that he has a payment plan to resolve the October 
2015 federal tax lien. Although he listed on his SCA and during his interview that he had 
periods of unemployment, he did not offer any specific evidence that the accumulation 
of his debts was beyond his control or any actions he has taken to responsibly address 
them or prove that his financial problems are under control. Applicant’s delinquent debts 
total more than $32,700. None of the above mitigating conditions are applicable.  
  
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions for drug involvement under AG ¶ 
25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana on various occasions from 1985 to 2013. He 
illegally used the prescription drug Xanax on various occasions from approximately 
2009 to 2013. Applicant was charged and convicted in 2008, 2004, and 1996 with 
possession of a class D controlled substance, marijuana. I find the above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
 
7 
 
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant has a long history of illegal drugs use and misuse of a drug that was 
not prescribed to him. He was repeatedly arrested and charged with possession of 
marijuana. His use and possession were not infrequent and did not happen under 
unusual circumstances. Applicant did not present evidence that he no longer associates 
with drug-using contacts, or that he has changed his environment where drugs are 
used. He did indicate that he did not intend to misuse the prescription drug in the future. 
Applicant attended a court-ordered drug program, but there is no evidence as to 
whether he received a diagnosis or a prognosis. Insufficient evidence was provided to 
conclude Applicant has been rehabilitated. The above mitigating conditions do not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under these guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 51 years old. He has approximately $32,700 of delinquent debts, 
including a $17,190 unpaid federal tax lien. He did not provide proof that he has filed his 
delinquent state tax returns or paid any of the debts. He has a history of illegal drug use 
and possession. Applicant failed to provide mitigating evidence regarding these security 
concerns. He has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves 
me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline H, 
drug involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.k:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2. Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.g-2.h:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
