 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08474 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 22, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and E for Applicant. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department 
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 15, 2016, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, which was 
dated May 26, 2016, and he requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge (AJ). 
The case was assigned to this AJ on August 8, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 8, 2016, and the hearing 
was convened as scheduled on August 29, 2016.  
 
 
2 
 
 At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 9, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits 
A through G, which were also admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr) on September 7, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, described 
above, including Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of 
Applicant, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of 
fact:  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old.  He is married but separated, and he has no children. 
Applicant received an Associate of Arts degree in 1988 in Network Administration. He 
served in the United States Air Force from 1984 to 2012, as a Reserve, and he received 
an Honorable Discharge. Applicant is currently unemployed, but he seeks a DoD 
security clearance in connection with his future employment in the defense sector. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists six allegations (1.a. through 1.f.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically overdue debts, a bankruptcy, and a tax lien under Adjudicative Guideline F. 
All of the SOR allegations will be discussed below in the order they were listed on the 
SOR: 
 
 1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a state tax lien entered against him 
in March 2015, in the amount of $21,717. Applicant admitted this allegation in his 
RSOR..  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that this debt occurred when he cashed out his 
401k in the amount of $101,000, when he became unemployed in 2012. While money 
was withheld during the disbursement to pay his additional Federal taxes for that year, 
no money was withheld to pay his additional State taxes. Since that time, he has been 
mostly unemployed. He only had two short term jobs, so he has been unable to pay off 
this debt. (Tr at 34-35.) I find that this debt is still outstanding.  
   
 1.b. The SOR alleges that in February 2013, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 
Bankruptcy, which was discharged in June 2013. Applicant admitted this allegation in 
his RSOR.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he filed bankruptcy to prevent his home 
from being sold in foreclosure. The home was ultimately saved from foreclosure, and 
the bankruptcy did discharge all of his other debts at that time. (Tr at 35-37.) 
   
 
3 
 
 1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for collection account in the amount of 
$2,598. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. 
 
Applicant testified that this debt was for a loan that he received in 2015. He was 
working at the time that he applied for the loan. He stated that he had no indication that 
he was about to be laid off, which did happen the month after he received the loan. He 
stated that he began paying off the loan as long as he could, for a few months, but 
ultimately he stopped making payments when the funds ran out. (Tr at 37-39.) While 
Applicant did indicate that he intends to start paying off this loan once he is employed, 
at this time I find that this debt is still outstanding. (Tr at 55.)  
 
1.d. The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to pay his 2013 Federal and State A 
taxes, as required. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR.  
 
Applicant testified that he did file Federal and State A tax returns for 2013, but 
because he was unemployed, he was unable to pay the amount of taxes that he owed. 
The amount he owed is addressed in 1.e., below. (Tr at 39-40.)  
            
 1.e. The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to the Federal Government and 
State A Tax Board for delinquent taxes in the amount of approximately $32,000. 
Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR and wrote that no evidence was 
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.  
 
 Applicant confirmed that he owed $32,000, but he was not sure if this was what 
he owed to the Federal Government, or that was the amount he owed to both the 
Federal and State Government. (Tr at 40-41.) The record is not clear if Applicant's total 
tax debt is $32,000 or $53,717, but it is undisputed that the debt has not been resolved 
or reduced, and Applicant has not approached the Government entities to attempt to 
establish a payment plan to resolve the debts.  
 
 1.f. The SOR alleges that Applicant’s security clearance was suspended in 2004, 
due to concerns regarding his failure to meet his financial obligations. Applicant 
admitted this allegation in his RSOR. 
 
 Applicant testified that his clearance was suspended, but not denied during this 
period, and when he “cleaned up [his] credit report,” he received his security clearance. 
(Tr at 41-42.)  
 
 Applicant testified that he and his wife divided up their bills, so each of them was 
responsible for paying some of the bills. He averred that some of his financial 
difficulties, which began in 2009 or 2010, occurred because, unbeknownst to him, his 
wife was not paying the bills that she was scheduled to pay. She was also borrowing 
money from Applicant, so he would also pay the bills that she was scheduled to pay, 
and she did not repay him. (Tr at 51-53.)  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement, lack 
of candor, dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant failed to provide truthful and candid 
answers to Questions asked under section 26 of an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), executed by him on August 23, 2015. (Exhibit 1.) 
The questions asked whether in the last seven years, Applicant had a judgment entered 
against him, had a lien placed against his property, had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency, or had any account or credit card suspended, charged off or 
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed. Applicant answered, “No,” to these questions. It is 
alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose that information concerning his 
finances and overdue debts as set forth in subparagraph 1.c. and 1.f., above. 
 
 In his RSOR, Applicant admitted that he answered, “No,” to this question, but he 
was not aware how it happened, as he would have answered, “Yes,” to these questions, 
since this information was in public records and subject to discovery.  
 
During his testimony, Applicant stated that he was aware that it was mandatory 
that he include all pertinent information, but he was confused and he made mistakes in 
his completing his e-QIP. He credibly averred that he never meant to mislead the 
Government about his finances or anything else when he was completing the e-QIP. (Tr 
at 42-45.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
5 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 
6 
 
 The record is clear that Applicant has significant debt both to the Federal and 
State Governments that has not been resolved. He also has a debt from a loan that has 
not been resolved. Additionally, Applicant has a history of financial difficulties that are of 
concern, both his filing a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy in 2013 that discharged his debt at that 
time, and having his security clearance suspended in 2004, for failing to meet his 
financial responsibilities. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
 One Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 is potentially 
applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 Some of Applicant's financial challenges occurred because of his long periods of 
unemployment. However, I do not find that he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. There are no indications that Applicant's tax debts have been resolved 
or reduced, or even that he has contacted these agencies to attempt to develop a 
payment plan. Therefore, I do not find that this mitigating condition or any other 
mitigating condition is applicable in this case. Until Applicant can show financial 
responsibility and a legitimate attempt to resolve his delinquent debts, the concern 
remains unmitigated.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:   
 
      Conduct involving questionable judgement, lack of candor, dishonesty, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
        
         The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement, lack of candor, 
and dishonesty. In reviewing the disqualifying conditions under Guideline E, I conclude 
that while Applicant should have been more careful in completing his e-QIP, there was 
no “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire” by Applicant, because he testified credibly that he did 
not mean to mislead the Government. I find that any incorrect information about his 
finances was due to mistakes in completing the form rather than a willful desire to 
mislead the Government. I do not find disqualifying condition ¶ 16(a) or any other 
 
7 
 
disqualifying condition applies in this case against Applicant. I, therefore, resolve 
Guideline E for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns 
under the whole-person analysis.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.f.:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
