 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06841 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On February 26, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have her case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on July 6, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on July 14, 2016, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence. She provided an undated-one-
page response to the FORM. Her response has been marked as Applicant’s Exhibit 
 
2 
 
 
(AE) A and is admitted without objection. The Government’s evidence, identified as 
items 1 through 7, is admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned 
to me on May 1, 2017.  
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. She graduated from high school in 1983 and she 
obtained her associates degree in 2006. She was married from 1984 to 2009 when she 
divorced her first husband. She re-married in 2012, and she and her current husband 
have six adult children between them. Applicant has been employed by federal 
contractors for over 11 years. Applicant reports having a previous security clearance 
from 2009. She served in the Navy from 1983 to 1989 and obtained an honorable 
discharge. Applicant did not disclose her delinquent debts in section 26 of her August 
27, 2014, Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance 
application (SCA). However, she did state there that she started having financial 
problems around the time of her divorce, and her second husband was out of work for 
almost one year from 2011 to 2012. Around that same time, four of their children moved 
back into Applicant’s home along with her grandchildren. Applicant supported all of 
them.2 
 
Applicant admitted five of the six delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling 
approximately $25,834. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.f, as it is a 
duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant described some of the adversity that she has 
overcome, including a bad divorce, four surgeries, and storm damage to her home from 
a hurricane.”3 Her second husband had a catastrophic motorcycle accident and he was 
out of work for one year while his arm was being re-constructed. Moreover, Applicant 
stated in her response to the FORM that she needs cataract surgery, and she is hoping 
to receive some money that is owed to her by her ex-husband, pursuant to their divorce 
agreement. She has produced no evidence to show that she had a divorce agreement 
or decree, or that she has received this expected money. These debts are not resolved.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems started in 2011 when her husband became 
unemployed after his employer lost a contract.4 Subject claims that she contacted many 
of her creditors about delinquent debts, but she could not pay these creditors as her 
income was insufficient. She has produced no documents to substantiate her efforts to 
settle these debts, or dispute them. In her subject interview in March 2015, Applicant 
described expenses related to divorce, moving, problematical tenants, and six children, 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s March 24, 2014, 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or Security Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 3). 
 
2 Item 4, page 28, optional comment.  
 
3 Item 3, page 2. 
 
4 Item 6, page 4. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
plus grandchildren, all living with her. Most of the children are now grown, and they 
have moved out.5 Also, her husband is now employed again. None of her delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR are related to gambling, alcohol or illegal drug use. Applicant 
had no credit counseling or debt-consolidation services, and she produced no monthly 
budget. There is no evidence in the record that she has disputed any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR, or settled them. These debts have not been resolved. 
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
5 Item 6, page 5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted to virtually all of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 
except for the duplicate debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.6  
 
                                                          
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant and her second husband have endured multiple surgeries, storm 
damages and unforeseen expenses related to raising six children, plus the children of 
their children. Her perseverance in the face of adversity is commendable. While these 
may have been conditions beyond her control, Applicant has not demonstrated that she 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant indicated she contacted creditors 
to try to compromise and settle some of her delinquent debts. Yet, Applicant did not 
produce any documents to show this. She did not obtain debt-consolidation services or 
credit-counseling, and she failed to demonstrate that she is making progress in 
resolving any of her delinquent debts. She produced no budget, or payment plan. Her 
debts remain unresolved. Her financial problems are recent and ongoing. Applicant 
provided insufficient evidence to show that her financial problems are under control, and 
that her debts were incurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. The mitigating 
conditions enumerated above do not apply.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There are ample indications that 
Applicant’s financial problem are not under control. She has not met her burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:             Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f:                        For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
