 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-07971 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have her case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on June 10, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on June 22, 2016, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence. She provided an undated one-
page response to the FORM, plus a 2015 Summary Record (performance evaluation) 
from her employer. Her response and the attached performance evaluation have been 
 
2 
 
 
collectively marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and are admitted without objection. 
The Government’s evidence, identified as items 1 through 5, is admitted into evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She graduated from high school in 1987. She has been 
married since May 2009, and she was previously divorced after being married from 
1981 – 1992. She has been employed by federal contractors for over 16 years. She has 
worked for her current employer since June 2009. Applicant reports having a previous 
secret security clearance granted in late 2009. Applicant disclosed some of her 
delinquent debts in section 26 of her June 2015, Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86). Applicant’s only explanation for the delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR, was that her current husband was injured, became disabled, and was unable to 
work. This left Applicant as the sole provider for a family of four.2   
 
Applicant admitted seven of the eight delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 
totaling approximately $22,000. SOR ¶ 1.h is a duplicate debt of SOR ¶ 1.e. It is, 
therefore, resovled. She also stated she voluntarily surrendered her 2012 automobile in 
early 2015, since it needed frequent repairs she could not afford. She disputes this 
delinquent debt, but produced no documents to confirm this dispute.3 She also stated 
that she voluntarily surrendered her husband’s truck in late 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.b).  
 
As to the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f, Applicant explained that she was frustrated 
and wanted to stop service from her cellular phone provider, but she could not afford the 
early termination fee. So, she simply stopped paying.4 Applicant stated that she 
expected her husband to receive disability compensation. Then, she would contact 
creditors and work on repairing her credit.5 There is no evidence in the record that she 
has done so, or that her husband actually did start receiving disability payments. In her 
response to the FORM, Applicant stated that she was trying to make payment 
arrangements with the creditor concerning SOR ¶ 1.a. No documentation has been 
submitted to confirm settlement or payment of any of her alleged delinquent debts.  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s June 25, 2015 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 3). 
 
2 Item 5, page 3.  
 
3 Item 2.  
 
4 Item 5, page 4. 
 
5 Item 5, page 7. 
 
3 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 
4 
 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable here:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted to nearly all of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR 
totaling over $22,000. The Government produced substantial evidence to raise the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.6 There 
is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
 
                                                          
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of proving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant disclosed some of her delinquent debts in her SCA. She stated that 
she disputed one, and she was attempting to make payment arrangements with other 
creditors. There is no evidence of any follow through. She repeatedly stated the reason 
for her financial problems was her husband’s injury and subsequent disability. While this 
may have been a condition beyond her control, Applicant has not demonstrated that she 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant indicated that she planned to 
repair her credit once he received disability compensation. However, she has produced 
no evidence that he is receiving that disability pay now, or that she reached out to these 
creditors, attempted to settle these debts, or entered into any installment payment 
plans. These debts remain unresolved. Her financial problems are recent and ongoing. 
Applicant provided insufficient evidence to show that her financial problems are under 
control. The mitigating conditions enumerated above do not apply.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There are ample indications that 
Applicant’s financial problem are not under control. She has not met her burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:             Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:                                   For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
         _____________________________ 
                                                  Robert J. Kilmartin 
                    Administrative Judge 
 
 
