 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01508 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to demonstrate that he has taken responsible action to resolve his 
delinquent debts. He has not mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The Government did not establish the falsification allegation under 
Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 17, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 29, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 27, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), along with documents 
identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant received the FORM on June 7, 2016. Applicant 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the Government’s FORM. The 
SOR and the answer (combined as Item 1) are the pleadings in the case. Items 2 through 
6 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on April 27, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.i. He 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e and 1.h. He denied the Guideline E falsification allegation, with 
an explanation. I have incorporated his answers and relevant comments into the findings 
of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He has never been married and has no children. He has 
lived at the same address since 1993. From July 1999 to July 2010, he worked in a 
restaurant. He was laid off when the business closed. He was unemployed until August 
2012, when he was hired for his current position with a defense contractor.1   
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in September 2012. 
At the time, he had multiple delinquent debts, set forth on a credit bureau report pulled as 
part of his background investigation. In response to questions on the SCA calling for 
disclosure of any delinquencies within the previous seven years, Applicant did not 
disclose that he had any delinquent debts.2  When he reviewed the answers he gave on 
his SCA with the interviewing agent a month later, Applicant acknowledged his 
delinquencies before being confronted with a credit report. He said they were due to his 
lack of employment.3    
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant has incurred nine 
delinquent accounts, totaling about $26,410. All are consumer debts or credit cards. They 
are found on Applicant’s credit reports from September 2012, December 2014, and 
August 2015.4  
                                                          
1 Item 2.  
 
2 Items 2, 4.  
 
3 Item 3 at 2. 
 
4 Items 1, 4, 5, 6.  
 
 
3 
 
 
In his answer. Applicant does not offer additional information for any debt that he 
admits. He gives no indication that any of them have been or are being paid or otherwise 
resolved.5  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.i are debts to the same creditor bank, for the same amount 
($6,479), though under different account numbers. Applicant became delinquent on both 
accounts in the same month (September 2011). Applicant’s 2015 credit report lists SOR 
¶ 1.i as a charged-off debt that has been transferred or sold.6 I find that SOR ¶ 1.i is a 
duplicate.7  
 
Applicant denies SOR debts ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h, claiming that they have been paid. He 
provides no corroborating documentation.8 He denies SOR ¶ 1.c (a $489 debt to a payday 
loan service) because he questions the debt’s legitimacy, without corroboration. 
Applicant’s credit reports from December 2014 and August 2015 verify the debt.9  
 
Applicant gives no indication that he has pursued credit counseling. He provides 
no information or documentation about his current monthly income or expenses. He gives 
no indication that he has attempted to contact his creditors in an effort to resolve his debts.  
 
Of the nine debts alleged under Guideline F in the SOR, seven were delinquent 
and in collection when Applicant submitted his SCA in September 2012.10 However, under 
Guideline E, the Government specifically alleged falsification as to only two debts. In the 
text of SOR ¶ 2.a, the Government alleges that Applicant “deliberately omitted the debts 
set forth in subparagraphs 1.a and 1.i, above.”11  
 
Applicant denies the falsification allegation, and explains that at the time he filled 
out his SCA, he was “still trying to work with the creditors to avoid debts turned over to 
collection agencies.”12 
                                                          
5 Item 1.  
 
6 Item 6 at 5. 
 
7 When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005) (same debt alleged twice).  
 
8 SOR debts ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h are both listed as delinquent on Item 6, Applicant’s August 2015 credit report.  
 
9 Items 5, 6 at 2. 
 
10  Item 4 (listing SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.i as being in collection). Two debts, SOR 
¶¶ 1.c and 1.h, became delinquent later. 
 
11 Item 1 (alleging that Applicant deliberately omitted from his SCA only two of the nine delinquent debts 
alleged under Guideline F, when in fact seven of them were delinquent at the time, according to Item 4). 
Neither party addressed this issue, either in Applicant’s answer or in Department Counsel’s FORM. I 
therefore take the text of the Guideline E allegation at face value.  
 
12 Items 1, 4. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.13 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are established by the record. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
                                                          
13 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant lost his job in summer 2010 after his employer closed the business. He 
was unemployed for the next two years, until he was hired for his current position in 
August 2012. Applicant’s job loss and resulting unemployment were circumstances 
beyond his control that led directly to his financial difficulties. The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies. However, for the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must provide evidence 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has now been gainfully 
employed for several years, yet most of his debts remain outstanding. He claims, but does 
not document, that two of his debts have been paid.14 He has not shown that he has made 
any payments towards any of his delinquent debts, or has a reasonable plan for resolving 
them. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant has acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. The second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has had delinquent debts for several years. He failed to provide 
corroborating evidence that he has paid or resolved any of the alleged SOR debts. There 
is insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. His 
delinquent debts continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant does not indicate that he has pursued credit counseling. He has not 
otherwise demonstrated that his financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does 
not apply. Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence of his good-faith efforts to repay 
his creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant disputes the legitimacy of one debt, SOR ¶ 1.c, but he does not set forth, 
or document, a basis for doing so. The debt is listed on the most recent credit report in 
the record. Applicant claims he has paid two other debts, SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h, but does 
not provide supporting documentation. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to these debts.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
                                                          
14 It is reasonable to expect applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of individual debts. 
ISCR Case No. 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
7 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  Applicant accrued delinquent debts as a result of his unemployment, from summer 
2010 to summer 2012. He did not disclose his debts on his September 2012 SCA in 
answer to various questions about his financial record. Applicant denied the allegation of 
deliberate falsification. This puts the burden on the Government to prove the allegation. I 
find that the Government has not set forth sufficient evidence to establish Applicant’s 
deliberate falsification. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
 
8 
 
 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under these guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant was unemployed for two-years after he lost his job in a restaurant when 
the business closed. He accrued numerous delinquent debts during this period. He has 
been gainfully employed in the defense industry since August 2012. He has not been 
shown to have deliberately falsified his SCA concerning his finances. However, he still 
has significant unresolved delinquencies. He has not set forth a realistic plan for resolving 
them. Applicant does not have a reliable financial track record at this time. His finances 
remain a security concern. He has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
  
                                                   
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
