 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06459 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sean M. Bigley, Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
May, 24, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 12, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 5, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on October 24, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
October 24, 2016, scheduling the hearing for November 17, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 3, which 
were admitted. Applicant testified on his own behalf. Applicant presented four 
documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A through D. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (TR) on November 29, 2016. 
 
2 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government and Applicant requested I take administrative 
notice of certain facts relating to Iraq. Department Counsel and Applicant’s Counsel 
provided five-page and three-page summaries of the facts, respectively, supported by 
documents pertaining to Iraq. The documents provide elaboration and context for the 
summaries. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b.~1.f., 1.h.and 1.i. He denied SOR 
allegation ¶¶ 1.a., 1.g. and 1.j. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5.) 
While living in Iraq, he volunteered and started working with American forces from about 
April of 2003 until about August of 2008, more than five years.  (TR at page 28 line 19 to 
page 34 line 4.)  Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2008.  (TR at page 41 line 
4 to page 42 line 13, and GX 1 at page 7.)  He is married to a Mexican national, who 
lives legally in the United States.  (TR at page 42 line 15 to page 43 line 1, and GX 1 at 
page 27.)  Applicant has one step-child, who is a native-born American.  (TR at page 42 
lines 16~18, and GX 1 at page 39.) 
 
 1.a.   Applicant’s 61-year-old father, a citizen and resident of Iraq, is a retired 
Brigadier General from the Iraqi Army.  He served as such in concert with the American 
forces in Iraq.  (TR at page 34 line 5 to page 36 line 9, at page 66 lines 2~11, and GX 1 
at page 31.)  Applicant contacts his parents once or twice a month.  (TR at page 49 line 
23 to page 50 line 7.)  Applicant would not compromise the interests of the United 
States vis-à-vis those of his Iraqi relatives.  (TR at page 44 line 21 to page 45 line 16.) 
 
 1.b.  Applicant’s 52-year-old mother, a citizen and resident of Iraq, is an 
elementary school teacher.  As such, she and all teachers work for the Iraqi Ministry of 
Education.  (TR at page 36 line 12 to page 37 line 2, at page 66 lines 12~18, and GX 1 
at page 30.)  Applicant contacts his parents once or twice a month.  (TR at page 49 line 
23 to page 50 line 7.)  Applicant would not compromise the interests of the United 
States vis-à-vis those of his Iraqi relatives.  (TR at page 44 line 21 to page 45 line 16.) 
 
 1.c.  Applicant’s 27-year-old brother is a citizen of Iraq, but resides in the United 
States.  He is “an Uber driver.”  (TR at page 37 lines 3~10, and GX 1 at pages 32~33.)  
He was granted asylum by the U.S. Government.  (TR at page 50 lines 8~17.) 
 
 1.d.  Applicant’s 23-year-old brother is a citizen and resident of Iraq.  (TR at page 
37 lines 11~16, and GX 1 at page 37.)  He is seeking asylum to immigrate to the United 
States.  (TR at page 51 lines 1~12.)   Applicant would not compromise the interests of 
 
3 
 
the United States vis-à-vis those of his Iraqi relatives.  (TR at page 44 line 21 to page 45 
line 16.)  
 
 1.e.  Applicant’s 29-year-old sister is a citizen of Iraq, but resides in the United 
States.  She works for a “School District.”  (TR at page 37 line 17 to page 3, and GX 1 
at page 34.)  She was granted asylum by the U.S. Government.  (TR at page 51 line 13 
to page 52 line 7.) 
 
 1.f.  Applicant’s 24 year-old sister is a citizen and resident of Iraq.  “She is a sales 
representative at a mall inside the airport.”  (TR at page 38 lines 4~12, and GX 1 at 
page 35.)  Applicant contacts his sister once or twice a month.  (TR at page 51 line 19 
to page 52 line 7.) Applicant would not compromise the interests of the United States 
vis-à-vis those of his Iraqi relatives.  (TR at page 44 line 21 to page 45 line 16.) 
 
 1.g.  Applicant’s cousin is a citizen of Iraq, but resides in Finland.  (TR at page 38 
line 13 to page 39 line 7.) 
 
 1.h.  Applicant’s, retired, 63-year-old mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of 
Mexico.  She lives part of the year, by virtue of a “B1/B2 . . .  visiting Visa,” with 
Applicant’s family in the United States.  (TR at page 39 lines 8~15, at page 52 lines 
8~16, and GX 1 at page 38.) 
 
 1.i.  Applicant, his wife, and his mother-in-law have had no contact with his 64 
year-old, Mexican father-in-law for more than 30 years. (TR at page 39 lines 14~16, and 
GX 1 at page 40.) 
 
 1.j.  The Applicant has little or no property interest in their family home in Iraq.  
Should his father pass away, his mother, brother and sister, noted above, still live in the 
property. Applicant has no interest in going to Iraq to lay claim to his possible, 1/6th 
interest, in their family abode.  (TR at page 40 lines 8~25, at page 55 line 22 to page 57 
line 17, at page 63 line 9 to page 64 line 15, and Appx D.) 
 
Notice 
 
 Iraq has made significant political and economic progress in recent years, but the 
country still faces many challenges.  Since the 2011 U.S. military withdrawal from Iraq, 
sectarian and ethnic divisions have widened.  Iraq’s one-time Al Qaeda affiliate 
constitutes the most violent component of the Sunni rebellion that has become a major 
threat to Iraqi stability in 2014.  Numerous terrorist groups are also increasingly active 
throughout Iraq.  The ISIS (Islamic State of Iraq and Syria) offensive has caused Iran to 
increase military support to the Iraqi government. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
   
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
  Applicant’s parents, one brother and one sister are citizens and residents of Iraq.  
His mother-in-law also is a citizen of Mexico. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
 
6 
 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are mitigating.  Applicant’s allegiance is clearly to the United 
States.  He would not place that affection below the interests of his family that remain in 
Iraq. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis.   Furthermore, Applicant has the full support 
of those with whom he has worked in the U.S. Army (AppX A), and has numerous 
awards and recommendations from the U.S. Army (AppX B). 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.~1.j:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
