 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07652 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct and drug involvement security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 26, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and H (drug involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 9, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on June 20, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
responded with documents that I have marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G. 
The case was assigned to me on April 11, 2017. The Government exhibits included in 
the FORM and AE A through G are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer or a predecessor contractor since 1992. He served on active duty 
in the U.S. military from 1988 until he received a general under honorable conditions 
discharge in 1992. He seeks to retain a security clearance, which he has held since at 
least 2010. He is a high school graduate. He is married without children.1 
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana before he joined the military. He worked overseas 
for his company from 2005 to 2007. He resumed smoking marijuana in 2008. He 
intentionally failed to report his marijuana use on his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in May 2010.2 He smoked marijuana about once 
or twice a week at home by himself until he tested positive for the use of marijuana on a 
drug-screening test in March 2015.3 
 
 Applicant stated the test was part of a medical screening for him to work 
overseas. He stated that his company would have been informed that he was not 
qualified to work overseas, but not that he tested positive, except that he reported it to 
his manager. He did not lose his job, but he was issued a final warning, and he was 
suspended from work without pay for a week. He listed his drug use on his May 2015 
SF 86, and he discussed it during his background interview in July 2015.4 
 
 Applicant completed drug counseling through his employer’s employee 
assistance program (EAP). The counselor noted that Applicant “was cooperative, 
attentive, completed tasks as assigned and showed ownership in his treatment.” 
Applicant stated that he has not used any illegal drugs since the positive drug test, he 
has passed all subsequent drug tests, and he will never use marijuana again.5 
 
Applicant submitted documents and letters attesting to his excellent job 
performance. He is praised for his work ethic, leadership, maturity, judgment, 
dedication, loyalty, professionalism, and integrity.6 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3. 
 
2 The SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified the SF 86. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR 
will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be considered when assessing Applicant’s credibility, 
in the application of mitigating conditions, and in the whole-person analysis.  
 
3 Items 2, 5, 6; AE B, G. 
 
4 Items 3, 4; AE G. 
 
5 Items 4, 6; AE A, D, G. 
 
6 AE B, C, E, F. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;7  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant possessed and used marijuana while holding a security clearance. He 
tested positive for marijuana use in 2015. The above disqualifying conditions are 
applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
 (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
  (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
                                                          
7 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
5 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 Applicant has not used marijuana since his failed drug test in March 2015. He 
completed his employer’s drug counseling program. His counselor wrote positive things 
about him, but fell short of providing a favorable prognosis. Applicant promises to refrain 
from marijuana use in the future. However, he smoked marijuana regularly from 2008 
through March 2015. He did so while holding a security clearance after lying about his 
marijuana use on his 2010 SF 86. 
 
 Applicant appears to be sincere, but that is insufficient to mitigate the well-
established pattern of illegal drug use. His conduct continues to cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) is not applicable, and AG ¶¶ 
26(b) and 26(d) are partially applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
Applicant’s failed drug test because of his marijuana use reflects questionable 
judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It also created 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. AG ¶ 
 
6 
 
16(c) is not perfectly applicable because Applicant’s marijuana use is sufficient for an 
adverse determination under the drug involvement guideline. However, the general 
concerns about questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations contained in AG ¶¶ 15 and 16(c) are established.8   
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant’s company and the DOD are aware of his marijuana use. AG ¶ 17(e) is 
applicable, and the concerns related to Applicant’s vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress are mitigated. AG ¶ 17(d) is partially applicable. However, the 
personal conduct concerns raised by Applicant’s questionable judgment and 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations are not mitigated under the same 
rationale addressed in the drug involvement analysis. AG ¶ 17(c) is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 14-03701 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2017). 
 
7 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and H in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. However, he smoked 
marijuana regularly for years while holding a security clearance after lying about his 
marijuana use on his 2010 SF 86.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct and drug involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
