 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08130 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
May 25, 2016. On June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are codified 
in 32 C.F.R. ¶ 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 7, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with 
supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted 
by Department Counsel on August 10, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who had an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concerns. Applicant received the FORM on September 1, 2016. She did not respond to 
the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 19, 2017. All exhibits are admitted into 
evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant has 10 delinquent consumer and medical debts totaling 
approximately $23,896. Applicant admitted all the allegations, and provided explanations 
in her answer to the SOR. Her admissions and explanations are incorporated in my 
findings of fact. Applicant is 42 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor 
since 2016.3 She graduated from high school in 1992. She was married in 1994 and 
divorced in 1998. She has one adult child. Her last security clearance was granted in 
2011. Applicant has worked over 20 years supporting DOD as a government employee 
or contractor. She stated in her answer that she is currently on administrative leave 
pending her security clearance status.4 
 
 Applicant noted in her answer that she incurred delinquent debts during periods of 
unemployment. She was most recently unemployed from December 2013 to August 
2014, and April 2015 to June 2015. Up to 2014, she did not have delinquent debts and 
held a high credit score. She received unemployment benefits from January 2014 to June 
2014, but the benefits were insufficient for her to meet her financial obligations. Her 
current position, which began in April 2016, is the first job that pays equal to her last 
government positon in 2013.5 She incurred medical debts while unemployed, without 
insurance. Her other debts resulted largely from consumer credit accounts, some of which 
are in collections. None of the debts have been paid, but she noted her intent to repay 
her debts in full. 
 
 In her personal subject interview (PSI), Applicant stated that she has not sought 
financial counseling.6 No information was provided regarding the current status of the 
SOR debts or her current financial condition.  
 
 
                                                     
3 GE 2. 
 
4 GE 2. 
 
5 GE 2. 
 
6 GE 6. 
 
3 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance decision.7 
The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the 
evidence.8 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” It is well-established law that no 
one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in Egan, “the 
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the Directive, any 
doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will 
be resolved in favor of protecting national security.9 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
                                                     
7 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
8 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
9 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that have not been resolved. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following may be potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. She has suffered recent periods of 
unemployment and underemployment, but has not shown that she acted responsibly to 
resolve debts once she was financially solvent. I have no information about her current 
financial status or that similar issues are unlikely to recur in the future. Generally, 
Applicant has not shown that her financial problems are being resolved or are under 
control. Her unresolved delinquencies cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person 
analysis.  
 
 
6 
 
 Overall, the absence of documentary evidence of good-faith efforts to resolve 
delinquent debts and an improved financial status, leaves me with questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
