 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-05739 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Susan B. Martin, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 20, 2015, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 8, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 17, 2016. He answered 
the SOR in writing through counsel on June 8, 2016, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 23, 2016.  
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on June 30, 2016, and later 
reassigned to me on October 14, 2016. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on November 
21, 2016, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 21, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through E, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 7, 2017. I granted Applicant’s 
request to keep the record open until January 31, 2017, to submit additional matters.  
On January 30, 2017, he submitted Exhibits F to N, without objection. The record closed 
on January 31, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, with 
explanations. He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility 
for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 42 years old, divorced, and has two children. He works for a defense 
contractor with an income of $48,000 annually. He also has a second job as a property 
manager earning about $650 monthly for about nine months while the owner is 
deployed in the military. He started that job in November 2016. Applicant has had a 
security clearance since 2007. (Tr. 19, 28, 31, 35, 51; Exhibit 1) 
 
Applicant has 33 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. The debts total $16,657. 
These include 29 delinquent medical debts totaling $10,048. He established a medical 
payment plan for some of those debts and future obligations. Applicant testified he 
entered into a debt payment plan with a non-profit debt counseling firm for 25 of those 
debts (Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g-1.j, 1.l -1.n, 1.p, 1.r, 1.t-1.cc, 1.gg, and 
1.hh), totaling $6,304. He pays into the plan $130 on the 20th of each month by 
automatic deduction from his bank account. He had made eight payments as of the date 
of the hearing. (Tr.15, 21, 22, 57; Exhibits 2-4, A-L) 
 
Meanwhile, there are five debts of $100 or under in amount and they are to be 
paid by Applicant directly. These debts are 1.e ($62), 1.k ($52), 1.o ($70), 1.s ($100), 
and 1.ff ($53), which totals $323. He admitted at the hearing he has not paid these five 
debts. They are not resolved. However, he put two other debts under $100 
(Subparagraphs 1.bb ($32) and 1.cc ($91)) in the above-discussed debt payment plan. 
(Tr. 15, 17, 21-26, 36, 37, 50, 57; Exhibits 2-5, A-N) 
 
Two debts are for credit cards (Subparagraphs 1.q and 1.dd) totaling $1,474. He 
claims that those debts are uncollectible under state law. He submitted a letter from the 
creditor stating it will not be collecting the debts. (Tr. 15, 17, 21-26, 36, 37, 50; Exhibits 
2-5, A-N) 
 
One debt is owed to a lender for a repossessed automobile for $8,547 that 
occurred in December 2007 (Subparagraph 1.ee). He has never repaid it and is 
disputing it. He purchased the vehicle after his 2007 bankruptcy was discharged. 
Applicant intends to assert the statute of limitations as a defense to collection. He is 
disputing it according to Exhibit D but he did not submit a document showing the terms 
 
3 
 
 
of the dispute or action taken. It is not resolved. (Tr. 15, 17, 21-26, 36, 37, 50; Exhibits 
2-5, A-N) 
 
He has one allegation that he filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in March 2007 that 
was discharged in August 2007 (Subparagraph 1.a). (Tr. 15, 17, 21-26, 36, 37, 50; 
Exhibits 2-5, A-N) 
 
 Applicant’s admission of all the alleged debts, and his 2007 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, also includes the information that many of the medical debts are for his 
former wife’s treatments and possibly some for his two children. He and his wife have 
not lived together since 2003, despite their subsequent divorce occurring in 2014. (Tr. 
35; Exhibits 1, 2) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
4 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated $16,667 in delinquent debt from 2007 to the present time 
that remains unpaid. Applicant has 33 delinquent debts listed in the SOR plus a Chapter 
7 bankruptcy filed in 2007. The evidence raises all of the above security concerns, 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the  person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
There is no persuasive evidence from Applicant that his divorce in 2014 
adversely affected his ability to pay his debts and that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. The debts accumulated after his 2007 bankruptcy, showing Applicant 
cannot manage his money to avoid accumulating debts. AG ¶ 20 (b) is not established. 
 
Applicant enrolled in a debt management program and has a substantial part of 
his delinquent debts in the repayment program. Therefore, part of his debts are being 
resolved and are under control. AG ¶ 20 (c) is established.  
 
Applicant is paying some of his debts in an orderly manner through a repayment 
plan. He did not arrange the payment plan until after the SOR was issued in March 
2016. He is paying those 25 debts on the installment plan basis. The creditor absolved 
him from two other debts owed on a credit card his former wife used. AG ¶ 20 (d) 
applies to the debts in the repayment plan and the credit card.  
 
However, he has not paid four other small debts he testified he would pay. 
According to his testimony, but unsupported by any documents, he is disputing the 
$8,547 owed on a repossessed vehicle he purchased after his 2007 bankruptcy was 
discharged. He did not establish a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
debt, other than he has not paid it and hopes to apply the state statute of limitations to 
the debt so he can avoid having to repay it. AG ¶ 20 (e) is not established.  The largest 
debt is not being resolved, nor are the four small debts totaling $232.  
 
 The remaining two mitigating conditions, AG ¶ 20 (a) and (f), do not apply.   
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
and was discharged in 2007. He then incurred other debts, mainly medical obligations 
for treatments provided his now ex-wife, and for a repossessed vehicle. It was only after 
being confronted with the SOR in March 2016 that he started to take action to resolve 
his delinquent debts. Applicant placed almost 30 of his 33 delinquent debts in a debt 
repayment plan, on which he had made only eight payments by the time of the hearing. 
His delinquent debts accumulated over nine years with no apparent attempt to pay them 
in a regular manner. It is likely this behavior will continue or recur in the future based on 
his previous bankruptcy and unpaid debts since 2007.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:      Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:      For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.c:      For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.d:      For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.e:      Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.f:      For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.g-1.j:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.k:      Against Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.l -1.n:     For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.o:       Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.p:      For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.q:      For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.r:      For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.s:      Against Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.t-1.z:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.aa-1.cc:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.dd:      For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.gg:      For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.hh:      For Applicant   
   
 
 
8 
 
 
Subparagraph 1.ee:      Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.ff:      Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
