 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-05395 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On March 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In an April 28, 2016, response 
to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations with explanations, and requested a 
determination based on the written record. On June 27, 2016, the Government issued a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) with five attachments (“Items”). Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM within the time allotted. I was assigned the case on May 19, 2017. 
Based on my review of the case file, I find Applicant mitigated financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old senior data base analyst who has worked for the same 
company since October 2007. He has been continuously employed since at least August 
2002. He maintained a part-time job from approximately 2011 through 2013 to 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
supplement his income. He has earned a high school diploma. He attended a college 
from 1996 until 1997. Between 2005 and 2006, he was enrolled in an on-line post-
secondary educational program. During these times, he sought and received student 
loans. Applicant has maintained the same residence since 2004. He married in 2004. The 
couple has two children, born in 2005 and 2007, respectively.   
 
Applicant’s student loans were originally in forbearance, then they were in 
repayment status until 2014. By that time, fluctuations in household income had made 
him unable to meet his monthly obligations and maintain his family of four. These 
fluctuations were caused, in part, due to his wife’s erratic salary over the course of a few 
years and the unexpected need to replace a family car that had become unrepairable.2 
While he was able to meet all other monthly obligations and contain the acquisition of 
debt, he became behind on his student loans and mortgage. Applicant started working 
with his creditors before the SOR was issued. Today, the family is living within its means. 
Applicant has been, and remains committed to, the payment of his debts. 
 
At issue in the May 2016 SOR are the following delinquent debts: 
 
1.a – Educational loan - $3,788 charged off. Repayment renegotiated; repayment 
poised to commence. Applicant contacted this lender to set up a repayment plan. Under 
the plan negotiated, the balance owed was reduced to $3,396.99; the address for 
submitted payments was changed; and he was set to start repayments in May 2016, two 
months after the SOR was issued.  
 
1.b – Mortgage account - $3,414 delinquency. Account current and in timely 
repayment. Applicant negotiated a repayment plan and timely paid $1,024 over 13 
months, thus avoiding foreclosure and rehabilitating the loan. After this stage of 
repayment was completed and he was current with his payments for over a year, 
Applicant resumed the lower, originally established payment schedule. Applicant 
submitted documentary evidence of timely repayments over the past 12 months. (FORM, 
Item 2, SOR Response attachment, statement dated March 23, 2016 (1 page)) The 
account is now reflected as current. 
 
1.c – Educational loan - $9,872 past due 120 days or more. Consolidated. This 
loan was consolidated into the National Direct Student Loan Data System (NSLDS) and 
paid at an indeterminate time before April 2016. The NSLDS statement submitted by 
Applicant only reflects small balances owed for other loans and grants. There is no 
indication of a balance owed on this particular loan. (FORM, Item 2, SOR Response 
attachment, statement dated April 11, 2016 (27 pages)) 
 
1.d – 1.e – Educational loans - $4,253 and $2,712, respectively, past due 120 days 
or more. Account current and in timely repayment. Applicant was initially unaware that he 
was in repayment on these debts as they were previously consolidated with another 
servicer. He provided documentary evidence reflecting that he is in repayment on these 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s wife assumed a more stable position in 2015. (FORM, Item 3 at 3) 
 
 
 
 
3 
debts. (FORM, Item 2, SOR Response attachment, statement dated April 15, 2016  (2 
pages)) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this guideline 
is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
 
 
 
 
4 
obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant’s 
considerable delinquent debt related to student loans and a mortgage. This is sufficient 
to invoke two of the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
           The debts at issue are multiple in number and were not the result of unusual 
circumstances. They were due, in part, to unpredictable fluctuations in Applicant’s wife’s 
income and the need to replace the family’s suddenly unservicable automobile in the 
months or few years preceding 2014. To help meet the challenges posed by these 
monetary obstacles, Applicant took a part-time job from 2011 until at least 2013. He began 
addressing these obligations between the time his wife acquired more stable employment 
and the issuance of the 2016 SOR. These facts are sufficient to give rise to AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
          Although there is no documentary evidence indicating Applicant has received 
financial counseling, there is documentary evidence he began addressing most, if not all, 
of the delinquent debts at issue before the issuance of the March 2016 SOR. Those efforts 
have thus far resulted in a negotiated repayment plan poised for implementation (1.a), 
and documented evidence showing he is in repayment on others (1.b, 1.d-1.e).  One debt 
(1.c) was shown through documentation to have been consolidated with similar student 
loan disbursements, and no outstanding balance is reflected. However, even if further 
payment on this single delinquent debt is still warranted, Applicant is now living within his 
means and has the commitment to honor any remaining balances. Regardless, his 
actions to date demonstrate his good-faith efforts to address his delinquent debts, and 
there are clear indications that his financial issues are being resolved. Consequently, AG 
¶ 20(c) - (d) apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c) sets forth the need to 
utilize a whole-person evaluation.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under the 
guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a married, 38-year-old senior 
data base analyst who has maintained the same position since October 2007. He has a 
high school diploma. He completed about one year of college and one year of an on-line 
post-secondary, educational program, for which he received student aid. When faced with 
financial issues arising from his wife’s fluctuating and irregular income flow, he took a 
part-time job from approximately 2011 through 2013 to supplement the family coffers.  
 
By the time the SOR was issued, Applicant had already begun communicating with 
his lenders regarding his past-due accounts. He has been in regular payment status now 
on his mortgage for over a year. One of his student loans is poised for implementation of 
a repayment plan, while it appears the rest are either in repayment or paid. While the 
issue of whether one of the consolidated student loans has actually been paid remains 
vague, Applicant’s commitment to honor all of his obligations and his track record to date 
persuade me that he will continue his efforts to address all debts while living within his 
means. Based on the information and documentation provided, I find Applicant mitigated 
Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                   
              _____________________________ 
               Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
              Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
