 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: 
 
               ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. : 15-04485 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 22, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
  
 
On December 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines J, H, and E, for 
Applicant. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on January 12, 2016, and he 
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.)  
On March 14, 2016, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the 
FORM, Department Counsel offered five documentary exhibits. (Items 1-5.) Applicant 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on April 22, 2016. Applicant submitted 
no additional evidence. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on 
December 13, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  
 After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including 
Applicant's RSOR, the FORM, and the admitted documents, and upon due 
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. He has never been married, and he has no children. 
Applicant has been employed as a welder by his current employer, a defense 
contractor, since May 2014, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with 
employment in the defense sector. (Item 3.)  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct)  
 
          The SOR alleges that Applicant has engaged in criminal acts, which create doubt 
about his judgement, reliability, and trustworthiness. The SOR lists eight allegations 
(1.a. through 1.h.) regarding criminal conduct, under Adjudicative Guideline J. Applicant 
admitted each of these eight allegations of criminal conduct that occurred between July 
2001 and May 2012, in his RSOR. (Item 2.) Allegations 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., 1.e., 1.g., and 
1.h. are drug related; including possession with intent to distribute a Class A controlled 
substance, possession with intent to distribute a Class B controlled substance, 
possession of a Class C controlled substance, and possession of a Class D controlled 
substance. The most recent allegation, 1.h., which Applicant admitted, alleges that in 
May 2012 he was “arrested and charged with a felony possession of a Class B 
Substance.” Allegation 1.c. alleges, and Applicant admitted, that in March 2002, he was 
arrested and charged with uttering and possession of a counterfeit note/cert/bill. 
Allegation 1.f. alleges, and Applicant admitted, that in March 2006 he was arrested and 
charged with uttering a counterfeit note/cert/bill and larceny by check. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement)   
 
 The SOR lists two allegations (2.a. and 2.b.) under Adjudicative Guideline H.  
 
 2.a. The SOR alleges, and Applicant has admitted in his RSOR, that he, “used 
marijuana with varying frequency from 1997 to at least 2012.” (Item 2.)  
 
 2.b. It is alleged in the SOR, and Applicant has admitted in his RSOR, that 
Applicant’s conduct as set forth in subparagraphs 1.a., 1.b., and 1.d., above is a 
concern under Guideline H. (Item 2.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Paragraph 3 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
 
 3.a.  Applicant executed a Security Clearance Application (SCA) certified by him 
on May 20, 2014. (Item 3.) The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified material facts in 
response to the questions under “Section 23 - Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity.” The 
questions asked: “In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any drugs or controlled 
substances? Applicant answered, “No,” to this question. It is alleged in the SOR, that 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose that information set forth in subparagraph 2.a., 
above.  
 
 In his RSOR, Applicant wrote that in April 2004, he was diagnosed with a mental 
disability, which was difficult for him to accept. Since he could not always obtain the 
prescribed medication, because he did not always have health insurance, he self-
medicated with marijuana, and he wrote that a lot of what happened to him between 
2004 through 2012 “has been a fog to me.” He contended that when he completed the 
SCA he thought it had been more than 7 years since he last used marijuana.  
 
 3.b.  The SOR alleges that on the SCA Applicant executed on May 20, 2014, 
Applicant falsified material facts in response to the questions under “Section 23 - Illegal 
Use of Drugs or Drug Activity.” The questions asked: “In the last 7 years, have you been 
involved in the illegal purchase, manufacture, cultivation . . . or sale of any drug or 
controlled substance?” Applicant answered, “No,” to this question. It is alleged in the 
SOR, that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose that he engaged in the conduct 
alleged in subparagraphs 1.a., 1.b., and 1.d. through 1.h., above.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted 
 
Applicant has a recent history of multiple criminal arrests and convictions that 
occurred from 2001 to at least 2012. These offenses give rise to concerns about 
Applicant’s judgment and reliability, both because of the nature of the offenses and the 
 
 
5 
 
 
quantity of criminal offenses. The aforementioned disqualifying conditions have been 
established.  
 
Four Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
  
 Applicant’s criminal past continues to cast doubt on his trustworthiness and 
judgment. Because of his long history of criminal offenses, and his failure to accurately 
and honestly provide full information about said conduct, as alleged under Guideline E, 
Applicant has failed to present evidence to show that similar criminal conduct is unlikely 
to recur. I do not find that any of the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 32 provides 
mitigation in this case. I, therefore, find Guideline J against Applicant. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and  
 
(c) Illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support the factual 
allegations under SOR ¶ 2.a. and 2.b. Applicant used marijuana and was involved with 
illegal drug conduct, for many years.  
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26. Because of Applicant's long and continuing history of 
using marijuana, his illegal drug-related conduct over many years, and his failure to 
reveal to the Government this history, I find that none of the mitigating factors can be 
considered in this case. I find Guideline H against Applicant.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the personal conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant failed to disclose his long history of drug usage and criminal conduct 
related to his drug usage.  While Applicant may not have recalled all of his drug usage 
and drug related arrests, it is unfathomable that he did not recall any of his marijuana 
usage from 1997 to at least 2012, nor his arrests from 2001 to 2012, when he was 
arrested and charged with a felony possession of a Class B substance. This behavior 
indicates questionable judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness. I find that 
Applicant did intentionally falsify section 23 on the SCA that Applicant executed on May 
20, 2014. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, none of 
them were established in this case. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts 
to correct his falsification and concealment. Falsifying material information is a serious 
offense, and Applicant has done nothing to show that similar lapses in judgment are 
unlikely to recur. He has not provided sufficient evidence to meet his burden of proof 
with respect to his personal conduct. I find Guideline E against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J, H, and E 
in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence raises significant doubts 
about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative 
guidelines under the whole-person concept. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2 Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a. and 3.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
