1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-05158 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
       Statement of the Case 
On March 7, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on June 17, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on July 11, 2016, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and provided no response to the 
 
2 
 
 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2017. The Government’s documents, 
identified as Items 1 through 12 are admitted into evidence without objection.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b with explanations. He 
failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for 2009 and 2010, and he has an 
outstanding tax lien filed against him by the state. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
                      .    
  Applicant is 56 years old. He retired from United States Air Force (USAF) after 
21 years of honorable service in 2001. He obtained his bachelor’s degree in 2006. He 
has been married since 1983, and was previously divorced in 1982 after a one year 
marriage. He has been employed by a federal contractor since April 2010. Applicant 
reports that he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in November 2009, and had 
approximately $90,000 in unsecured-non-priority claims discharged in July 2010.3 
   
            Applicant did not disclose his failure to file a return or pay his 2009 federal 
income taxes in his February 2011 Questionnaire for National Security Positions, also 
known as his security clearance application (SCA).4 Applicant first disclosed his failure 
to file federal income tax returns for 2009 and 2010 in response to a question in section 
26 of his January 2012 SCA.5 He stated there that he was in the process of having the 
returns filed and taxes paid. In his clearance interview in February 2012, Applicant 
stated he was optimistic that the process would be completed soon.6 Applicant filed his 
most recent SCA in 2014 and claimed that he was working to have his 2009 and 2010 
federal tax returns “filed and paid now.”7 During a subsequent clearance interview, 
Applicant claimed he had started a payment plan to address his 2009 taxes. He 
expected to have that debt, of approximately $4,500 for tax year 2009, paid off by 
2015.8 He also admitted that he had not yet filed his 2010 federal income tax return or 
paid the taxes.  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed that he has now filed his 2009 and 
2010 federal income tax returns and he was due to begin a payment plan with the IRS 
to address his tax debt within 60 days.9 With regard to the state tax lien in the amount of 
                                                          
3 Item 12. 
 
4 Item 10, p. 40. 
 
5 Item 8. 
 
6 Item 9, p. 3. 
 
7  Item 4, pp. 40-41. 
 
8 Item 7, p. 4. 
 
9 Item 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
$4,366 alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant stated that he owes the state taxes for tax year 
2014.10 Applicant suggests that these taxes resulted from a failed business venture. 
Applicant took out a second mortgage in 2007, and also used credit cards to invest in a 
business opportunity that apparently turned out to be a pyramid - Ponzi scheme.11 
Applicant has failed to produce any documentary evidence of this supposed pyramid 
scheme, or any evidence that he filed the delinquent tax returns, entered into a payment 
plan, or paid either the delinquent federal or state taxes.  
 
                                                       Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
10 Item 3. 
 
11 Item 7, pp. 4-5; Item 9, pp. 2-3; and Item 11, pp. 2-3. 
 
4 
 
 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
potentially apply here:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant admitted he did not file his federal income tax returns as required. He 
provided no documents or evidence to show that he has filed these yet. Neither has he 
produced a payment plan to the IRS, nor any evidence of progress on payments on the 
 
5 
 
 
state tax lien or the federal taxes owed, as alleged in the SOR. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;      
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant only disclosed his failure to timely file his 2009 -2010 federal income 
tax returns in his 2012 SCA, and he claimed to have now filed the federal-income-tax 
returns in question. Yet, Applicant produced no evidence to show that he has complied 
with his responsibilities and is up to date on filing his income tax returns. He has 
produced no evidence that he satisfied the state tax lien or otherwise resolved his tax 
delinquencies. AG ¶¶ 20(a) - 20(e) do not apply.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed 
under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant honorably 
served for 21 years in the military. He claims to have been victimized when he invested 
in a fraudulent company. He sought financial counseling in connection with his 
bankruptcy filing and he has worked continuously for a federal contractor for the last 
seven years.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There are ample indications that 
His financial problems are not under control and he failed to establish his financial 
responsibility. He has not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to his suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:             Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                   
    _____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
Administrative Judge 
