 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08820 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 1, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 2, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on 
September 8, 2016, and reassigned to me on October 12, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 20, 2016, 
scheduling the hearing for March 23, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel amended the SOR by withdrawing the allegation under SOR ¶ 
1.m. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 31, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer or a predecessor contractor since January 2015. She served on 
active duty in the U.S. military from 1999 until she was honorably discharged in 2009. 
She attended college for a period without earning a degree. She married in 2001 and 
divorced in 2006. She has four minor children.1 
 
 Applicant worked for a defense contractor in Afghanistan from 2010 to 2013. She 
lost her job after she returned to the United States because of an injury. She was 
unemployed from October 2013 through April 2014 and from October 2014 to January 
2015, which resulted in financial problems and delinquent debts. She also is the only 
wage earner of a large family without the benefit of child support.2 
 
 Applicant has not filed her federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 
2015. Because of her service in Afghanistan, she may have been eligible for an 
automatic extension to file her income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2013, but if 
eligible for those extensions, she would have been required to file the returns upon her 
return to the United States (180 days plus whatever time was left for Applicant to file the 
returns before she entered the combat zone).3 She stated that when she returned from 
overseas, she was unable to afford a tax professional to assist her in filing her tax 
returns.4 
 
 The amended SOR alleges two delinquent medical debts totaling $1,520 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.k and 1.l), nine miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling $28,570 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
through 1.j), and that Applicant failed to file her federal income tax returns for tax year 
2010 through 2014 when they were due (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant admitted owing all of the 
debts at one point, but she established that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 
and 1.l have been paid.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-28, 34, 61, 64-65; GE 1.  
 
2 Tr. at 15-17, 34-35, 38-39, 55; GE 1.  
 
3 See https://www.irs.gov/publications/p3/ar02.html#en US 2016 publink100050111.  
 
4 Tr. at 17-19, 28-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. The SOR only alleged that Applicant did not file 
income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2014. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not 
be used for disqualification purposes. It may be used in the application of mitigating conditions, and in the 
whole-person analysis. 
5 Tr. at 19-22, 31-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
March 2015. She listed a number of delinquent debts and that she had not filed her 
federal income tax returns for 2010 through 2013. She wrote that she was working 
overseas in a tax-free environment and that she was told that she did not have to file 
her returns until she returned home permanently. She wrote that she was still having 
financial difficulties at that time, but she intended to pay her debts as soon as she was 
able.6 
 
 In her June 2016 response to the SOR, Applicant stated that she called a tax 
company in June 2016 to file her back returns, but the company wanted $995. She did 
not have the funds at that time to pay the tax company. She retained the tax company 
about a month before the hearing, but she still had not filed the returns as of the date of 
the hearing. She stated that she initiated payment plans on several of her debts. In 
February and March 2017, Applicant paid $3,416 to resolve an unalleged debt and the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, and 1.l. She did not submit documents 
establishing any other payments. She is working overseas again in order to make more 
money to support her family and pay her debts. She stated that she saves until she has 
enough to pay a debt, and that she intends to pay her debts. She has not received 
financial counseling.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
6 GE 1. 
 
7 Tr. at 22, 28-29, 32, 37-41, 49-50, 60-63, 70; AE A. 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay her 
financial obligations. She has not filed her federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 
through 2014. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant was unemployed for extended periods after she returned from working 
overseas. She also is the only wage earner of a large family without the benefit of child 
support. Those events were beyond Applicant’s control. Her failure to file tax returns 
was not.  
 
 In February and March 2017, Applicant paid $3,416 to resolve an unalleged debt 
and the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, and 1.l. Those allegations are mitigated. 
She is working overseas again in order to make more money to support her family and 
pay her debts. She stated that she intends to pay her debts. Intentions to pay off debts 
in the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other 
responsible approaches. See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013). 
 
 Applicant has still not filed her tax returns for 2010 through 2015. Failure to file 
tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with complying with well-
established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules and 
systems is essential for protecting classified information. See ISCR Case No. 14-04437 
at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). Applicant’s repeated failure to file her federal income tax 
returns in a timely manner does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and 
reliability required of persons granted access to classified information. See ISCR Case 
No. 15-03481 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016).  
 
 I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that she made a good-faith effort to pay her debts. Her financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are not applicable, except for the paid 
debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial considerations concerns 
remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service and the factors that led to her financial problems. However, she shirked 
her tax responsibilities for years, and she is still not in compliance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Withdrawn 
   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
