 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05264 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Rosario Mario F. Rizzo, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence).1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR, and she requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 25, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, scheduling the 
                                                          
1 The caption was amended to reflect Applicant’s surname following her marriage and name change. 
 
2 
 
hearing for March 8, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1-2 and Administrative Notice (AN) I were admitted without objection. Applicant 
and her husband testified, and she presented one document, which was admitted into 
evidence as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, without objection. I received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on March 27, 2017. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges security concerns based on Applicant’s contacts with her 
father-in-law, stepmother-in-law, and extended family members in Russia. Applicant 
admitted these contacts and provided further explanation in her response to the SOR.2 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact: 
  
 Applicant is 27 years old, and she is a U.S. citizen by birth. She attained a 
bachelor’s degree in May 2012 and a master’s degree in May 2014. Since July 2014, 
she has been employed full time by a DOD contractor. Applicant’s parents and sister 
are citizens of and reside in the United States.3  
 
 Applicant met her husband in September 2008, and they began dating in 
December 2009. In August 2015, they married. Applicant’s husband was born in Russia 
and is a Russian citizen by birth. He moved to the United States with his family in about 
1994, and he has lived in the United States ever since. He became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 2006, and he retains his Russian citizenship. He is an only child.4  
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law is a citizen of and resides in Russia. Decades ago, he 
completed two years of compulsory military service in the Soviet military. He lived in the 
United States in the 1990s and returned to Russia when his work visa expired. He 
speaks Russian and English. He is employed as a driver for an executive of a business 
entity controlled by the Russian government. Applicant has contact with her father-in-
law through social media – exchanging holiday greetings, photos of special events, and 
“normal family things.” She and her husband invited her father-in-law and stepmother-
in-law to their August 2015 wedding; however, they did not attend. Applicant’s father-in-
law sent them approximately $1,010 as a wedding gift.  Applicant’s husband has contact 
with his father every few months and last saw him in-person in 2009.5 
 
 Applicant’s stepmother-in-law is a citizen of and resides in Russia. Applicant’s 
limited contact with her stepmother-in-law occurs over social media. Applicant’s 
husband has met his stepmother on only one occasion (2009).6 
                                                          
2 At hearing, the SOR was amended, without objection, to reflect Applicant’s marriage in August 2015. 
 
3 GE 1. 
 
4 Response to SOR; Tr. 20, 22, 31, 32. 
 
5 Response to SOR; Tr. 23, 28, 38, 39, 44. 
 
6 Response to SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is a dual citizen of the United States and Russia, 
residing in the United States. Applicant has weekly to monthly contact with her mother-
in-law.7 
 
 Applicant’s husband has a stepsister, two grandmothers, an aunt, an uncle, and 
a cousin, who are citizens of and reside in Russia. Applicant and her husband have very 
limited contact with these relatives, though his paternal grandmother sent approximately 
$700 as a wedding gift.8 
 
 Two supervisors and one co-worker provided letters of support attesting to 
Applicant’s exemplary character, work performance, and adherence to procedures.9  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 I have taken administrative notice of the following facts concerning Russia: 
 
 Russia is one of the top two most aggressive and capable collectors of sensitive 
U.S. economic information and technologies, particularly in cyberspace. Russian 
intelligence services target U.S. personnel with access to sensitive computer network 
information, seeking proprietary, sensitive, and classified information in a broad range of 
subject areas. One recent growing trend is the targeted recruitment of Russian 
immigrants with advanced technical skills who work for leading U.S. companies by 
Russian intelligence services. 
  
 Russia’s foreign policy objectives clash with those of the United States, 
particularly Russia’s occupation of territories within the sovereign nations of Georgia 
and the Ukraine.  
 
 Russia’s human rights record is poor. The judiciary is subject to manipulation by 
political authorities. Abuses include attacks on journalists, physical abuse by law 
enforcement officers, harsh prison conditions, arbitrary detention, politically motivated 
imprisonment, electronic surveillance without judicial permission, and widespread 
corruption in the executive, legislative, and judicial branches.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
7 GE 1. 
 
8 GE 1; GE 2; Response to SOR. 
 
9 AE A. 
 
10 AN I. 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
 
5 
 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
“The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding 
[sensitive]information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has 
interests inimical to those of the United States.”11 The nature of a nation’s government, 
its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. “An applicant with family members living in a country hostile to 
the U.S. has a very heavy burden to show that they are not a means through which the 
applicant can be subjected to coercion or exploitation.”12 
 
 One disqualifying condition under this guideline is relevant to this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
To establish AG ¶ 7(a) the Government must demonstrate a “heightened risk” 
due to Applicant’s contacts with her Russian in-laws. Here, the facts for administrative 
notice, outlining Russia’s geopolitical security profile and intelligence-gathering 
activities, establish the “heightened risk” element under AG ¶ 7(a). Applicant’s father-in-
law, stepmother-in-law, and extended families members are citizens of and reside in 
Russia. AG ¶ 7(a) applies.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 11-12659 at 3 (May 30, 2013). See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
15, 2011). 
 
6 
 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Russia’s intelligence capabilities and aggressive targeting of U.S. sensitive and 
classified information demonstrate its interests inimical to those of the United States. As 
a result, Applicant faces a “very heavy burden” of persuasion to show that her father-in-
law, stepmother-in-law, and extended family members in Russia are not a means 
through which Applicant can be subjected to coercion or exploitation. 
 
The paucity of evidence about Applicant’s stepmother-in-law and extended family 
members in Russia prevents me from concluding that they are not in positions or 
engaged in activities of security concern under AG ¶ 8(a). Applicant and her husband 
have very limited contacts with his stepmother and extended family members in Russia. 
The casual nature of these relationships and the infrequency of contact are such that 
there is little likelihood that they could create a risk for foreign influence of exploitation. 
AG ¶ 8(c) applies as to Applicant’s contacts with her stepmother-in-law and extended 
family members in Russia. 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is employed by a government-controlled business entity, 
and he resides in Russia. Applicant has not demonstrated, under the “very heavy 
burden” of persuasion, that it is unlikely that she, her husband, or her father-in-law will 
be placed in a position of conflicting interests. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant and her husband’s contacts with their family members in the United 
States are more frequent than those with her father-in-law. Notwithstanding the 
infrequency of their contacts, Applicant and her husband maintain a relationship with 
her father-in-law, as demonstrated by her husband’s in-person contact in 2009, the 
wedding invitation in 2015, the wedding gift in 2015, and the social-media contacts 
about “normal family things.” These contacts buttress the presumption that the nature of 
Applicant’s relationship with her spouse’s immediate family members is not casual.13 
Whether out of a sense of affection or filial obligation, Applicant and her husband 
affirmatively maintain this relationship with her father-in-law. Taken with the “very heavy 
burden” of persuasion, I cannot conclude that Applicant and her husband’s sense of 
obligation to her father-in-law is “so minimal.” AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply. 
 
For the reasons discussed above, despite the infrequency of their contacts, 
Applicant and her husband’s affirmative actions to maintain their relationship with her 
father-in-law leads me to conclude that this relationship is not casual. AG ¶ 8(c) does 
not apply. 
 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 11-12659 at 3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2013). 
 
7 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns associated with her stepmother-in-law 
and extended family members in Russia (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c.). She did not satisfy the 
“very heavy burden” of persuasion in mitigation as to her and her husband’s contacts 
with her father-in-law (SOR ¶ 1.a.). Therefore, she has not mitigated the foreign 
influence security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is well-regarded by her supervisors and co-worker for her character 
and work performance. There is no evidence impugning her loyalty to the United States. 
Nonetheless, Applicant and her husband’s actions to maintain their relationship with her 
father-in-law buttress the presumption of a non-casual relationship. I conclude Applicant 
did not mitigate the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b.-1.c.   For Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
