                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )                ISCR  Case No.  15-01531  
                                                                    )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On September 29, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 29, 2016, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on August 12, 2016 and initially scheduled for hearing on
October 25, 2016. Hearing was continued and rescheduled for October 27, 2016.  
At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of eight exhibits (GEs 1-8).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and four exhibits (AEs A-D). The transcript (Tr.)
was received on November 8, 2016.   
Procedural Issues
Before the opening of the hearing, Applicant’s facility security officer (FSO)
confirmed Applicant’s separation from his sponsor that was noted in  Joint Personnel
Adjudicative System (JPAS) in May 2016 due to the sponsor’s loss of its DOD contract.
His current employer assumed his previous employer’s DOD contract and the company’s
sponsorship of Applicant for a security clearance
Applicant’s current FSO confirmed Applicant’s current employer’s sponsorship of
Applicant for a security clearance, which is noted in JPAS. (Tr. 10-11) With these
confirmations, DOHA’s jurisdiction is retained.
Prior to the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with payment updates regarding his
student loan debts. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement
the record. Department Counsel was afforded three days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant provided documentation of a payment
agreement with SOR creditors 1.a-1.b and 1.d-1.e covering Applicant’s monthly payment
obligations under his agreement. Applicant’s post-hearing submission was admitted
without objection as AE E. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated four delinquent student loan
debts exceeding $17,000 and eight delinquent consumer debts exceeding $7,000.
Allegedly, these debts remain outstanding.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the alleged debts with
explanations. He claimed he has been in contact with some of the listed creditors and has
made, or will be making, arrangements with the creditors. And he claimed one of the
debts (SOR ¶ 1.f for $732) has been paid in full; while another debt (SOR ¶ 1.c) is
disputed. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 31-year-old installer for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
2
Background
Applicant has never married and has four children from prior relationships for whom he
provides child support. (GEs 1 and 5) He co-habited with a woman beginning in August
2013, but no longer does so. (Tr. 17) 
Applicant attended vocational classes at a technical institute between September
2009 and September 2010, but did not earn a diploma or certificate of completion. (GEs
1and 5) He reported no military service. He has worked for his current employer as an
installer since April 2014. (GE 5) Between April 2013 and April 2014, he worked for other
non-DOD employers in painter and installer capacities. (GEs 1 and 5) He reported
unemployment between January 2013 and March 2013 and worked for other employers
as a painter between June 2002 and December 2012. (GE s 1 and 5; Tr. 42-43)
Applicant’s finances
Between 2009 and 2015, Applicant accumulated a number of student loan and
consumer debts associated with his attendance at a vocational school. (GEs1-5; Tr. 30-
33) His student loans became delinquent after he left school and could not afford to make
his monthly payments. (GE 5) His student loan debts currently exceed $17,000
Besides his student loan debts, Applicant incurred delinquent consumer debts
exceeding $7,000. (GEs 2-5) Applicant attributed his debt delinquencies to overextending
himself and failing to maintain better control of his finances. (GE 5) He accepts full
responsibility for his debts and his failure to address them.
Applicant has since addressed some of his listed delinquent accounts. He provided
documentation of a payment agreement with SOR creditor 1.l that reflects a present
balance of $670.54, a considerable reduction from the reported balance in his most
recent credit reports. (GEs 2-4 and AE A; Tr. 20) He also documented his satisfaction of
his SOR ¶ 1.f account. (AE B; Tr. 21)
Applicant completed a repayment agreement with his student loan lender in
September 2016. (AEs C and E) The agreement calls for payment of an enrollment fee,
payable in three equal installments of $199 in connection with his outstanding student
loans totaling $18,725. (AEs C-D; Tr. 21) Before entering into this installment agreement
with his student loan lender, Applicant had no established payment track record. (GEs 2-5
and AE E; Tr. 27-28) While he documented his three installment payments covering his
enrollment fee, he did not provide any evidence of his following through with any loan
payments under the agreement.  (Tr. 24) Although his credit reports confirm that he made
some payments on his student loans in 2014, these reports do not reveal any other loan
payments made in 2015 and 2016. (GEs 2-4; Tr. 24-25) Whether applicant’s student
loans have been returned to current or rehabilitation status under his new installment
agreement with his student loan lender is unclear.
3
Applicant’s remaining consumer debts remain outstanding as well. SOR debts ¶¶
1.c ($3,177); 1.g ($631); 1.h (unspecified); 1.i ($1,071); 1.j ($300); and 1.k ($217) have
not been addressed to date by Applicant. (Tr. 28-40) When asked about these debts in a
prior interview with an agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in September
2014, and at hearing, Applicant acknowledged these accounts and his lack of any actions
to address them. (GE 5; Tr. 30) 
Applicant makes $22.40 an hour from his current job as an installer. (Tr. 41) He
has not pursued financial counseling, and has not developed a budget to date. Nor has
he explored debt consolidation. (GE 5; Tr. 43) Further, he provided no character
references, performance evaluations, or evidence of community and civic contributions. 
    P   o  l i c  i e  s     
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
4
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
5
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent student
loan and consumer debts over a number of years between 2009 and 2015. His student
loans have been delinquent since 2015, and only recently have been addressed in his
2016 installment agreement. And his consumer debts have been only partially
addressed with his payments on his SOR ¶ 1.l debt and his payoff of his SOR ¶ 1.f debt.
His history of delinquent debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying
conditions (DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and
DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Extenuating circumstances are limited in Applicant’s case. While he had periods
of unemployment in the past, they have been brief. Since March 2013, he has been fully
employed, albeit in relatively low-paying jobs. He attributed most of his delinquencies to
overextending himself and failing to maintain his finances in a responsible way,  Further,
since returning to work, he has not addressed his consumer debts responsibly, or
established a meaningful track record with his student loan repayment agreement.
Considering all of Applicant’s circumstances, they merit no more than minimal
application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Few mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s situation. While his installment
agreement with his student loan creditor shows promise, it is not accompanied by any
meaningful track record of principal and interest payments pursuant to the agreement.
Mitigation credit for repayment efforts requires probative evidence showing either a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at
resolving the applicant’s debts. See ISCR Case No, 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20,
2004)(quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (June 4, 2001). Applicant has not satisfied
his burden of proof of producing evidence of a good track record of addressing his
delinquent debts. Because he has not developed any verifiable evidence of meaningful
repayment of his SOR-listed creditors, application of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” is very limited.
Prospects for his following up on his overdue student loan principal and interest
6
payments and other listed debts are uncertain and difficult to gauge at this time.
Furthermore, Applicant has provided no probative evidence of financial counseling or
reasonable basis for disputing any of the debts he does not recognize. None of the
other mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s situation.
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant’s limited efforts to date in addressing
his student loans and consumer debts while fully employed reflect poorly on his
judgment. Afforded opportunities to address his listed SOR debts during and after the
hearing, he provided little evidence of any inability to achieve more substantial progress
with his debts over the past three years. While he provided proof of his satisfying the
enrollment fees conditioned in his student loan agreement, he provided no evidence of
further progress on his loans and remaining consumer debts, and still retains delinquent
debts that exceed $23,000. Whole-person assessment of Applicant’s clearance
suitability is further weakened by the absence of evidence of endorsements, personnel
evaluations, and proofs of community and civic contributions.
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s accumulations of
student loan and consumer debt delinquencies and his limited initiatives to date in
addressing his finances, his overall efforts in restoring his finances to stable levels
consistent with holding a security clearance are insufficient to meet mitigation
requirements imposed by the financial considerations guideline. Unfavorable
conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by SOR  ¶¶1.a
through 1.e, and 1.g through 1.k. of Guideline F. Favorable conclusions are warranted
with respect to the allegations covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.l.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs. 1.a-1.e and 1.g-1.k:                Against Applicant
Subparagraphs. 1.f and 1.l:                For Applicant
Conclusio  n  s                            
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
7
                                        
  
8
9
