 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-06349  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the five alleged delinquent debts. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.   
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On January 26, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On March 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 15, 2016 (Answer), and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On May 9, 2016, Department Counsel prepared the Government’s written 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
case. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) mailed a complete copy of 
the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, to Applicant on May 12, 
2016. He received it on May 17, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant timely submitted two exhibits that he 
marked as Items A and B. I marked his accompanying letter as Item C. Applicant did not 
object to the Government’s FORM. All Items are admitted. DOHA assigned the case to 
me on March 6, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c, and denied the allegations in 1.a, 
1.b, 1.d, and 1.e, because he stated they were resolved. (Item 2.)  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old and married. He has worked for a federal contractor 
since April 2004. (Items 3, 5.) As of June 16, 2016, he was promoted from his previous 
position. (Item C.) Applicant disclosed some delinquent debts in his January 2015 SCA. 
(Item 3.)  
 
   Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from February 2015 and April 2016, the 
SOR alleged five delinquent debts, which totaled about $10,300. (Items 4, 6.) The 
status of each debt is as follows: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a was a $480 unpaid cell phone debt from January 2015. Applicant paid 
it in April 2016. (Answer: 1.a.) It is resolved. 
   
  SOR ¶ 1.b was a $56 unpaid utility debt from December 2014. Applicant paid it in 
April 2016. (Answer: 1.b.) It is resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c is an automobile repossession debt of $9,606. Applicant’s last 
payment on the debt was in 2009. During a background interview, he stated that he was 
unable to pay the loan because he had assumed too much debt at the time. He said he 
had contacted the creditor about the matter, but had not received a response. He was 
willing to resolve the debt. In his response to the FORM, he reiterated that he had called 
the creditor repeatedly to resolve the debt. The company told him the file was archived, 
and he no longer had a financial responsibility for the debt. He asked the creditor to 
confirm that information, but it has refused to so. He again said he is willing to pay the 
debt. (Item 5; Item C.) 
   
  SOR ¶ 1.d was an unpaid $160 medical debt from October 2008. Applicant paid 
it in March 2016. (Item A) It is resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e was an unpaid $88 medical debt from June 2013. Applicant paid it in 
March 2016. (Answer: 1.b.) It is resolved. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant did not submit a budget or provide evidence that he participated in 
credit counseling. A CBR from June 2016 indicated that his mortgage, automobile loan, 
and credit card accounts are current. (Item C.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated five delinquent accounts totaling about $10,300 between 
2009 and 2015, which he did not begin to resolve until 2016. That history and inability or 
unwillingness to pay lawful debts, raise security concerns under the above disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial delinquencies: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), because 
Applicant’s debts spanned a period from 2008 to 2015. Applicant indicated that his 
automobile was repossessed because he assumed more debt than he could afford 
when he took out the loan. That was not a circumstance beyond his control; hence, AG 
¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). He did 
not submit evidence of financial counseling or a budget, but a June 2016 CBR indicated 
that his ongoing financial obligations were under control. Applicant demonstrated a 
good-faith effort to resolve his debts by paying four delinquent debts, albeit after he 
received the SOR. He also indicated that he had made a good-faith effort to resolve the 
largest debt, an automobile repossession, by contacting the creditor several times, and 
indicated his willingness to pay it. He established mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) as to all 
SOR allegations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who takes responsibility for his financial matters. He is aware that future financial 
problems may jeopardize his employment. At this time, he has sufficiently resolved all 
debts, diminishing the potential for pressure, coercion, and duress. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me without doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for 
a security clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
