 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ADP Case No.  15-03605  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
May 22, 2017 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant (Item 
1.) The action was taken under DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, 
dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant furnished an undated reply to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she 
requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) 
On April 25, 2016, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the 
FORM, Department Counsel offered five documentary exhibits. (Items 1-5.) Applicant 
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on May 29, 2016. Applicant did not 
submit any additional evidence. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
January 26, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to a sensitive position is denied.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including 
Applicant's RSOR, the FORM, and the exhibits, and upon due consideration of that 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 47 years old. She is married and she has no children. Applicant 
seeks access to sensitive information in connection with her current employment. (Item 
3.) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists 15 allegations (1.a. through 1.o.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically overdue debts totaling $11,652. All of the allegations have been established 
by Items 2 through 5. Applicant admitted all of the SOR debts in her RSOR. Regarding 
1.k., she wrote that she was currently making payments. No evidence has been 
introduced to establish that Applicant has resolved or reduced any of her delinquent 
debts, or that she has established any payment plan with any of the creditors.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.” (See 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
 
 
3 
 
 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set out in AG 
¶ 18:   
 
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified [or sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise concerns and could 
potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these disqualifying 
 
 
4 
 
 
conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established that Applicant 
accumulated significant delinquent debt over several years, which has not been 
satisfied.  
 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate concerns from financial 
difficulties. Since no independent evidence has been submitted to show Applicant has 
resolved or reduced any of her significant delinquent debt, I cannot find that she has 
acted responsibly, and thus I cannot find that any mitigating condition is a factor for 
consideration in this case. 
 
 Until Applicant is able to significantly resolve or reduce her overdue debts, I find 
that Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Consideration concerns, which are found 
against Applicant.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a sensitive position by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
sensitive position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a sensitive 
position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial 
Consideration concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.o.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to a 
sensitive position.  Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
 
