 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04719 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s periods of unemployment could have contributed to or aggravated his 
financial situation; however, he presented insufficient information to establish that he was 
financially responsible under the circumstances. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. Access to classified information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 4, 2014. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) on December 7, 2015, issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 30, 2015, and requested a decision based 
on the written record. 
 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), adducing the 
evidence in support of the security concerns and clearance denial, was provided to 
Applicant by transmittal letter dated March 2, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on 
March 11, 2016. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to 
provide material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM or submit any additional evidence. The case was assigned to me 
on May 1, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included his 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator from 
September 30, 2014. Applicant was informed he could object to the summary of his 
interview and it would not be admitted, or that he could make corrections, additions, 
deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. Applicant was informed that his 
failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any objections could be construed as a waiver, 
and the evidence would be considered by me. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM, 
submitted no documents, and raised no objections. I admitted the document and 
considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response, he admitted the SOR allegations. He also stated he would 
pay a $57 debt alleged in the SOR within a short period. Applicant’s SOR admissions are 
incorporated into my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 55 years old. He never married and has no children. He received a 
bachelor’s degree in 1986. He enlisted in the Air Force and served from 1988 to 1999. 
While in the Air Force, he was granted a secret clearance. Applicant did not disclose the 
reason for his discharge or the characterization of his service. He noted that he has been 
receiving mental health counseling and taking medication since 2010 for anxiety and 
depression related to his service period and the passing away of his parents. (SCA, 
Section 21; FORM, Item 4) 
 
Applicant’s employment history shows that he was employed between October 
1999 and September 2004; unemployed between September 2004 and June 2005; 
employed between June 2005 and June 2009; unemployed between June 2009 and July 
2011; employed between July 2011 and May 2012; unemployed between May 2012 and 
October 2013; and employed since October 2013 to present. He was hired by his current 
employer, a federal contractor, in May 2014. (2014 SCA, Section 13)  
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in 2014. In response to Section 26 
(Financial Record) of the SCA, Applicant disclosed 14 delinquent student loans and other 
debts acquired between 2005 and 2010. Applicant stated that lapses in his work history 
made it difficult to meet his financial obligations. He also indicated he was unsure whom 
to contact to resolve his debts and that he was seeking forbearance for the student loans.  
 
3 
                                         
 
A Government background investigator interviewed Applicant in September 2014. 
During the interview, Applicant confirmed his periods of unemployment and told the 
investigator that while unemployed he took college courses (between 2005 and 2009, 
and between 2009 and 2010). Additionally, he searched for jobs and spent time with 
family and friends. Applicant disclosed on his 2014 SCA that he travelled for leisure 
overseas in 2008, 2009, and 2011. (SCA, Section 20C) 
 
The investigator confronted Applicant about his delinquent debts, including those 
alleged in the SOR (seven delinquent student loans and two other debts). Applicant 
confirmed the alleged debts. He acknowledged receiving collection notices and calls from 
creditors, but he ignored them. Applicant promised to contact his creditors to establish 
payment agreements and to ask for forbearance on his student loans. (SCA, Section 26, 
FORM, Item 4) 
 
Applicant informed the investigator that his financial condition was poor to fair. He 
explained that because of his periods of unemployment, he did not have sufficient money 
to pay his delinquent debts after paying his living expenses and his car note. 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented by his 2014 SCA, 2014 
interview, SOR admissions, and in his credit report. Applicant presented no documentary 
evidence to show that he has been in contact with his creditors, or that he attempted to 
settle, pay, or dispute any of his delinquent debts. He presented no evidence to show he 
has attended a financial counseling course or that he maintains a budget. Applicant 
provided no information about his current income, monthly expenses, and whether his 
income is sufficient to pay his living expenses and debts.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
 
4 
                                         
 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is well documented in the file record. AG 
¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history 
of not meeting financial obligations.” The record established the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
 
5 
                                         
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are recent and ongoing. He presented insufficient evidence to show 
that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred under 
circumstances unlikely to recur. Applicant presented evidence of periods of 
unemployment that could have contributed to or aggravated his financial situation; 
                                            
2 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
6 
                                         
 
however, he presented insufficient information to establish that he was financially 
responsible under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant was made aware of the Government’s financial considerations security 
concerns when he completed his 2014 SCA, during his 2014 interview, when he received 
the SOR, and when he was provided the FORM. He was allowed a period of 30 days 
after receipt of the FORM to produce evidence in extenuation and mitigation. He failed to 
provide any documentary evidence to show he has been in contact with his creditors, or 
that he attempted to settle or pay his delinquent debts since he acquired them.  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. 
Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security 
clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. The financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 55 years old. He served in the Air Force 10 years, and has worked for 
federal contractors on and off since 2011. He presented evidence of periods of 
unemployment that could have contributed to, or aggravated his financial situation; 
however, he presented insufficient information to establish that he was financially 
responsible. Under the totality of the circumstances of this case, Applicant’s evidence is 
insufficient to establish his financial responsibility. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
  
 
7 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
