 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-08556 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Maurice Arcadier, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by 
past financial issues that were largely attributable to matters beyond her control, 
including a business failure, unemployment, and caring for her elderly parents. After 
being hired by her current employer in 2011, Applicant began responsibly addressing 
her troubled finances. Her current financial situation does not raise a security concern. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 22, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
her circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
  
 On April 12, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. 
Applicant and her husband testified at the hearing and the exhibits offered by the parties 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
were admitted into the administrative record without objection. (Government Exhibits 1 – 
5; Answer, Attachments A – H; and Applicant’s Exhibits A – B.)  
 
 At the conclusion of the hearing and after carefully considering the evidence, as 
well as each sides’ stated position, I gave notice to the parties that the case appeared 
appropriate for summary disposition. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on April 
21, 2017. Three days later, on April 24, 2017, Department Counsel objected to the 
resolution of the matter through summary disposition and requested a full decision.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 53, has been married to her husband for nearly 30 years. They have 
two children. She was granted a security clearance in the mid-1980s in connection with 
her past employment for another government agency. She held that clearance until 
2000, when she began working for an employer in the private sector.  
 
From 2003 to 2010, Applicant experienced a succession of unfortunate events 
that negatively impacted her family’s household finances. In 2003, she was laid off from 
her job due to a business downturn. Two years later, her father was diagnosed with a 
serious, degenerative disease. Applicant and her mother became his caretakers. Then, 
in 2007, Applicant’s mother suffered a stroke and Applicant became the primary 
caretaker for both her parents.3 Applicant and her spouse’s finances were strained 
during this period, but they were able to continue to pay their bills on time because his 
construction business was doing well. And then, in 2007-2008, the U.S. housing market 
collapsed and the economy went into recession. This event, coupled with the end of a 
government program that had for years provided construction-related jobs in the area 
that Applicant and her husband reside, resulted in the business’s ultimate demise. 
 
Applicant and her husband used up their savings to pay for their household 
expenses. They were unable to find work and started relying on credit cards to pay for 
groceries and other living expenses. Eventually, they were unable to pay the monthly 
minimum payments due on their credit cards and became delinquent on a number of 
debts.4 Applicant provided her IRS account transcript for 2010, which shows that her 
and her husband’s adjusted gross income was less than $13,000.5 
 
Additionally, and unbeknownst to Applicant, her husband did not file their joint tax 
returns for several years in a row. Applicant’s husband, who from 2003-2011 was the 
sole breadwinner, had primarily been responsible for preparing and filing their joint tax 
returns. While the construction business was a thriving enterprise, Applicant’s husband 
                                                          
2 Prehearing correspondence, the notice of hearing, case management order, and Department Counsel’s 
objection are attached to record as Appellate Exhibits (App. Exh.) I – IV. 
 
3 Applicant’s father passed away from his medical condition in about 2009. 
 
4 Tr. 22, 36-38; Answer. 
 
5 Answer, Attachment B. 
 
3 
 
 
was able to employ a certified public accountant to prepare and file their returns. (He 
had found the tax forms too difficult and time consuming to fill out on his own.) Once 
work dried up and some of the business’s former clients did not pay for work already 
completed, Applicant’s husband could no longer afford to pay the accountant. He tried 
unsuccessfully to prepare the tax forms on his own. He hid the information about the 
delinquent tax filings from his wife (the Applicant), because he did not want to add to the 
stress she was already experiencing caring for her ailing parents and taking care of their 
then young children.6 
 
In 2011, Applicant and her spouse became gainfully employed. They then started 
to address and resolve their delinquent debts and overdue tax filings. They contacted 
their overdue creditors, negotiated settlements, and paid their debts, including the 
$18,000 debt referenced in SOR 1.h.7 In 2014, or a year before applying for a security 
clearance, Applicant and her husband began filing their overdue tax returns. They were 
entitled to refunds for tax years 2009 – 2012, and paid the nominal taxes due for 2013 
and 2014.8 They timely filed their 2015 and 2016 tax returns, and paid any taxes due. 
Applicant’s tax filings are up-to-date and she does not owe any taxes.9 She and her 
husband now use a generally-available tax software to prepare and file their returns.  
 
Applicant disclosed her history of financial problems on the security clearance 
application that she submitted in May 2015. She fully discussed and answered 
questions about her finances during a clearance interview in June 2015. She responded 
to financial interrogatories sent to her by Department Counsel in 2016, voluntarily 
supplying her tax returns, IRS account transcripts, and other requested information.10  
 
 Applicant and her husband’s income has increased markedly since 2010.11 Their 
2016 tax return reflects an AGI of nearly $90,000.12 Their current combined yearly 
income is approximately $130,000.13 Notwithstanding the increase in household 
income, Applicant and her husband live frugally. They only buy what they can afford, 
paying for mostly everything with cash or debit cards. They have one credit card with a 
$500 spending limit, which they only applied for to rebuild their credit. This credit card 
                                                          
6 Tr. 16-19, 25-29, 38-41; Answer. 
 
7 Tr. 15-16, 22-25; Answer, Attachment H (proof of payment). 
 
8 Answer, Attachments A – F. 
 
9 Answer, Attachment G; Exhibit B (2015 tax return); Exhibit 3 at 28-43 (IRS account transcripts supplied 
by Applicant in August 2016, show that federal tax returns for tax years 2009-2014 were filed and 
indicated a zero balance for each of those years). 
 
10 Exhibit 1; Exhibit 3. 
 
11 Answer, Attachments A - F. 
 
12 Exhibit B. 
 
13 Tr. 20-21, 44. 
 
4 
 
 
account has a zero or nearly zero balance. Applicant supplied a current credit report 
that reflects no negative or derogatory accounts.14 Applicant and her husband live in the 
same house that he built for them when they were newlyweds nearly 25 years ago. 
They drive cars that are more than 10 years old, personally repairing and maintaining 
the cars. They have accumulated an emergency savings fund of approximately 
$15,000. Applicant regularly contributes to her 401(k) retirement savings account. Her 
youngest child recently graduated from college and, as their children’s education-related 
expenses has gone away, Applicant has seen their monthly net remainder (amount left 
over after paying recurring household expenses) triple from $500 to $1,500. Applicant is 
no longer her mother’s primary caretaker, because her sister moved in with their mother 
a few years ago and has taken on that role.15 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
                                                          
14 Exhibit A. See also Exhibit 5 (credit report supplied by Government reflects no negative or derogatory 
accounts, with the accounts listed on the credit report showing a “0” balance).  
 
15 Tr. 19-22, 29-33, 41-49; Exhibit 3 at 3. 
 
5 
 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 As stated in the relevant portion of AG ¶ 18 quoted above, the security concern 
at issue is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial issues might 
be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their 
debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to delinquent 
debt and other security-significant financial issues cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, 
self-control, and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.16 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(g): failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same; 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection process. Instead, an 
administrative judge examines the way an applicant handles their personal financial 
obligations to assess how they may handle their security obligations.17 Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance was called into question due to overdue tax returns 
and a relatively large delinquent debt. Her past failure to timely file income tax returns 
raises heightened security concerns about her judgment and ability to abide by rules 
and regulations, requiring a close examination regarding the circumstances giving rise 
to her financial issues and her response to it.18 
 
In examining the circumstances that led to Applicant’s past financial problems, it 
is clear they were caused by matters largely beyond her control, including the 
recession, job loss, business failure, and caring for elderly and infirm parents. Applicant 
did not walk away from her financial obligations. Instead, after regaining employment in 
2011, she responsibly addressed and resolved her debts and tax situation. She 
contacted her creditors, negotiated settlement agreements whenever possible, and 
repaid her debts in full. She also filed her overdue tax returns and paid any resulting tax 
debt. Her failure to file for several years was an aberration and it was not primarily her 
fault. She timely filed and paid her taxes before her husband’s business failed, and she 
has resumed doing so. Based upon the record evidence, including Applicant and her 
husband’s positive efforts in addressing and resolving their past financial issues, as well 
as their credible testimony at hearing, I am left firmly convinced that Applicant will 
continue to responsibly manage and meet her financial obligations going forward.19  
 
                                                          
17 See also, ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (“Security clearance determinations 
are not an exact science, but rather predicative judgments about a person’s security suitability in light of 
that person's past conduct and present circumstances.”) (citing, Egan, 484 U.S. at 528-529). 
 
18 See generally, ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (Board explained the heightened 
security concerns raised by tax-related financial issues, as follows:  “A security clearance represents an 
obligation to the Federal Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor 
other obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information.”). 
 
19 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 15-03481 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016) (resolution of overdue tax filing alone 
insufficient to mitigate heightened security concerns, where no evidence of financial reform or extenuating 
circumstances to explain the late filing). 
 
7 
 
 
Additionally, Applicant took the necessary steps to put her financial house in 
order well before applying for a security clearance. She has been candid about her 
financial situation and cooperative throughout the security clearance process.20 Her 
financial situation is clearly under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a) – 20(d) apply. 
 
After a complete and thorough review of the record evidence, while remaining 
mindful of my duty to resolve any unmitigated doubt in favor of protecting national 
security, I find that Applicant met her heavy burden of proof and persuasion in mitigating 
the security concerns at issue. Furthermore, she clearly established her eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
20 See, AG ¶ 2(a) (whole-person factors).  
