 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01008 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant experienced financial difficulties due to circumstances largely beyond his 
control, but mitigated the concern by acting responsibly. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on June 30, 2014. On 
August 1, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR on August 18, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
August 3, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on September 26, 2016. On December 
20, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
 
2 
 
hearing was scheduled for January 12, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through I were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 24, 2017. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges seven delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$56,929, and a foreclosed mortgage account with an unspecified balance. The delinquent 
debts consist of: a judgment and three delinquent accounts owed to the mortgage-loan 
creditor totaling $46,883; a $9,620 judgment owed to a credit-card company; a $178 
medical account; and, a $248 cable account. In his Answer, Applicant admits the 
foreclosure and the debts to the mortgage-loan creditor, however, he states that the 
delinquent accounts were combined and form the basis of the judgment which is now 
$18,441. He admits the credit-card debt and denies the medical and the cable debts. His 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. The delinquent debts are reflected in 
Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) from January 2015 and July 2014. (GX 4; GX 2.)  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old simulation engineer currently employed by a defense 
contractor since June 2014, and employed in the defense industry since July 2007. He 
was granted a DOD security clearance in 2008. He is a combat veteran who served 
honorably in the U.S. Navy from August 1986 until June 1994, and held a security 
clearance from at least 1989 to 1990. He received an associate’s degree in May 1980; 
an advanced electronics program completion certificate in October 1989; an associate’s 
degree in August 1999; a bachelor’s degree in December 2006; and a master’s degree 
in January 2012. He held a top secret clearance from 1989 to 1990 while in the Navy. He 
and his wife married in 1992, and they have a 20-year-old daughter. Applicant also has a 
35-year-old son and a 29-year-old son from a prior marriage. (GX 1; Tr. 34; Tr. 40.)  
 
Applicant purchased a house in 1995 for about for $138,500. In 1998, he 
refinanced the house with the mortgage-loan creditor for about $156,000, which 
encompassed an equity line-of-credit that he used to make home repairs and to purchase 
a used vehicle. (GX 1; Tr. 29; Answer.) In about 2003, Applicant began experiencing 
financial difficulties when his wife became ill and was no longer able to work. He incurred 
medical bills in addition to suffering the impact of her loss of income. Applicant’s mother-
in-law was living with them during this period, and she became terminally ill. Applicant 
incurred medical treatment costs as well as expenses for her hospitalizations. In about 
August 2004, the contract on which Applicant was working ended, resulting in his 
unemployment and increased financial strain. After seeking local employment for about 
four months, he found an out-of-state job that required him to move. He incurred expenses 
for traveling home to visit his wife and perform work on the house. (Tr. 44.) Applicant 
supported two households from 2004 until 2008, when his family moved in with him. (Tr. 
26-28.)  
Between 2004 and 2008, based primarily on the advice of realtors, Applicant and 
his wife invested time and about $43,000 in necessary repairs and modifications to their 
house in anticipation of its sale, exhausting their 401(k)s, and using their personal loan 
 
3 
 
and credit card to finance the work. In about 2007, they unsuccessfully attempted to sell 
the house on their own, and later listed it through a realtor. Despite the costly 
improvements, the house did not sell. (Tr. 30; Tr. 43.) Applicant continued to make the 
$1,250 monthly mortgage-loan payments while the house lingered on the market. In 2008, 
he was no longer able to sustain the financial burdens of two households on his sole 
income, and had depleted his financial reserves. As a result, he negotiated with the 
mortgage-loan creditor which agreed to accept partial monthly payments. However, in 
August 2008, without warning or explanation, the creditor returned Applicant’s partial 
payment and began foreclosure proceedings. (Tr. 28; GX 3; GX 1.) The house was 
foreclosed in November 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.a), and sold at auction in February 2010 for 
$175,000. (Tr. 45; Answer; AX F.) The proceeds from the sale of the house satisfied the 
mortgage loan and the equity line-of-credit, with the creditor receiving a profit of 
approximately $19,000. Applicant’s 2015 and 2016 CBRs show a $0 balance on the 
mortgage loan. The line-of-credit was not reported as a separate loan on any of the record 
CBRs. (Answer; Tr. 30; GX 4; GX 5; AX H.)  
Applicant secured two additional loans with his mortgage-loan creditor, a vehicle 
loan (SOR ¶ 1.c) and a personal loan (SOR ¶ 1.e). He also had a credit-card account with 
another creditor (SOR ¶ 1.f). As Applicant struggled to maintain his mortgage-loan 
payments, he fell behind on these accounts, and ultimately defaulted on them in late 2006. 
(GX 2; Tr. 29; GX 3.) After defaulting, Applicant repeatedly contacted both creditors in an 
effort to establish repayment arrangements. However, both creditors demanded full 
payment of the debts. Applicant did not have the financial resources to comply. He 
consulted an attorney who advised him to file for bankruptcy, which he opted not to do. 
(Tr. 33.) Applicant unsuccessfully defended himself in court, and the debts were reduced 
to judgments. (Tr. 48-50; GX 1.)  
The $9,620 April 2008 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is for Applicant’s delinquent 
credit card. Applicant contends that the $6,924 vehicle loan debt and the $5,051 personal 
loan debt owed to the mortgage-loan creditor were combined by the creditor and are the 
underlying debts of the November 2009 $16,467 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. He 
states that the $18,441 debt (SOR ¶ 1.b) is the same judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, with 
additional interest and fees. (Tr. 30-31; Answer.) He further asserts that despite the 
consolidation of the two accounts into one judgment, the two accounts and the judgment 
continued to be erroneously listed as three separate accounts on his CBRs. These 
assertions are supported by the record evidence. (GX 2; GX 4.) The two accounts and 
two judgments have been removed from Applicant’s CBRs as of 2015. (GX 4; AX G; AX 
H.) 
Applicant was told by the attorney with whom he consulted that the mortgage-loan 
creditor should have used the $19,000 profit it made from the sale of Applicant’s house 
to offset the judgment for Applicant’s other two loans. (Tr. 46.) Despite questioning the 
legitimacy of the judgment, in 2012, Applicant again contacted the mortgage-loan creditor 
and attempted to settle the judgment, offering a lump-sum payment of $2,000, which was 
refused. (AX I; Tr. 34; Tr. 48.)  
Applicant paid the $178 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.d), incurred in 2011, in 2013. He 
paid the $248 cable bill (SOR ¶ 1.h) also incurred in 2011, at an unspecified time. He 
 
4 
 
successfully disputed these two debts with the credit reporting agencies and they have 
been removed from his CBR. (Tr. 50; GX 4; GX 5.)  
Applicant’s co-worker, a former Navy captain, who assessed Applicant for his 
current employment and is aware of his financial issues, has “been positively impressed 
with [Applicant’s] conviction, commitment, and integrity, both professionally and 
personally.” (AX C.) Applicant received high performance evaluations in 2014 and 2015. 
His 2015 Manager’s Assessment states, “[Applicant] has never shown himself to be 
anything other than a professional with the highest ethical standards and desire to uphold 
all company values.” (AX D; AX E.) 
Applicant has supported his family on only his income since 2003. He lives within 
his means, which includes out-of-pocket assistance for his daughter’s college expenses 
of $12,000 to $14,000 a year. He rents his home, does not have a vehicle loan, and 
maintains a single credit card that has a balance of about $1,640 and a $2,000 limit. He 
has not incurred any delinquent debt since 2011, and no significant delinquent debt since 
2008. There are no negative accounts on his 2016 CBRs. (Tr. 51-58; GX 2; GX 5; AX G; 
AX H.) He was candid, sincere, and credible while testifying and accepts responsibility 
for his previous financial issues. (Tr. 35-36.)  
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
5 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 The record evidence establishes that SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.g are duplicate debts. 
Therefore, I have not considered the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g when evaluating 
Applicant’s financial status. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under 
the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged 
twice).  
 
 Applicant’s testimony, corroborated by the record evidence, establishes two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 However, a person can mitigate concerns about his ability to handle and safeguard 
classified information raised by his financial circumstances by establishing one or more 
of the mitigating conditions listed under the guideline. The relevant mitigating conditions 
in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts, and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose from circumstances largely beyond his 
control. Specifically, his wife suffered an illness which resulted in medical costs and her 
inability to return to work, and his mother-in-law became terminally ill and required 
expensive medical care. Applicant was unemployed for four months until he found work 
in another state and moved. He paid the expenses for two households for four years 
solely on his income. He made costly and extensive necessary improvements on his 
house in an unsuccessful effort to sell it. As a result of these unforeseeable and 
unavoidable additional expenses, Applicant depleted his financial reserves, then fell 
 
7 
 
behind on his financial obligations. He acted responsibly and in good faith by maintaining 
contact with his creditors and repeatedly attempting to negotiate repayment plans. 
Despite his exhaustive efforts to resolve his debts, his creditors refused to accept his 
offers. He successfully disputed two paid SOR debts and has not incurred additional debt. 
“Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of a person’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case 
No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.)  
 
 Applicant has not incurred any significant delinquent debt since 2008, and no 
delinquent debt since 2011. He is current on his ongoing financial obligations and has 
reduced his overhead. He has no mortgage loan or vehicle loan and only a $2,000 limit 
on his sole credit card, thus drastically limiting his potential to become financially 
overextended. These actions demonstrate that Applicant is committed to maintaining his 
plan for financial stability. A person is not required to establish resolution of every debt 
alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems 
and take significant actions to implement the plan. The adjudicative guidelines do not 
require that a person make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor do they 
require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 
2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
    
 The circumstances under which Applicant incurred delinquent debt are unlikely to 
recur, particularly in light of the proactive and preventive measures he has taken to ensure 
his financial stability. Applicant’s past financial difficulties do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
8 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I have also 
considered the following: 
 
 Applicant is a combat veteran who served honorably in the military for eight years, 
and held a security clearance for part of that time. He has held a DOD security clearance 
since 2008, and is trusted and respected by his employer. He negotiated with his creditors 
in good faith, albeit unsuccessfully, to resolve his debts. He lives within his means, and 
has been proactive in limiting his susceptibility to any potential indebtedness. I am 
confident that Applicant will continue his good-faith efforts to maintain his financial 
stability. 
  
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
