 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03085 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on April 4, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on April 13, 2016, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and provided a four-page 
response to the FORM on June 17, 2016, with 12 pages of documentation attached. 
 
2 
 
 
These were collectively marked as Applicant’s Exhibit A (AE A) and admitted into 
evidence. 1 The Government’s evidence, identified as items 1 through 9, is admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He obtained his bachelor’s degree in 1981. He has 
been married since October 1997, and he has been employed by a federal contractor 
since November 1984. Applicant reports he was first granted a security clearance in 
1990.2 Applicant disclosed some of his delinquencies involving routine accounts in 
section 26 of his November 15, 2012 Questionnaire for National Security Positions or 
security clearance application (SCA).3 Applicant’s only explanation in the SCA is that he 
had a reduction in work and lost earnings. He also claims that payments have been set 
up with many of the creditors.4 Applicant admits to receiving a clean slate when his 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy was discharged in 2003.5 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶1.a, alleging that he owed delinquent federal taxes for 
tax years 2009 and 2010. In his Response to the FORM, Applicant claims to have paid 
off the $8,740 in back taxes for 2009 and 2010, but his tax problems persist. He claims 
to have set up an installment plan in 2012 for the 2011 and 2014 delinquent tax debts 
that were not alleged in the SOR. Applicant claims to continue to pay $145 monthly on 
this installment plan. Applicant attached a June 8, 2016 installment agreement with the 
IRS which reflects balances owed of $1,880 for tax year 2011 and $4,330 for 2014, 
respectively. An inference can be drawn that he has paid off the tax delinquencies for 
2009 and 2010 alleged in the SOR, since those debts are not addressed in the 
installment plan. However, Applicant failed to establish a regular payment history for this 
installment plan and document that he brought his delinquent tax debts current. No 
explanation has been offered as to how he became delinquent on the 2009 and 2010 
taxes in the first place.  
 
Applicant also admitted to six of the remaining seven delinquent debts or 
judgment alleged in the SOR in his December 2015 Answer to the SOR. Applicant 
repeatedly responded “I admit I owe, in process of contacting creditor.” But Applicant 
has not followed through on any of this. He provided few documents and virtually no 
evidence to show progress on payments, or mitigation regarding the delinquent debts 
                                                          
1 AE A attachments include: emails; letters from the IRS; letters from a law firm; and a notice of 
satisfaction of judgment; handwritten notes in red ink; letters from creditors; and letters from a debt 
verification firm. 
 
2 Item 5, p. 27. 
 
3 Item 2, section 26. 
 
4 Item 5, p. 30 and 31. 
 
5 Answer to SOR ¶ 1.j.  
 
 
3 
 
 
alleged in the SOR. SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.i are duplicate debts. Applicant reached out to 
the successor creditor and attached a May 4, 2016 letter from this creditor reflecting that 
the debt was cancelled, no monies owed.6 However, it is evident that it was earlier 
charged off by the original creditor. Applicant did not pay it off or resolve it. The only 
debt that Applicant denied is alleged at SOR ¶1.e, but that debt is substantiated in his 
credit reports.7 Although Applicant provided some notes scribbled in red ink purporting 
to show that this was paid off by credit card,8 he did not provide the credit card 
statement or receipt from the creditor. 
 
Applicant avers that the $5,175 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b has been 
removed from his credit bureau report but is still in the process of being challenged, 
stating “I have to get back to you on this account.”9 He made similar assertions with 
respect to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶1.d and 1.f, but provided no documents to verify 
these disputes or explain why these debts were either charged off or fell off his credit 
reports. Applicant also states that his mortgage loan at SOR ¶ 1.c is current. Yet, he 
provides no documents to substantiate this assertion. Applicant contends that the 
delinquent debt owed to a utility provider, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e, was paid off. Yet, he 
provides only handwritten notes scribbled in red ink that purport to show this.10 SOR ¶¶ 
1.g and 1.i are duplicates of the same debt.11 That account was opened in September 
2007 and charged off in April 2011 in the amount of $1,584. No evidence has been 
provided to show that it has been resolved.  
 
In his February 2013 personal subject interview (PSI), Applicant stated that he 
has continued to pay $145 a month on the installment plan with the IRS. Yet, no 
documentation has been offered to confirm this. His financial problems resulted from his 
wife having cancer and being unable to work, and his own loss of income.12 His 
employer under withheld taxes when Applicant increased the number of dependents he 
was claiming on his W-4 form around 2009 and 2010. Moreover, in that same PSI given 
four years ago, Applicant expressed his intentions to consult with a financial advisor, 
and to pay every delinquent account in full.13 He is working with a debt verification firm 
to challenge certain items on his credit reports.14 Scant work product has been provided 
                                                          
6 AE A, attachment G. 
 
7 Items 7 and 8. 
 
8 AE A, attachment E. 
 
9 AE A.  
 
10 AE A, at attachment E.  
 
11 AE A, at attachment G, letter dated May 4, 2016.  
 
12 Item 6, at p. 6.  
 
13 Item 6, at p. 7. 
 
14 AE A.  
 
4 
 
 
except for emails from the firm showing challenged item, and removal of a few items 
from his Transunion credit report.15  
  
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
15 AE A, attached emails from Lexington Law.  
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted to the delinquent taxes owed for 2009 and 2010, and claimed 
that the 2009 back taxes were paid. He also admitted to most of the other delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR. He claimed to be in the process of contacting creditors in 
each instance. Applicant has had a history of recurring delinquent debts going back to 
2002 when he filed for bankruptcy protection. This was part of a pattern. He didn’t pay 
his taxes for 2009 and 2010 for several years, and he continued to accrue delinquent 
debts. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
6 
 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant disclosed many of his delinquent debts in his SCA. He repeatedly 
stated that particular delinquent debts were either charged off or no longer appear on 
his credit reports. Allowing delinquent debts to be charged off due to passage of time or 
the absence of unsatisfied debts from credit reports does not necessarily mitigate such 
debts. These debts remain unresolved. The mitigating conditions enumerated above do 
not apply.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline. Applicant has attempted to mitigate his financial 
problems by hiring a debt verification firm in 2016. However, those efforts have been 
inadequate.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There are ample indications that 
Applicant’s financial problems, especially his taxes, are not under control. He has not 
met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:             Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:                                   For Applicant  
 
       Subparagraphs 1.h – 1.j:                       Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
     _____________________________ 
                                            Robert J. Kilmartin 
               Administrative Judge 
 
 
