 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-05451 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On March 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on June 16, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on June 22, 2016, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence. He provided a one-page 
 
2 
 
 
response to the FORM dated July 10, 2016, plus attachments.1 These have collectively 
been marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and are admitted without objection. The 
Government’s evidence, identified as items 1 through 6, is admitted into evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2017.  
 
  Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant is 62 years old. He obtained his GED in 1973. His first marriage was 
from 1977 to 1980, when he was divorced. He has been married to his present wife 
since 1986. Applicant has been employed by a federal contractor since October 2001. 
Applicant reports having a security clearance since 2004. Applicant disclosed in section 
26 of his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance 
application (SCA) that “after a severe injury and later diagnosed with MS I was out of 
work, off and on, for approximately 3 years causing some financial difficulties.”3 He also 
stated that he had an attorney working on his mortgage delinquency issue, and he 
described an automobile loan delinquency, in the amount of $15,150, with a bank at 
SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant explained: “During my illness I fell behind on my payments and 
the loan ‘disappeared’ from all records when I paid off another car at the same bank. 
Just recently the loan reappeared and was charged off. The car remains in my 
possession and no attempt was made by the bank to recover the car.”4  
 
In his subject interview on January 2, 2015, Applicant clarified that the auto loan 
in question fell off his credit report when he went on disability in 2009 and couldn’t make 
payments.5 Around that same time, he paid off his spouse’s similar auto loan with the 
same bank. Subsequently, an apparent computer error incorrectly reflected both auto 
loans as paid.6 Applicant did not receive any bank correspondence, or repossession 
notices. Applicant does not dispute it. He was previously using consumer credit-
counseling services, then he hired attorneys in 2009 to attempt resolution of his 
delinquent debts.7 SOR ¶ 1.e is not resolved. Page one of his July 2016 credit report 
reflects that the delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c has been deleted and removed, 
                                                          
1 AE A attachments include: a one page bank account activity statement showing a $79.64 debit apparently 
paid to N.R. Agency on April 29, 2016; a one page June 30, 2016 letter from JCS stating although a 
balance of $5,300.75 is still due Citibank on a credit card, they terminated collection efforts; a ten page 
July 19, 2016 Experian Credit report; and two ten page Karma credit reports, both dated July 20, 2016.  
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s September 25, 2014, 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or Security Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 2). 
 
3 Item 2, page 33.  
 
4. Item 2, page 35. 
 
5 Item 5, page 6.  
 
6 Item 5, page 6. 
 
7 Item 5, page 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
after Applicant successfully disputed it.8 This debt is resolved. Similarly, Applicant 
disputed the debt at SOR ¶ 1.b as fraudulent. It has been removed from his credit 
reports, and it is resolved.9  
 
Applicant admitted four of the five delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling 
approximately $65,448. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.a, as it 
has been paid off. This is confirmed by the page from his bank statement dated April 29, 
2016, attached to AE A. In regards to the home mortgage loan delinquency at SOR ¶ 
1.d, Applicant annotated his Answer stating “I agree, the house to be sold May 26, 
2016.”10 Through counsel, he attempted to negotiate the mortgage loan debt with the 
bank, but the bank was intractable and Applicant was advised to vacate his home of 25 
years and allow foreclosure sale to ensue.11 The house has since been transferred back 
to the mortgagee bank, and his credit reports all reflect no balance due. This debt is 
resolved.  
 
In his April 11, 2016 letter “to whom it may concern” attached to his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant described a series of medical misfortunes that he and his wife 
endured. Approximately 20 years ago, he contracted Lyme disease with complications. 
This condition went undiagnosed for eight years. More recently he has been diagnosed 
with relapsing, reoccurring multiple sclerosis (MS). Then, in October 2010, Applicant fell 
from a tree, causing multiple fractures. Since then, he has been on temporary disability, 
on and off, for several years.12 His wife suffered a heart attack in January 2013, 
resulting in exorbitant medical expenses. She is 66 years old, and incapable of working. 
Applicant returned to work in May 2012, but the damage to his credit was substantial, as 
he was the sole-bread winner for his family. Despite receiving legal advice to declare 
bankruptcy, Applicant declined to do so, and he is making progress paying debts, with 
the help of legal counsel. His financial delinquencies are not due to gambling, alcohol, 
or drug abuse.  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
8 AE A, attached Experian Credit Report.  
 
9 AE A, attached Experian Credit Report. 
 
10 Item 1. 
 
11 Item 1, attached letter at p. 2. 
 
12  Item 1, attached letter at p. 1. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted to virtually all of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 
except for the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. The Government produced substantial 
evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts.13 Applicant met that burden. Only one delinquent debt is 
unaddressed.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
 
(c) the person has received, or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
                                                          
13 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant and his wife have endured multiple illnesses, disability, and unforeseen 
expenses related to the downturn in the real estate market. These conditions were 
beyond his control. Applicant has demonstrated that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant indicated he employed the services of a credit-counseling 
agency, then a law firm, to try to compromise and settle some of his delinquent debts. 
Applicant produced documents to show that he paid off SOR ¶ 1.a, successfully 
disputed the debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, and satisfied the mortgage loan by 
transferring his home back to the bank at SOR ¶ 1.d. He is making progress in resolving 
his only remaining delinquent debt at SOR ¶ 1.e. His debts are substantially resolved. 
Applicant provided sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under 
control, and that his debts were incurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. The 
mitigating conditions enumerated above apply.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s finances no longer remain a security concern. There are ample 
indications that Applicant’s financial problem are under control. He has met his burden 
of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:             For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
