 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-05533 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by her inadvertent, minor security 
lapses that occurred three years ago. She self-reported the incidents and took 
corrective action. These security infractions were an aberration in an otherwise long 
history of properly handling and safeguarding classified, sensitive, and proprietary 
information. Applicant established that similar security incidents are unlikely to recur. 
She did not falsify her security clearance application. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline K (handling protected information) and Guideline E 
(personal conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR and initially requested a decision on 
the written record. She subsequently requested a hearing to establish her eligibility for 
continued access to classified information. 
  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On April 11, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. 
Applicant testified and called two witnesses, a character reference and a co-worker. 
Both sides offered exhibits, which were admitted into the administrative record without 
objection. (Government Exhibits 1 – 3; and Applicant’s Exhibits A – K.)2 The transcript 
of the hearing was received on April 19, 2017, and the record closed on May 5, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
General Background3 
 
Applicant, 55, is the granddaughter of refugees who fled a brutal genocide and 
immigrated to the United States. She was born, raised, and educated in the United 
States. She has been married to her husband for nearly 35 years. They adopted their 
two children, one of whom suffers from learning and physical disabilities.  
 
Applicant holds a master’s degree in mechanical engineering and earned an 
advanced degree in management from a prestigious U.S. business school. She is an 
executive at her company, a federal contractor. Her position with the company is 
primarily in the business development arena, though her portfolio is quite extensive. 
She is the person others in the company seek out for advice and she is often asked to 
handle and resolve the most challenging issues – assignments that she routinely 
accepts. She has been highly successful at her job, generally exceeding expectations 
and regularly earning six-figure bonuses. She has received repeated promotions over 
the years, with ever increasing responsibilities and demands.  
 
In the past five years, Applicant has been selected as the chair of a select 
industry trade group; named by a U.S. publication as one of the top five women in her 
(traditionally male-dominated) field; and invited as a guest speaker at a high-visibility 
U.S. military forum. She mentors young female executives at her company. In July 
2015, she was promoted to her current vice president position. She has been with her 
current employer since 1989, and has held a clearance since at least 1999.  
 
When not at work, Applicant helps care for her elderly parents and is active in her 
community. Through her church, Applicant volunteers mentoring teenage girls from 
disadvantaged backgrounds. She became involved in this charitable endeavor about 
ten years ago, after returning from a church-sponsored mission trip to a war-torn, third-
world country where her children were born.  
 
The director of the church’s youth ministry, who has known Applicant for about a 
decade, testified at the hearing. He states that Applicant is a great role model of the 
values his ministry tries to instill in young people of “Integrity, Courage, Honesty, 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s request for hearing, prehearing correspondence, the notice of hearing, case management 
order are attached to record as Appellate Exhibits (App. Exh.) I – IV, respectively. 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated, the pertinent portions of the record that were primarily relied upon for the 
information relayed in this section can be found at Tr. 9-45, 52-53; Exhibit 1; Exhibits A - K. 
 
3 
 
 
Discipline, Determination, and Strength.” He also states that Applicant “is a person of 
the highest integrity. You would have to go a long way to find someone with greater 
moral character.”4 Other individuals, including the president of her company and a 
fellow youth minister, provided similar glowing accolades. 
 
Security Infractions5 
 
In 2014, Applicant’s work office also doubled as a sensitive compartmented 
information facility (SCIF). The company’s senior security officer (SSO) provided a letter 
noting some inherent issues with the SCIF’s setup at the time that “increased the 
opportunity for inadvertent security infractions, particularly with prohibited electronic 
devices.”6 The unique issues identified by the security manager and Applicant’s 
executive assistant, a 20-year military veteran, were as follows:  
 
1.  The SCIF was a stand-alone secure office with only one exterior door, which 
was permitted to remain open as long as the executive assistant or Applicant were 
present and no discussion of classified information was occurring.  
 
2.  The SCIF did not have an anteroom (or “mantrap”) with a locker or other 
suitable container that would allow a person entering the SCIF to place their personal 
belongings, cell phone, and other electronic equipment. As soon as a person crossed 
the threshold of the office door, which at times was propped open, that person was in a 
secure environment. 
 
3.  The company issued Applicant a laptop that she could use within the SCIF to 
work on classified and non-classified matters. She was also issued a wireless card that 
she could use with the laptop outside the SCIF.  
 
The Government approved the setup of the SCIF (Applicant’s office) and Applicant’s 
use of a company laptop, which could be connected to the internet through the 
company-provided removable wireless card when she was not working in the SCIF.  
 
In about January 2014, Applicant requested that a locker or other suitable 
container be placed outside the SCIF to lessen the risk of an inadvertent security 
violation. Her supervisor at the time initially denied the request. She eventually was able 
to convince upper management to get a locker placed outside the office door, which she 
and her executive assistant could then use to place their purses, brief cases, cell phone, 
and other non-classified electronic equipment. The locker did not arrive until late 2014, 
as the responsible company representative searched for one that would match the style 
of the furniture in other executive office suites. 
                                                          
4 Tr. 9-15; Exhibit J. 
 
5 Unless otherwise indicated, the pertinent portions of the record that were primarily relied upon for the 
information relayed in this section can be found at Tr. 18-33, 45-60; Exhibits 1-3; Exhibit J at 1, 7-9. 
 
6 Exhibit J at 8. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s executive assistant testified that in 2014, Applicant had a very busy 
schedule and was inundated with a number of job-related tasks outside her primary 
area of responsibility. Applicant would routinely walk in and out of her office (SCIF) 
throughout the day to attend meetings. She was also provided a laptop by the company, 
which she could carry in and out of her office (SCIF), from and to her home, and while 
on business-related travel. She had to remember to remove the wireless card before 
entering her office (SCIF).  
 
 During a busy six-month period from late winter to early summer of 2014 
Applicant had several successive security infractions involving the unauthorized 
introduction of electronic devices into her office (SCIF). In February 2014, following a 
round of business meetings, she was carrying a stack of papers in her hands from a 
recent presentation. In the stack was the company-issued wireless card and her smart 
phone. She carried the stack into her office (SCIF). The wireless card was not 
connected to the laptop or any other electronic device. A company president, whose 
office was next to Applicant’s, writes that he saw Applicant run out of the SCIF within 
seconds of recognizing what she had done and immediately reported the matter to 
company security. These incidents are alleged at SOR 1.a and 1.b.  
 
In June 2014, Applicant was given a temporary, loaner laptop by her employer 
while her usual company-issued laptop was being upgraded. This loaner laptop, 
however, was not approved for use in the SCIF (her office). She mistakenly brought the 
loaner laptop into her office. This incident is referenced at SOR 1.c. In early July 2014, 
Applicant returned from a business trip and did not clean out the computer bag she 
used on the trip. She brought the computer bag into her office (SCIF) the following 
Monday, with the company-issued wireless card still in its plastic sleeve inside the 
computer bag. The wireless card was not connected to the laptop or any other 
electronic device. This incident is referenced at SOR 1.d.  
 
Applicant testified that she self-reported these security incidents to her security 
office.7 This is corroborated by Applicant’s executive assistant, her supervisor at the 
time, and the company’s senior security officer (SSO).8 The security office and the 
Government client determined that each of the incidents constituted an infraction. An 
“infraction” is “[a] failure to follow proper security procedures that does or is not likely to 
result in a compromise of classified information.”9 However, due to internal corporate 
policy at the time, the incidents were collectively deemed a violation. Nevertheless, 
company security and the Government client “did not suspect a compromise of 
classified information.” This corporate policy has since been changed to allow the 
                                                          
7 Tr. 51. 
 
8 Exhibit 2; Exhibit J at 7-8. In assessing the weight to extend to the testimony and statements of other 
company employees, I have considered the potential for bias as Applicant is a high performer for the 
company (having generated over $100 million in profits for the company in one year alone). However, no 
evidence of unlawful collusion was presented or evident from the record. Furthermore, after considering 
the entire record evidence, I found the information provided by these individuals credible.  
 
9 Exhibit J at 8. 
 
5 
 
 
responsible security officials to assess whether a group of incidents rise to the level of a 
violation.10 
 
In late July 2014, Applicant and her supervisor had a meeting to discuss the 
security incidents and potential ways to avoid a recurrence of the issue. He gave 
Applicant a letter for reprimand (LOR), which states in pertinent part:  
 
You are hereby reprimanded. Everyone makes mistakes; however this is 
becoming a pattern. While I view these incidents as oversights and not a 
negligent disregard for security procedures, my expectation is that you, as 
a seasoned executive with extensive background in supporting classified 
programs will be able to correct this. I have full confidence that you will.11  
 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility and access to classified information was 
not suspended or revoked. She was also not offered any remedial security training after 
any of the incidents or the reprimand. She was not notified, either formally or informally, 
that the security infractions amounted to employee misconduct. Less than a year later, 
Applicant was promoted and given additional responsibilities and duties, to include 
handling highly sensitive U.S. Government information. 
 
Following the security incidents, Applicant placed signs outside her office to 
remind herself and others to remove and secure all electronic equipment before 
entering her office space (the SCIF). Since the July 2014 security incident, Applicant 
has not been involved in any such incidents.  
 
Sometime after the LOR was issued, the company installed a cabinet or locker 
outside Applicant’s (former) office. Persons now entering the office (SCIF) can put their 
personal belongings and electronic equipment in a secure container. The company also 
stopped issuing non-secured laptops to those working in classified environments and 
installed a desktop in the SCIF.  
 
The SSO notes that Applicant’s “track record prior to and after this series of 
incidents has been solid.” He also states that he has frequent interaction with Applicant 
and the incidents themselves do not change his opinion as to her trustworthiness, 
reliability, and good judgment.12 
 
                                                          
10 Exhibit J at 8. 
 
11 Exhibit 2.  
 
12 Exhibit J at 8. 
 
6 
 
 
Personal Conduct13 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in October 2014. 
Section 13.C, Employment Record, of the SCA asks: 
 
Have any of the following happened to you in the last seven (7) years at 
employment activities that you have not previously listed? . . .  
 
• Fired from a job? 
• Quit a job after being told you would be fired? 
• Have you left a job by mutual agreement following charges or 
allegations of misconduct? 
• Left a job by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory 
performance? 
• Received a written warning, been officially reprimanded, 
suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the workplace, such as 
violation of a security policy? 
 
Applicant answered “No” to this question.14 A few months later, during a security 
clearance interview, Applicant volunteered the information about the security incidents 
and the reprimand.15  
 
At hearing, Applicant explained that she answered the workplace misconduct 
question in the manner she did, because she did not consider the reprimand an official 
or even unofficial negative mark in her employment record. She was not formally 
notified or even informally told that her conduct rose to the level of workplace 
misconduct. She is familiar with the corporate forms used to notify an employee that 
their conduct constitutes workplace misconduct or is deficient in some manner. Her 
supervisor did not use any of these forms during or after the meeting.  
 
Applicant’s executive assistant, who has held a clearance and been involved with 
highly-classified projects as both a federal contractor and military member for the past 
20 years, assisted Applicant in filling out her SCA by the deadline set by corporate 
                                                          
13 Unless otherwise indicated, the pertinent portions of the record that were primarily relied upon for the 
information relayed in this section can be found at Tr. 23-34, 45-60; Exhibits 1-2; Exhibit J at 7. 
 
14 Exhibit 1 at 11. The SCA at issue does not contain a specific question asking an applicant to disclose if 
they were ever involved or found to have committed a security infraction or violation. Instead, the SCA 
only asks an applicant to disclose situations where their clearance was suspended, denied, or revoked. 
Exhibit 1 at 44. The only question that presumably asks an applicant to disclose a security infraction or 
violation, as alleged in the SOR, is in Section 13.C, a section that is clearly tailored to find about any 
adverse employment history, including workplace misconduct. Based on this context, the question at 
issue appears to be asking an applicant to reveal security incidents involving violence or other unlawful 
conduct, not an incident involving the oversight of a rule or regulation for the protection of protected 
information. However, this issue is somewhat moot in light of my finding that Applicant did not deliberately 
falsify her SCA nor attempted to mislead the Government about this information. 
 
15 Exhibit 3 at 2. 
 
7 
 
 
security. At the time, the executive assistant was aware that Applicant had committed 
the security infractions and of the LOR’s existence. She reviewed the SCA and did not 
believe the information about the security infractions or LOR needed to be listed on the 
SCA. She noted that the Government client was fully aware of the security infractions 
well before the SCA was submitted, because she (Applicant) had self-reported the 
information to corporate security. Applicant and the executive assistant’s testimony was 
credible, reasonable, and fully consistent with the other record evidence.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
 
8 
 
 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information  
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern.16 
 
Security clearance cases require administrative judges to assess whether an 
applicant has the requisite good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to be 
entrusted with classified information. When evidence is presented that an applicant 
previously mishandled classified information or violated a rule or regulation for the 
protection of protected information such an applicant bears a very heavy burden in 
demonstrating that they should once again be found eligible for a security clearance.17 
 
 Applicant’s commission of four security incidents in a relatively short time span 
raise the overall Guideline K security concern. In assessing Applicant’s case, I 
considered the following pertinent disqualifying and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 34(g): any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or 
other sensitive information; 
 
AG ¶ 35(a): so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it happened 
so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 35(b): the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial 
security training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the 
discharge of security responsibilities. 
 
 The incidents at issue occurred three years ago. However, the passage of time 
alone, without evidence of true reform and rehabilitation, is insufficient to mitigate the 
heightened security concerns at issue. Instead, the focus of the inquiry is whether the 
person has: (1) accepted responsibility for the incident(s), (2) reformed the behavior that 
led to or contributed to the incident(s), and (3) established that a similar incident(s) is 
                                                          
16 AG ¶ 33. 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014) (very heavy burden standard); ISCR Case No. 
01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (security clearance determinations are “not an exact science, but 
rather predicative judgments.”). 
 
9 
 
 
(are) unlikely to recur. A judge must review any claim of reform and rehabilitation with 
“strict scrutiny.”18 Applicant met this burden.  
 
 Applicant’s past security lapses were not deliberate nor the result of a reckless or 
even negligent disregard for security rules and regulations.19 Instead, the major 
contributing factors were personal inattentiveness and working in a unique environment 
that lacked the usual safeguards to help prevent the inadvertent security lapses that 
occurred. Of note, despite Applicant’s warnings and attempts to remedy the situation, 
Applicant’s employer and the Government allowed the inherent vulnerability issues with 
the SCIF to continue, even after the first few incidents.  
 
 Applicant fully acknowledges her responsibility for the incidents. She self-
reported them, which allowed the responsible security officials to review the situation 
and determine that no compromise occurred.20 She then responded favorably to the 
counseling with her supervisor and took corrective action to put in place the proper 
safeguards to avoid a recurrence of a similar incident. She has not been involved in any 
type of security incident in the past three years. Rather, over the past three years, she 
has properly handled and safeguarded closely guarded U.S. and corporate information. 
Before these incidents, she had a long track record of properly handling and 
safeguarding protected information. AG ¶¶ 35(a) and 35(b) apply. 
 
 Additionally, the significant and overwhelming whole-person evidence adduced at 
hearing clearly establishes that Applicant has and exhibits the good judgment, reliability 
and trustworthiness expected of all clearance holders. Therefore, I am firmly convinced 
that Applicant will continue to properly discharge her security responsibilities and that 
the security lapses at issue were an aberration.21  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately falsified her SCA by not disclosing the 
security infractions and LOR in response to the question about workplace misconduct. 
The deliberate falsification of a SCA raises the personal conduct security concern, 
which is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
                                                          
18 ISCR Case No. 06-21537 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 21, 2008).  
 
19 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 07-08119 at 5 (App. Bd. July 8, 2010) (“ongoing pattern of knowing and 
willful security violations”).  
 
20 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 06-21537 (favorable decision undermined by determination that actual 
compromise occurred and applicant’s failure to take responsibility for their conduct).  
 
21 See generally ISCR Case No. 04-05802 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2007) (Board affirmed favorable 
decision where applicant had committed seven security violations in a short period of time, because the 
judge’s findings “concerning the impact that Applicant’s workload had upon his mistakes; the inadvertent 
nature of the violations; . . . and steps Applicant has taken to ensure his compliance with security 
procedures,” as well as “the Judge’s evaluation of Applicant as a believable and honest witness in his 
own behalf” were supported by the record evidence). 
 
10 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the candor of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the SCA and continues throughout the security 
clearance process. However, the omission of material, adverse information standing 
alone is not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally falsified his or her SCA. 
An omission is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot the information requested, 
inadvertently overlooked or misunderstood the question, or sincerely thought the 
information did not need to be reported. An administrative judge must examine the facts 
and circumstances surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.22 
 
 Applicant did not deliberately falsify her SCA. She self-reported the security 
incidents when they occurred to the Government through her employer’s security office. 
She then volunteered the information during her clearance interview. Applicant’s 
conduct is inconsistent with the expected actions of a person who is attempting to hide 
or mislead the Government. Instead, by reporting the security incidents and freely 
volunteering the information during her clearance interview, Applicant showed that she 
can be trusted to place her security obligations over her own personal concerns or 
interests. Furthermore, I found her testimony that she did not believe the security 
infractions and reprimand needed to be listed on the SCA credible, reasonable, and 
consistent with other record evidence.  
 
After a complete and thorough review of the record evidence, while remaining 
mindful of my solemn obligation to resolve any unmitigated doubt in favor of protecting 
national security, I find that Applicant met her burden of proof and persuasion in 
mitigating or refuting the security concerns at issue. Furthermore, she clearly 
established her eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K (Handling Protected Information):     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:       For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:        For Applicant 
                                                          
22 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for continued access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
