 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-03911 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 2, 2014. On 
January 17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006. The guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), 
and they replaced the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 22, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
 
 2
case on May 4, 2016. On May 10, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on May 16, 2016, and did not respond.1 The case was assigned to 
me on March 30, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old supervisor who has been employed by defense 
contractors since January 2011. He received a security clearance in December 2003.  
 
Applicant did not complete high school. He has never married, but he has three 
children, ages 18, 11, and 6. He and the mother of his children live in the same house 
for the sake of the children, but they do not have a spouse-like relationship.  
 
 In 2006, Applicant obtained a $536,000 adjustable-rate loan to purchase a home. 
When the interest rate adjusted, his monthly payments increased from $1,780 to 
$3,700, causing him to fall behind on credit-card payments and other debts. He 
refinanced the loan in 2011 and reduced his monthly payments to about $1,480. (Item 
3.) The payments are current and are not alleged in the SOR, but his payments on a 
second mortgage loan were 180 days past due in the amount of about $32,000 when he 
submitted his SCA. The delinquent second mortgage payments are alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a, and he has numerous delinquent credit-card and installment accounts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.l, 1.n, and 1.o. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m is a delinquent medical bill 
for $1,103. Applicant has not submitted any documentary evidence of payments, 
payment agreements, or other resolution of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, an April 2014 CBR reflected 15 delinquent 
debts totaling about $169,000, but he answered “No” to all questions asking about 
financial delinquencies during the preceding seven years, and he did not disclose any of 
the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. During a personal subject interview (PSI) in 
May 2014, he told the investigator that he did not disclose the debts because he did not 
know about some of them and he thought he was required to disclose only federal 
                                                          
1 The FORM included Item 3, a summary of a two personal subject interviews (PSIs) conducted on May 
21, 2014, and June 16, 2014, which were not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. 
Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the accuracy of the PSI 
summaries; make any corrections, additions, deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSIs 
on the ground that the summaries were not authenticated. I conclude that he waived any objections to the 
PSI summaries by failing to respond to the FORM. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like 
lawyers, they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. 
ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 2) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
debts. (Item 3 at 13.) In his answer to SOR, he admitted that he falsified his SCA. He 
explained: “I have no excuse. I responded to the question hoping that the delinquency 
involving all accounts had been prior to seven years. It had been near 5 years at the 
time of investigation.” While some of the accounts alleged in the SOR had been opened 
more than seven years preceding Applicant’s SCA, they all became delinquent in May 
2009 or later, within five years of the submission of his SCA. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
 4
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and the documentary evidence 
in the FORM establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are 
potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 5
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are established. Applicant delinquent debts are 
numerous, recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. The fluctuation in the interest rate on his mortgage loan, the turbulence in the 
housing market, and the medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m may have been due to 
conditions beyond his control, but he has not acted responsibly. He has presented no 
evidence of counseling, payments, payment agreements, or grounds for disputing any 
of the debts, even though he has been employed since January 2011. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .” In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted falsifying his SCA. He 
offered inconsistent explanations for failing to disclose his delinquent debts: that he did 
not know about some of them, that he thought the questions pertained only to federal 
debts, and that he hoped that they were outside the seven-year window for the financial 
questions in the SCA. His explanations are inconsistent, implausible, and unpersuasive.  
 
 
 6
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established, because Applicant did not disclose his delinquent 
debts until he was confronted with the evidence by a security investigator. AG ¶ 17(c) 
also is not established. Applicant’s falsification was not “minor,” because falsification of 
a security clearance application “strikes at the heart of the security clearance process.” 
ISCR Case No. 09-01652 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2011.) It was arguably “infrequent,” but it 
did not occur under “unique circumstances” making it unlikely to recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). I have considered that 
Applicant has held a security clearance for many years and has acknowledged his 
culpability for the conduct in the SOR. Because Applicant requested a determination on 
the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity 
based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts and lack of candor in 
 
 7
his SCA. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
