 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00874 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about her family connections to Nigeria 
under Guideline B, foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under foreign influence. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 26, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On August 26, 2016, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), along with 
documents identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant received the FORM on September 
1, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant replied on September 26, 2016, and 
submitted three attachments. The FORM Response and the attachments are marked as 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D. AE A, B and D are admitted without objection.1 
Applicant did not object to any of the Items offered by the Government. The SOR and 
the answer (Items 1 and 2) are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 and 4 are admitted 
without objection. Item 5 and AE C are the parties’ requests for administrative notice. 
The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2017.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Both parties submitted written requests that I take administrative notice of certain 
facts about Nigeria.2 Without objection, I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the requests that are supported by source documents from official U.S. 
Government publications. The facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. Her admissions and other comments are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. She was born in Nigeria. She immigrated to the United 
States in 2007, after finishing college in Nigeria. She has lived in the United States ever 
since. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2014. She was married from 2011 to 2013. 
She has no children. She earned a master’s degree in 2014 from a university in the 
United States. She worked for a telecommunications company from 2008 to 2014. She 
was unemployed for a period after earning her master’s degree. Applicant has worked 
in information technology for a defense contractor since March 2015. She completed a 
security clearance application in connection with that employment.3   
 
 Applicant’s mother (SOR ¶ 1.a) is a Nigerian citizen. She moved to the United 
States in December 2015, and is now a permanent U.S. resident. She lives with one of 
Applicant’s sisters in the United States. Applicant’s mother is in her sixties. She is a 
retired homemaker.4  Applicant maintains regular, frequent contact with her mother.5  
                                                          
1 AE B is another copy of the Government’s FORM. It is therefore duplicative, but is nonetheless 
admitted.  
 
2 Item 5; AE C.  
 
3 Item 2.  
 
4 Answer; Items 3, 4; AE A. 
 
5 Answer; AE A.  
 
3 
 
 
 
 Applicant has three sisters who are citizens and residents of Nigeria. (SOR ¶ 
1.c). One sister is a married mother of two children. Her husband works for an oil 
company. The second sister is an administrative assistant for a private company. The 
third sister is a student.6 Applicant’s brother (SOR ¶ 1.b) is also a citizen and resident of 
Nigeria. He is currently an engineering student at a Nigerian university.7 These siblings 
all reside in southern coastal Nigeria.8 
 
 Applicant returned to Nigeria in 2010 for her father’s funeral. She returned for 
memorial services in 2011 and again in December 2013. She returned in April 2014 to 
help her mother prepare to move to the United States. Applicant has not visited Nigeria 
since then.9 
 
 Applicant was in monthly contact with her siblings before her mother relocated. 
As the oldest daughter, she felt a responsibility to monitor her mother’s care, particularly 
when her mother fell ill. Since her mother’s move, Applicant communicates with them 
less frequently, mostly on birthdays and holidays. Applicant’s siblings are between the 
ages of 25 and 38 and are financially independent. Applicant does not provide them 
financial support. Applicant’s hope is that her siblings will be able to immigrate to the 
United States, as she, her sister, and her mother have done.10  
 
Applicant provided letters of recommendation from four character references: her 
pastor; a U.S. government employee who knows her well; her former professor, and a 
former co-worker. All of her references attested to Applicant’s responsibility, value to her 
community, and loyalty to the United States. All expressed their belief that were 
Applicant ever presented with a conflict of interest between the United States and 
another interest, she would resolve that conflict in the best interests of the United 
States.11  
   
Nigeria is a federal republic located in Western Africa. It is the largest economy 
and most populous country in Africa.12 Since gaining its independence, Nigeria has 
faced many challenges, including terrorist activity, sectarian conflicts, entrenched 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
6 Answer.  
 
7 AE A, Answer, Items 3, 4.  
 
8 AE A.  
 
9 AE A.  
 
10 AE A.  
 
11 AE D.  
 
12 AE C.  
 
 
4 
 
 
corruption, and widespread mistrust of the government. Nigerian security forces, 
particularly the police, have been accused of serious human rights abuses.13  
 
Boko Haram, a U.S.-designated Foreign Terrorist Organization, has grown 
increasingly active and deadly in its attacks against state and civilian targets, primarily 
northern Nigerian states. In 2014, the group’s abduction of almost 300 schoolgirls drew 
international attention.14 
 
The United States has established a strategic dialogue with Nigeria to address 
issues of mutual concern. The United States is the largest foreign investor in Nigeria. 
The United States seeks to help improve the economic security, stability and well-being 
of Nigerians by strengthening democratic institutions, improving transparency and 
accountability and professionalizing security forces.15  
 
In general, the security situation in Nigeria remains fluid and unpredictable. The 
U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens to avoid travel to a number of Nigerian 
states because of the risk of kidnapping, robberies, and other armed attacks.16 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
13 Item 5.  
 
14 Item 5.  
 
15 AE C.  
 
16 Item 5. The State Department’s most recent travel warning for Nigeria advises that these concerns 
remain. See https://travel.state.gov/content/passports/en/alertswarnings/nigeria-travel-warning.html. (U.S. 
State Department Travel Warning for Nigeria, issued April 5, 2017).  
 
 
5 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
AG ¶ 7(a), requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” 
required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. It denotes a risk 
greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s family 
ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”17 
 
The nature of Applicant’s relationship to her family members, coupled with 
Nigeria’s serious human rights issues, the threat of terrorism, and the government’s 
inability to stem corruption, raise a heightened risk that Applicant might be subject to 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion through her 
family members. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have 
been raised by the evidence. 
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
  
 Applicant’s mother has relocated to the United States, and is a permanent U.S. 
resident. This significantly lessens the risk that Applicant might be subject to 
exploitation, coercion, or duress through her mother, though she remains a Nigerian 
citizen. Applicant’s siblings are not employed with the Nigerian government. They do not 
reside near any area that terrorists are known to operate. Nigeria is not known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States. Indeed, Nigeria’s economy 
and stability is heavily dependent on aid and investment from the United States. 
However, in light of the matters accepted for administrative notice, AG ¶ 8(a) has limited 
applicability.  
 
 Applicant met her heavy burden of persuasion in establishing the applicability of 
AG ¶ 8(b) to her circumstances. She left Nigeria in 2007 to further her education in the 
United States. She has created a life for herself in the United States, earning a graduate 
degree, beginning a promising professional career, and forming strong relationships 
with those she has come in contact with through school, church, and work. She has 
strong ties to her community here. Most of Applicant’s siblings remain in Nigeria, but 
she has not returned since before her mother moved to the United States in 2015. 
Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the best interests 
of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
Now that her mother has relocated to the United States, Applicant has infrequent 
contact with her siblings, on birthdays and holidays. Applicant does not provide them 
financial support. She has not visited Nigeria since 2014. AG ¶ 8(c) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. After carefully weighing the evidence, 
both favorable and unfavorable, and considering the whole-person factors set forth in 
AG ¶ 2(a), I find that Applicant mitigated the heightened concerns raised by her family 
connections to Nigeria. The record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign 
influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                 
 
     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
