 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01066 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 22, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 21, 2017. 
After coordinating with the parties, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on February 21, 2017, scheduling the hearing for February 
 
2 
 
22, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on February 28, 2017.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. He did not submit any additional evidence. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Iraq. The request was not admitted in evidence but was included in the record as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice 
of the facts contained in HE I. The most pertinent facts are that Iraq is a constitutional 
parliamentary republic. Iraq’s sectarian and ethnic divisions are fueling a major 
challenge to Iraq’s stability. There is a surge of terrorist activity in Iraq, primarily as a 
result of the actions of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). U.S. citizens are 
at high risk of kidnapping and violence. Terrorists committed the overwhelming number 
of serious human rights abuses in the country.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2015. He is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. He has a degree from a technical institute in Iraq. He has never married, and 
he has no children.1 
  
 Applicant was born in Iraq. He served in the Iraqi military from 2004 to 2006. He 
worked as a linguist in support of U.S. forces in Iraq from 2006 through 2009. The U.S. 
military assisted him in obtaining a visa, and he immigrated to the United States in 
2009. He became a U.S. citizen in 2014.2 
 
 Applicant had an Iraqi passport, which he used to travel to the United States. He 
did not use the passport after obtaining U.S. citizenship. The passport expired in 2014. 
He does not intend to obtain another Iraqi passport.3 
 
 Applicant’s parents and seven siblings are citizens and residents of Iraq. His 
father and one of his brothers are lawyers. His father worked for an Iraqi government 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 27-28, 43; GE 1-4. 
 
2 Tr. at 23-24, 27-30, 34-37; GE 1-4. 
 
3 Tr. at 23-26, 41, 47-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE A. 
 
3 
 
agency that was unrelated to defense or intelligence. His father is retired, but his brother 
still works for the agency. Applicant sent his father about $7,000 in 2011 and 2012 to 
help with medical expenses and his brother’s wedding. One of Applicant’s brothers is in 
the Iraqi military. None of his other family members have any immediate connection to 
the Iraqi government or any terrorist organization.4 
 
 Applicant has worked as a linguist for U.S. forces in Iraq since March 2015. He is 
not permitted to visit his family or tell them anything about his job when he is working in 
Iraq. They live about 300 miles from where Applicant is working. He contacts them 
periodically by telephone. One of his brothers knows Applicant is in Iraq because they 
met when both their units were involved in the same mission. Applicant does not believe 
his brother told the rest of the family that he was in Iraq.5 
  
 Applicant does not have any foreign assets. He credibly stated that his allegiance 
lies with the United States, and that he would report any attempt to use his family in Iraq 
against him.6 
 
 Applicant was wounded during a combat mission with U.S. forces in 2007. He 
submitted commendatory material and letters from U.S. military personnel in Iraq. Three 
different battalion commanders wrote that Applicant’s performance of duties was 
exemplary during more than 100 combat missions over an 18-month period in 2006 and 
2007.7 In 2006, a U.S. military officer recommended Applicant for immigration to the 
United States and wrote:  
 
Throughout the [last] seven months, [Applicant] was continuously placed 
in a position of danger, enduring mental and physical stress. In addition, 
[Applicant] was placed in a position of confidence with access to 
operational plans in the near future as well as privy to all information 
gathered, as he was the conduit for all of it. 
 
[Applicant] has proven himself to be a completely loyal and trustworthy 
individual, whom I have patrolled with on more than one hundred 
occasions. He does his job with a sense of duty and responsibility for his 
country that all members of [the military unit] admire. [Applicant] has 
conducted himself with honor and has been readily accepted by the 
[military unit] as one of them.8 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 27-34, 48-62; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
5 Tr. at 49-51. 
 
6 Tr. at 53, 60-61, 66; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 4. 
 
7 Tr. at 39, 43-46, 66-67; GE 1, 4; AE B. 
 
8 AE B. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s parents and siblings are citizens and residents of Iraq. The potential 
for terrorist violence against U.S. interests and citizens exists in Iraq. Iraq also continues 
to have human rights problems. Applicant’s foreign relatives create a potential conflict of 
interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
 
6 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Iraq. Guideline B is not limited to 
countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States.9  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. He credibly testified that he would report 
to security officials any attempt to use his family members against him. The Appeal 
Board has stated that such testimony, standing alone, is of limited value, unless there is 
record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner in the past in 
comparable circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous track record of 
complying with security regulations and procedures in the context of dangerous, high-
risk circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the national security.10 
In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the Appeal Board discussed 
this issue as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
10 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
7 
 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
I find that Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
Applicant possessed an Iraqi passport while a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 10(a) is 
applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant’s Iraqi passport is expired, and he does not intend to renew it. AG ¶ 
11(e) is applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
8 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. He credibly testified that he would report 
any attempt to use his family members to coerce him to reveal classified information. 
The Appeal Board has held that “generally, an applicant’s statements, by themselves, 
as to what he would do in the face of threats by a foreign government or entity are 
entitled to little weight. On the other hand, an applicant’s proven record of action in 
defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an 
applicant in a Guideline B case.”11 The complicated state of affairs in Iraq places a 
significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his foreign family 
members do not pose an unacceptable security risk. He has met that burden.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
9 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
