 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  16-01385 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 24, 2015. On 
July 10, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline H. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 1, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on August 24, 2016, and sent a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) to Applicant (including documents identified as Items 1 through 3), who was 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on September 6, 2016, 
 
2 
 
and did not respond. Items 1 and 2 are the pleadings in the case. Item 3 is admitted into 
evidence. The case was assigned to me on May 19, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 49 years old and has been married for 25 years. He has two 
children, ages 18 and 24. He served honorably in the U.S. Navy from 1987 through 
1996. He has since remained employed by federal contractors. He has maintained a 
top-secret security clearance for over 25 years. 
  
When Applicant submitted his 2015 SCA, he disclosed that he smoked marijuana 
between approximately August 2010 and March 2013 at parties to be social. As to 
frequency, he used it “at most once every other year.” He claimed that he “never 
intended to use it at all [it] just happened” and that because he was “pushing 50,” it was 
“just not a thing [he thought] about doing.” 
 
When Applicant answered the SOR, he stated that he smoked marijuana 
between 2011 and 2013 “a couple of times” and “never” since 2013. He also claimed 
that he “never had a positive urinalysis.” He acknowledged that marijuana use “is 
frowned upon,” which is why he does not intend any future marijuana use. 
 
Without providing any supporting documentation, he claimed in his SOR answer, 
that he has received many “Atta boy” letters from government agencies and that he 
believed his supervisors would attest to that. He also asserted that he would never 
divulge secure information and that he values truthfulness and hard work. He also 
stated that his “work ethic and love and respect for this country should speak for itself.”  
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant of his opportunity to submit 
a documentary response to the FORM setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”2 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”3 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”4 
 
                                                          
1 These facts are extracted from Applicant’s SOR answer (Item 2) and his SCA (Item 3). 
 
2 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
3 Egan at 527. 
 
4 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
3 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”5 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.6 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”7 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.8 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.9 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.10 
  
                                                          
5 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
7 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
8 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
9 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
10 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
4 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”11 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”12 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: “Use of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” 
Drugs are defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as “[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
Applicant’s admissions establish the following disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction”;  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a 
security clearance. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using 
associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the 
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent 
with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are not established. Applicant used marijuana on more 
than one occasion, over the course of several years, while in possession of a security 
clearance that he had maintained for over 20 years. He used it while in his 40s, 
employed with a federal contractor, and married with children. He did not intend to use 
marijuana; rather, it “just happened.” Applicant did not provide a signed statement of 
intent. He self-reported his marijuana use on his SCA and has not used it since 2013, 
which merits favorable consideration. However, the circumstances of his marijuana use 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Furthermore, I 
cannot conclude that his marijuana use is not likely to recur.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors AG ¶ 2(a). Because Applicant requested a 
determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his 
credibility and sincerity based on demeanor.13 After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and evaluating all the evidence in the context 
of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised 
by his marijuana use. Accordingly, I conclude that he has not carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
13 See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
