 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-02527 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns stemming from his financial 
problems. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 30, 2016, and he requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 25, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, 
scheduling the hearing for March 8, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-5 were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and 
 
2 
 
presented documents, and the record remained open until April 10, 2017.1 Applicant 
submitted 17 documents, which were admitted into evidence as Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A-Q, without objection.2 I received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 27, 2017. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges three unpaid judgments (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.d.) and two 
delinquent utility accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.e.).  Applicant admitted the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a.-1.d., and he denied the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He graduated from high school and has taken several 
undergraduate-level courses. From April 2003 to August 2015, he worked full time as an 
engineer for multiple companies.  He was unemployed from August 2015 to January 
2016. Since January 2016, he has been employed full time by a DOD contractor. He 
married in July 2006, and he has four children – ages 13, 21, 22, and 24.3 
 
 Applicant’s November 2015 and July 2016 credit reports establish all five alleged 
debts. The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a. was entered in June 2011 against Applicant in the 
approximate amount of $9,189. He explained that this judgment originated from one or 
more credit cards that he had used for his wedding expenses. He claimed to have paid 
approximately $3,700 to settle this account, but he provided no documentation to 
corroborate his claim. Rather, he transposed the alleged judgment with another un-
alleged account with the same creditor.4 
 
 The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b. was entered in January 2014 against Applicant in 
the approximate amount of $5,041. After the hearing, he settled this debt for 
approximately $4,700 in March 2017.5 
 
 The utility bill in SOR ¶ 1.c. was placed for collection in the approximate amount 
of $1,692. Applicant settled this debt for approximately $800 in January 2017, and 
Department Counsel stipulated that this debt was resolved.6 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s request for an extension of time to submit post-hearing documents and my grant of that 
request are included in the record as Administrative Exhibit (AX) I. 
 
2 Applicant’s post-hearing submissions included a cover letter (AE H) and seven attachments pre-marked 
as AE A-G. 
 
3 GE 1; AE A. 
 
4 GE3; GE 5; AE K; Tr. 28-29. 
 
5 GE 3; GE 5; AE G; AE Q. At hearing, Applicant confused the alleged judgment (SOR ¶ 1.b.) with a 
different judgment (AE G) entered in favor of the same creditor in January 2017. 
 
6 GE 3; AE I; Tr. 36. 
 
3 
 
 The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.d. was entered in January 2014 against Applicant in 
the approximate amount of $15,651. There is no documentary evidence of any 
payments or debt-resolution efforts on this judgment. 
 
 The utility bill in SOR ¶ 1.e. was placed for collection in the approximate amount 
of $103. Applicant denied this debt and denied having an account with this utility during 
the timeframe he inferred from the credit reports. He disputed the debt because it had 
since fallen off his credit report. There is no documentary evidence to show that he has 
disputed this debt with the alleged creditor or has taken steps to resolve this debt.7  
 
 In February 2016, Applicant hired a debt-consolidation service to assist him in 
resolving his delinquent debts. He used this service to settle the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c., but 
he has not arranged any other debt-repayment plans with this service.8  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial delinquencies to roof repairs in 2005, his 
wedding expenses in 2006, his father’s funeral expenses in 2014, and his 
unemployment in 2015. However, he only provided documentation for some of his 
wedding expenses. He provided no explanation as to what precipitated his financial 
delinquencies in about 2011. His spouse was unemployed from 2000 to 2015. His 
current monthly budget reflects a net monthly remainder of approximately $1,100, with 
no scheduled debt repayments.9 
 
 Applicant’s character and work performance are well-regarded by his supervisor 
and co-workers. There is no evidence of any employment disciplinary actions or security 
infractions filed against Applicant.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
7 GE 3; Tr. 41-42. 
 
8 Tr. 36, 63. 
 
9 AE B; AE M; AE P; Tr. 26, 42-47. 
 
10 AE J; AE O. 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s five delinquent debts total approximately $31,676. These debts 
became delinquent between 2011 and 2014. The Government produced substantial 
evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting 
the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.11 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the  basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue 
 
Applicant’s financial struggles date from 2011 and are ongoing. He settled two 
debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c.) after the issuance of the SOR, but there is no 
documentary evidence of any further debt-resolution efforts on the remaining three 
debts. Because there is no documentary evidence of any debt-resolution payments prior 
to January 2017, doubts remain as to Applicant’s good judgment and financial 
responsibility. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances beyond his control, and (2) Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant and his wife experienced periods of 
unemployment, their house needed repairs, and Applicant’s father passed away. These 
events may constitute circumstances beyond his control in the context of AG ¶ 20(b). 
  
                                                          
11 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances.12 Applicant very recently settled two of the alleged debts, but there is no 
documentary evidence of a debt-resolution plan for the remaining debts or steps taken 
in furtherance of that plan. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant engaged the services of a debt-consolidation company. There is no 
evidence of any financial counseling or credit counseling. Applicant’s monthly budget 
reflects a significant monthly remainder ($1,100), but it omits any scheduled debt 
repayments. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”13 AG 
¶ 20(d) applies as to the two debts settled by Applicant (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c.).  
 
Applicant denied the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. due to its absence on his credit 
report. The removal or deletion of an account from a credit report is not evidence of debt 
payment or resolution.14 Applicant has not provided documented proof to substantiate 
his dispute or evidence of actions to resolve this debt. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
After his January 2016 security interview, Applicant engaged the services of a 
debt-consolidation company, but there is no documentary evidence of any debt 
repayments until after the issuance of the SOR. This inaction raises concerns about his 
financial responsibility. He has settled two debts very recently, though he has developed 
no plan to resolve the remaining debts nor taken steps in furtherance of this plan. I find 
that security concerns about Applicant’s financial problems remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) (“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
13 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 02-14950 at 4 (App. Bd. May 15, 2003) (“The removal of those debts from his 
credit report does not make them disappear as if they never existed or preclude the Judge from 
considering other record evidence that shows those debts exist.  The security significance of Applicant’s 
financial history doesn’t turn on whether Applicant’s debts could or could not be legally listed on a credit 
report after the passage of seven years.”). 
 
 
7 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is well-regarded by his co-workers and supervisors for his work 
performance and character, and he very recently has taken some steps to address the 
alleged delinquent debts. His past inaction in addressing his delinquent debts, his failure 
to develop a plan to resolve the remaining debts, and his confusion as to the remaining 
unpaid judgments, leaves me with questions and doubts as to his financial responsibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
   
  Subparagraphs 1.b.-1.c.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d.-1.e.:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
