1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-00280 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Available information is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns about 
Applicant’s ties to family members in Iraq and by the financial support he provides for his 
mother there. His request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On December 15, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a security clearance.1 
 
                                                 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
2 
 
 On May 31, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline2 for foreign influence 
(Guideline B). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
based solely on the written record. However, Department Counsel for the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) timely requested a hearing.3  
 
 I received this case on December 8, 2016, and convened the requested hearing 
on December 27, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel 
presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 3. Department Counsel also requested that I 
take administrative notice of certain facts pertaining to Iraq. In support of that request, 
Department Counsel proffered a six-page memorandum and seven attachments. I 
granted Department Counsel’s request and admitted the pertinent documents as Hearing 
Exhibit (Hx.) 1. 
 
 Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A – J. After the hearing, 
Applicant submitted Ax. K – O. I admitted all of the exhibits without objection. DOHA 
received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 4, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline B, the Government alleged that Applicant’s parents, seven 
siblings, his wife’s mother and his wife’s two sisters are citizens of and reside in Iraq (SOR 
1.a); and that Applicant provides his mother with about $1,000 each year in financial 
support (SOR 1.b). In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of 
the SOR allegations. In addition, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He was born, raised, and educated in Iraq, where he 
received a bachelor’s degree in software engineering. He and his wife, who also was born 
and raised in Iraq, have been married since June 2005. They have two children, ages 10 
and 8. The older child was born in Iraq, the younger in the United States. (Gx. 1) 
 
 Applicant received his college degree around the time of the United States invasion 
of Iraq in 2003. In September 2003, Applicant was hired by a U.S. company to be a linguist 
and translator embedded with U.S. military units in combat zones. He worked as a 
Category 1 linguist for the next five years. In 2008, U.S. military authorities approved 
Applicant’s request to participate in the Special Immigrant Visa program. That decision 
arose from Applicant’s work for the U.S. military in Iraq. Applicant and his family 
immigrated to the United States as legal aliens in February 2008. They have lived in the 
United States since then. Applicant, his wife and their older child became U.S. citizens in 
May 2013. Applicant and his wife bought a house in the United States in 2010. All of their 
                                                 
2 The Department of Defense implemented the adjudicative guidelines on September 1, 2006. These 
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
3 Directive, E3.1.7. 
 
3 
 
financial, professional, and personal interests lie in the United States. (Gx. 1; Ax. A; Ax. 
K; Ax. M; Tr. 27, 39) 
 
 Since 2008, Applicant has continued his work as a linguist in support of the U.S. 
military. In 2009, DOD granted him eligibility for a position of public trust for work as a 
language instructor in support of conventional and special operations missions. That 
eligibility was renewed in 2013 and 2014. In February 2015, Applicant returned to Iraq for 
work as a defense contractor supporting U.S. training of Iraqi military for counter 
insurgency operations against the Islamic State in the Levant (ISIL). Applicant’s work now 
requires his eligibility for access to classified information so that he can operate with 
forward-deployed special operations personnel. Applicant’s wife also works as a defense 
contractor providing linguistic services at a stateside U.S. military facility. (Gx. 1; Ax. A; 
Tr. 20 - 21, 57 - 58) 
 
 Applicant has twice completed counter-intelligence (CI) screenings as a 
prerequisite to his work with U.S. military units. In March 2009, after initially finding a 
counter-intelligence risk due to incomplete information, the Army determined that 
Applicant’s background did not conflict with the work for which he was being considered. 
One fact that Applicant reported was that he and his family were threatened with physical 
harm because he was helping the U.S. military. This fact was confirmed by American 
military sources. Again, in February 2015, the Army examined Applicant’s background, 
including the financial support he provided his mother, and allowed him to deploy to Iraq 
for his current work. The information in the more recent CI screening was virtually the 
same as the first screening. (Gx. 2; Gx. 3) 
 
 Applicant’s parents and his wife’s father are elderly and retired. Applicant’s mother 
has medical problems but does not have enough money to obtain the care she needs. 
After leaving Iraq in 2008, Applicant has provided her roughly $1,000 each year for 
medical expenses as they arise. Applicant and his wife each have two sisters. All of whom 
are housewives in Iraq. Applicant has five brothers, one of whom has moved to the United 
States using a visa sponsored by Applicant. That brother works as a cameraman and is 
in the process of applying for U.S. citizenship. Applicant’s other brothers live near their 
parents and work in various non-government jobs. No one in Applicant’s or his wife’s 
families have any official connection to the Iraqi government. Before 2003, Applicant’s 
brothers and father served in the Iraqi army as required of all male Iraqi citizens. They did 
not stay in the military any longer than their minimum required conscription. Applicant 
never had to serve in the Army because he was studying at an Iraqi university. (Gx. 2; 
Gx. 3; Tr. 11, 26 – 31, 42 - 56) 
 
 Until recently, Applicant had regular contact with his mother and his siblings. 
However, he stopped communicating with them after receiving the SOR and realizing that 
there may be a security problem. Applicant has not returned to Iraq to visit any of his 
friends or relatives since 2008. Applicant’s wife returned once in 2010 after her mother 
died. No one in his family knows what he does for a living. Applicant lives in U.S. military 
quarters and has no contact with Iraqi family or friends when he deploys to Iraq. (Tr. 11, 
27 – 29, 31, 53) 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s work with military units before he immigrated to the United States drew 
extensive praise from several sources. His military commanders and others with whom 
he worked held Applicant in high regard for his commitment to the missions assigned to 
the units with whom he worked, and he has received several expressions of gratitude and 
recognition. This trend has continued in his current employment. (Ax. B; Ax. C) 
 
 To assess properly the security significance of these facts within the adjudicative 
guidelines at issue, I have taken administrative notice of certain facts regarding Iraq. 
Among the most pertinent of these facts are that Iraq=s newly and freely elected 
government has been unable, without assistance from the U.S. military, to quell violence 
that has engulfed parts of Iraq, fueled and perpetrated, initially by Al-Qaeda terrorists, as 
well as Sunni insurgents and Shiite militias, and more recently by ISIL. As a result, some 
parts of Iraq remain wholly unstable. Even the city of Baghdad is still subject to random 
acts of sectarian violence. Nonetheless, the Iraqi government remains aligned with the 
United States in its efforts to improve the ability of Iraqi military and police forces to 
combat ISIL and protect the Iraqi populous. Iraq also remains committed to advancing a 
democratic form of government that is accountable to its people. (Hx. 1) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of 
the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, administrative judges 
should follow specific applicable guidelines whenever it possible to measure a case 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. 
 
                                                 
4 See Directive. 6.3. 
5 
 
 The principal purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden 
of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government 
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her 
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Available information shows Applicant’s parents, siblings, and members of his 
wife’s family are citizens of and live in Iraq. One of Applicant’s brothers is still an Iraqi 
citizen but now lives with Applicant as a legal immigrant now seeking U.S. citizenship. 
This information presents the following security concern expressed at AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 More specifically, these facts support application of the disqualifying condition at 
AG ¶ 7(a): 
 
contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if 
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
                                                 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
6 
 
 Available information shows that large parts of Iraq remain unstable and beset by 
sectarian violence. The presence of Applicant’s family members presents a heightened 
risk that Applicant could be pressured or coerced to act contrary to U.S. interests. 
Balanced against this is the applicability of the following AG ¶ 8 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign  individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and  
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 No one in Applicant’s or his wife’s families in Iraq have any association with the 
Iraqi government or its military. Their parents are retired from non-government jobs, and 
their siblings and their spouses lead routine middle class lives there. Two CI screenings 
of the same facts and circumstances presented here found that there is no conflict 
between Applicant’s Iraqi relationships and his work for the U.S. military at home or 
abroad. Those conclusions are bolstered by the information about his performance while 
embedded with combat forces in Iraq before he immigrated to the United States in 2008. 
Further, Applicant has no property or financial interests in Iraq. He and his family are 
permanently entrenched as American citizens whose livelihood has been built on their 
work for and commitment to the U.S. military. Applicant always has been candid and 
forthcoming about his personal ties to Iraqi citizens and about all aspects of his 
background. He is cognizant of the security concerns related to someone in his position, 
so much so that he stopped communicating with his family after receiving the SOR.  
 
All of the foregoing supports application of the above-named mitigating conditions. 
I conclude it is also sufficient to mitigate the security concerns under this guideline. 
 
 I also evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG 
¶ 2(a). From 2003 to 2008, Applicant worked in support of U.S. interests, often at great 
personal risk to him and his family. For that work, the United States government approved 
Applicant’s request for Special Immigrant Visas for him and his family. Applicant 
7 
 
continued that work after arriving in the United States in 2008. A recent CI screening of 
the same information reviewed in a 2009 CI screening served as the basis to approve his 
return to Iraq in 2015 to support ongoing U.S. missions in a hostile environment. 
Additionally, Applicant already has been deemed eligible for a position of trust regarding 
sensitive information since 2009. Information from current and former military associates 
and civilian co-workers is uniform in its support for Applicant’s character and suitability for 
clearance. All of the foregoing far outweighs security concerns about his family ties in 
Iraq. A fair and commonsense assessment of this record resolves any remaining doubts 
about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
