 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  16-00218  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Cathryn E. Young, Attorney At Law 
 
 
May 16, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 25, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 9, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on October 11, 2016.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 3, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 6, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered two exhibits, referred to as 
Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant offered 
eight exhibits referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through H, which were admitted 
 
2 
 
without objection.  He also testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on December 19, 2017. 
 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to the country of the Republic of China (Taiwan). (Tr. p. 13.)  Department 
Counsel provided a 5 page summary of the facts, supported by 42 pages of 
Government documents pertaining to the Republic of China (Taiwan).  The documents 
provide elaboration and context for the summary.  Applicant’s Counsel had no objection 
to Department Counsel’s request.  (Tr. p. 13.)  Accordingly, I take administrative notice 
of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters of 
general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings 
of Fact. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this 
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts 
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise 
of classified information. 
 
Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR.  After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 55 years old, and married with one child.  He has two Master’s 
degrees, one in Mechanical Engineering and the other in Computer Engineering.  He 
holds the position of Software Engineer 4, and seeks to obtain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment in the defense industry.     
  
 Applicant was born in Taiwan in 1961 and grew up there.  He served in the 
Taiwanese Army from 1985 to 1987, as was mandatory.  He came to the United States 
for graduate school in 1988, and became a naturalized citizen in 2003.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit D.)  Applicant met his wife in the United States, who had also immigrated here to 
attend college, and they were married in 2001.  After meeting the Applicant, she 
decided that she wanted to stay here.  In 2008, she became a naturalized United States 
citizen, and is now a housewife.  (Tr. p. 49.)  They have one daughter who was born in 
the United States.  Applicant considers himself solely an American citizen.  He has lived 
in the United States since he immigrated here in 1988, and has made it his permanent 
home.   
 
 Applicant began working for his current employer in November 2015.  Soon 
thereafter, understanding that he would need a security clearance, he voluntarily 
surrendered his foreign passport to the company authorities.      
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s parents, two sisters, his mother and father-in-law, and two brothers-
in-laws are citizens and residents of the Republic of China.  Applicant’s third sister 
resides in the United States.  Applicant’s father, who is 90 years old, is a retired 
mechanical engineer who used to work for a sugar company in Taiwan.  (Tr. p. 26.)  
Applicant’s mother is 80 years old, and is a housewife.  (Tr. p. 37.)  Applicant contacts 
his parents by skype to talk with them about once every two or three weeks in order to 
keep them acquainted with his seven year old daughter.  Applicant’s last physical 
contact with his parents was in 2011 when he took his daughter to Taiwan to visit his 
parents for two weeks.  Applicant used his United States passport to travel to Taiwan.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit C, and Tr. p. 31.)  Applicant’s family in Taiwan are supportive of his 
American citizenship and happy about the opportunities available to him here. 
                
 Applicant has three sisters.  One is a United States citizen who lives in the United 
States, and works for her county.  She is married and has a daughter. The second sister 
is a United States citizen and resides in Taiwan.  She had problems finding a job here, 
and was offered a position in Taiwan that she accepted.  She resides with Applicant’s 
parents in Taiwan.  The third sister is solely a citizen of the Republic of China.  
Applicant’s contact with his sisters in Taiwan is about the same as with his parents, 
once every two to three weeks or so.  One of his sisters is employed in Taiwan as a 
Manager of a financial institution, the other is an elementary school teacher.  One of 
Applicant’s sisters is married to a professor who works at a private university.  Applicant 
rarely has any contact with his brother-in law, as his last contact was maybe over a year 
or two ago.  (Tr. p. 41.)  Applicant’s family in Taiwan have no specific knowledge that he 
is applying for a security clearance.  They do not ask him questions about his job and 
he does not volunteer information.  None of the Applicant’s family nor his wife’s family 
there have any affiliation with the Taiwanese Government.   
 
 Applicant’s mother and father in-law are also citizens and residents of Taiwan.  
Applicant does not speak with them regularly.  His wife and daughter talk with them 
about once a month, making small talk.  Applicant’s father-in-law is retired, and his 
mother-in-law is a housewife.  Again, Applicant’s last contact with them was in 2011 
when he took his daughter back to Taiwan to meet them for the first time.    
 
 Applicant’s parents own no assets in Taiwan.  His parents live with his sister in 
her house.  Applicant has no financial assets in Taiwan.  He does have significant 
holdings in the United States, which include an IRA account, a 401K, a checking 
account, a savings accounts, and stock accounts.  His approximate net worth exceeds a 
million dollars in the United States.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F.)    
 
 Applicant has no plans to return in the near future to Taiwan.  He has adopted 
the American culture.  He has joined a Christian church in the United States.  He is 
regularly involved in community service, working with food banks, and serving the 
homeless on the holidays.  (Tr. p. 60.)  He also clearly understands his responsibility to 
safeguard classified information.  He states that if he ever observes suspicious activity, 
or if he is ever approached by anyone, including any foreign contact seeking information 
from him, he is to immediately report it to his security department, and will, in fact, do so 
immediately. 
 
4 
 
 
 Letters of recommendation from personal and professional associates who know 
the Applicant from church or from work attest to his high level of integrity, honesty, 
dependability and responsible nature.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G.) 
 
 It is noted that the current political situation in China elevates the cause for 
concern in this case.  The People’s Republic of China, (PRC) seeks to unify Taiwan and 
mainland China as “One China.”  Taiwan continues to be a significant threat to the U.S. 
for theft of U.S. trade secrets, proprietary economic information, and defense-related 
critical technologies.  The U.S. Government works diligently to identify, circumvent, and 
sanction any foreign intelligence threats to U.S. national and economic security. 
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
 
5 
 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
  Applicant has foreign family contacts in the Republic of China.  He maintains 
contacts with his foreign family members. This evidence is sufficient to raise this 
disqualifying condition.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) apply.  Applicant’s parents, two sisters, and in-laws 
are citizens of and reside in Taiwan.   Applicant has only casual and very limited contact 
with his family in Taiwan.  They have no knowledge of what he does or where he works, 
and they are not affiliated with the Chinese Government in any fashion.  They are 
supportive of his move to the United States and his life here.  Applicant has lived in the 
United States for the past twenty-nine years.  He is a naturalized American citizen. He is 
married to a naturalized American citizen, and they have a native-born American child.  
Applicant’s assets are all in the United States and exceed one million dollars.  The 
United States is now the Applicant’s permanent home, and he has adopted the 
American culture and its values.  Under the particular facts of this case, the possibility of 
foreign influence does not exist, nor is there the potential for conduct resulting the 
compromise of classified information.  I find that the Applicant is not vulnerable to 
foreign influence.  Accordingly, If I find for the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence).   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a short but distinguished history with the defense industry and is 
respected by his manager, professional colleagues, and friends. He performs well at his 
job. While he was born Taiwan, he is an American by choice. He has been residing in 
the United States for the past 28 years. His closest familial ties are with his wife, and 
daughter, both of whom are American citizens. His remaining contacts in Taiwan are 
casual and infrequent. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States due to his longstanding ties here.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
