 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00843 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems resulted from circumstances beyond his control and 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances. His 2017 credit report shows no new 
delinquent debt. He is in control of his financial situation. He did not deliberately falsify his 
security clearance application. Financial considerations and personal conduct security 
concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is granted.   
 
Statement of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 5, 2015. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) on July 13, 2016, issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) 
and Guideline E (personal conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on August 1, 2016 
(Answer), and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On February 15, 2017, Applicant requested an 
expedited hearing. (Hearing Exhibit 1) At hearing, Applicant stated he had sufficient time 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
to prepare, was ready to proceed, and affirmatively waived his right to 15-day advanced 
notice of the hearing. (Tr. 15-16) 
 
The case was assigned to me on February 28, 2017, and DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing that same day, scheduling the hearing for March 8, 2017. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. Government exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, and Applicant’s exhibits (AE) 
1 through 4, were admitted into evidence without objection. On March 20, 2017, DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer, he did not specifically deny or admit the SOR allegations. I 
considered them denied. However, he generally admitted some of the SOR factual 
allegations and provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s statements 
in his Answer and his hearing admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He completed a bachelor’s degree in 2005, and is 
currently pursuing a master’s degree. Applicant married his wife in 2007, and they 
separated in 2011. (Tr. 30) He has a young daughter of this marriage. He stated in his 
2015 SCA that he had been living with a cohabitant since 2014. He has a one-year-old 
son from this relationship. 
 
Applicant received a U.S. Air Force officer commission in 2005. He served 
honorably on active duty until he received an early discharge in 2011. He then joined the 
Reserve where he served until 2014. Applicant worked as a security specialist between 
October 2011 and February 2012; as a project analyst for a federal contractor between 
February 2012 and August 2013; he served in a full-time position with the National 
Guard/Reserve between August 2013 and January 2014; and as a logistics supervisor 
for a private company between January 2014 and February 2015. He was hired as a 
project analyst by his current employer (a federal contractor) in February 2015.  
 
Applicant received a secret clearance upon his commission as an Air Force officer 
in 2005. His clearance was continued until his discharge from the Reserve in 2014. There 
are no allegations or evidence of any security violations or issues of concern, except for 
those in the SOR. After his discharge, Applicant deployed twice to the Middle East in 
support of U.S. interests while working for Government contractors. 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in 2015. In response to Section 26 
(Financial Record) of the SCA, Applicant disclosed that he had financial problems, which 
included being “over 120 days delinquent on some debts,” and the repossession and 
foreclosure of his home. Applicant explained that when he separated from active duty he 
also separate from his wife. He could not find employment with a salary commensurate 
with his Air Force salary, and his wife provided no financial assistance to pay the 
mortgage. He paid the mortgage until he exhausted his savings and retirement accounts. 
 
Applicant’s security investigation addressed his financial problems and revealed 
the four delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s history of financial problems 
 
3 
                                         
 
is well documented in the record evidence and his testimony. The status of the SOR debts 
follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($11,372) alleged a delinquent credit card account. In 2015, Applicant 
entered into a payment agreement with the collection agency and has been paying $210 
a month since. As of February 6, 2017, he had reduced the debt by $3,780, to a total 
owed of $7,592. (AE 4) 
 
Regarding the delinquent mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b ($41,958), Applicant 
explained that he purchased a home with his wife in 2009 for $269,000. In July 2010, the 
bank notified him that the mortgage exceeded the value of the property ($120,000). 
Notwithstanding, Applicant continued paying his mortgage until 2012. In 2012, he was 
working overseas on a contract that was not extended. He returned to the United States 
and found himself without employment for about six months. When he found a job, his 
salary was significantly lower and he had additional expenses associated with his 
relocation for the job and living expenses. He did not have the financial means to continue 
paying the mortgage and other debts, and they became delinquent. 
 
Applicant continued communications with the mortgage holder, and in 2015, he 
surrendered the property via a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure. The mortgage holder released 
Applicant of all liabilities resulting from the mortgage. (AE 3) 
 
Concerning the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c ($382), Applicant testified that when he 
was about to deploy for an overseas assignment he paid off his security system but failed 
to pay the last month charges for the security monitoring services. He was not aware of 
the debt until he was informed about it during his interview with a background investigator. 
Shortly thereafter, Applicant paid the debt. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d ($103) alleged an unpaid toll violation. Applicant credibly testified that 
it was his wife’s violation. The violation occurred after their separation and she kept the 
vehicle. She failed to pay the violation and the state initiated a collection against Applicant 
because at the time he was in the car title. When he was informed his wife did not pay 
the violation, he paid it to resolve the issue. 
 
A March 2017 Equifax credit report confirms Applicant’s testimony. (GE 4) It 
reflects that Applicant has 25 transaction accounts with currently no past due balances. 
The SOR debts are not reflected delinquent in the credit report. 
 
Applicant income is $79,000 annually ($5,000 a month), plus a monthly $376 
disability payment he receives from the Department of Veteran’s Affairs. His monthly 
obligations include: child support, $950; rent, $1,435; utilities, $90; cellphone, $131; and 
cable, $100. Additionally, he pays lawyer’s fees ($1,000), credit card payments, car and 
homeowner’s insurance, and his student loans. Applicant testified that he has been able 
to make ends meet, but with strict financial planning. In 2015, he sought financial 
counseling from a financial planner who helped him restructure his bill payments. 
Applicant now uses a spreadsheet to track his monthly income and expenses. 
 
 
4 
                                         
 
Applicant’s documentary evidence shows he currently has no delinquencies. His 
financial information and credit reports show that he is not living beyond his financial 
means. He needs his clearance and current job to continue paying his debts and 
supporting his children. Taking care of his children is his priority. 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his financial problems. He believes that his 
separation from the service, the separation from his wife, the downturn of the U.S. 
economy, and his inability to find a job paying a good salary were circumstances beyond 
his control that heavily contributed or exacerbated his financial problems. He believes 
that his financial situation is now stable and he is motivated to continue resolving his 
financial problems. He promised to maintain his financial responsibility. Applicant 
understands that he is required to maintain his financial responsibility to be eligible for a 
clearance.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
 
5 
                                         
 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is well documented in his testimony and 
the record evidence.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The record established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and  
                                            
2 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
 
6 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant acknowledged his financial problems. They resulted from circumstances 
beyond his control, including his separation from the service, his marital separation, the 
downturn of the real estate market, his inability to find a paying job commensurate with 
his service pay, and periods of unemployment and underemployment.  
 
Applicant’s documentary evidence show that he remained in contact with his 
creditors, established payment plans in 2015 (before issuance of the SOR), and has been 
paying the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Moreover, he resolved the largest debt alleged in 
the SOR and paid the two remaining debts. Applicant is currently in control of his own 
finances. The credit reports show that he has not acquired any new delinquent debt. His 
financial information and credit report show that he is not living beyond his financial 
means.  
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his past financial problems. His financial situation 
is now stable and he is motivated to continue resolving his financial problems. He is 
keeping his own budget and managing his expenses. Applicant believes he has learned 
his lesson and promised to maintain his financial responsibility. 
                                            
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
                                         
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s past financial problems do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant’s efforts 
are sufficient to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  SOR ¶ 2.a alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified his 2015 SCA when he failed 
to disclose the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d. I find that Applicant’s omissions 
were not deliberate or made with the intent to mislead the Government.  
 
  Applicant disclosed in his 2015 SCA that he developed financial problems after he 
left the service and separated from his wife in 2011. He disclosed that he was delinquent 
on his mortgage, the largest debt, and was pending foreclosure. He credibly testified that 
he was not aware of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c until he met with the investigator, and 
he believed that his wife would have paid for her toll violation.  
 
 Considering the totality of the circumstances, including his demeanor while 
testifying, I find Applicant’s testimony to be truthful and credible. I find he refuted the 
Guideline E allegation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant, 34, honorably served 10 years in the Air Force as an officer. He 
possessed a security clearance during his service and there is no evidence of any security 
violations or concerns, except for the SOR allegations. He has worked for federal 
contractors (on-and-off) since 2011, and deployed twice to the Middle East in support of 
U.S. interests. His financial problems were due to circumstances beyond his control and 
his documentary evidence shows he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to establish his current financial responsibility. He 
showed good-faith efforts to resolve his debts. He is in control of his financial situation. 
Applicant understands that he has to maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a 
clearance and retain his job. I find that his omissions on the 2015 SCA were not 
 
8 
                                         
 
deliberate. Financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
