 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01129 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by two 
alleged drunk driving incidents, but his financial situation continues to raise a security 
concern. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 19, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under the financial considerations, alcohol consumption, and personal conduct 
guidelines.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
 
 On April 13, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was held. 
Applicant testified at the hearing and the exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into 
the administrative record without objection. (Government Exhibits 1 – 7 and Applicant’s 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Exhibits A – D.) The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 21, 2017, and the record closed 
on May 12, 2017.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 34, is a high school graduate and twice divorced. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. military from 2002 to 2008. His service in the military included an 18-
month deployment to Iraq. He has nagging injuries, which he suspects are connected to 
his military service. He has not gone to the Department of Veteran’s Affairs to have his 
injuries assessed to determine whether they are service-connected and, if so, the extent 
of his disability, because he does not view his injuries as significant or daunting as those 
of others who served with him and returned from Iraq. He received an honorable 
discharge upon separating from active duty and then served in the reserves for a time. 
He was first granted a security clearance while in the military.3 
 
 After leaving active duty in 2008, Applicant was unable to find gainful employment 
until 2013, when he was hired as a federal contractor. He submitted a security clearance 
application in 2015 in connection with this job. On his application, Applicant disclosed that 
he had twice been charged with drunk driving. Specifically, in 2008, shortly before 
separating from the military, Applicant and a friend who had recently returned from a 
deployment to Iraq went out drinking. Applicant consumed too much alcohol and made 
the poor decision of getting behind the wheel. He was arrested, charged, and convicted 
of drunk driving.  
 
 Applicant had no further alcohol-related incidents until 2014. On this occasion, 
Applicant went out to dinner and on the way home had a bathroom emergency. He was 
pulled over for speeding short of reaching a gas station with a bathroom. He tried to 
explain the situation to the police officer who had stopped him after a short chase, but the 
exasperated officer arrested him for drunk driving. His blood alcohol content level was 
registered at a .14. He went to court and the drunk driving charge was reduced to reckless 
driving. He pled nolo contendere to the reduced charge and was found guilty. He 
successfully completed a drunk driving course that was ordered by the court. He also 
voluntarily obtained and successfully completed alcohol counseling, and attended AA. He 
has not been involved in any further criminal conduct, alcohol related or otherwise. At the 
time Applicant submitted the clearance application, the drunk driving charge was still 
pending. He freely disclosed the matter on the application.  
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debt shortly before and after leaving active duty 
in 2008. The SOR lists 11 delinquent debts totaling about $40,000. The debts include a 
                                                          
2 Correspondence with the parties, the notice of hearing, and case management order are attached to the 
record as Appellate Exhibits I – III. Applicant submitted Exhibits A – D post-hearing and they consist of: (a) 
his May 11, 2017 email, (b) documents related to the 2014 reckless driving conviction, (c) DD Form 214 
(Member-1 form was provided which does not contain discharge characterization), and (d) documents from 
the credit repair firm. 
 
3 Based on the limited evidentiary record, I cannot easily determine what impact, if any, Applicant’s military 
service and service-connected injuries had to the security concerns at issue.  
 
3 
 
 
$120 collection account for cell phone service (SOR 1.k), a $3,800 collection account for 
a jewelry store account (SOR 1.i), and two student loan accounts in collection status for 
over $12,000 (SOR 1.a and 1.c).  
 
On the 2015 security clearance application, Applicant noted that he was aware of 
a number of delinquent debts appearing on his credit report and that he was in the process 
of addressing his debts. During his April 2015 clearance interview, Applicant was asked 
about the delinquent accounts appearing on his credit reports, including a number of the 
SOR debts. He promised to look into the debts and address them. He took no such action 
and testified that he had no good explanation for his inaction. (Tr. 48-49) 
 
Applicant recently moved in with his girlfriend and they are splitting living 
expenses. After paying recurring expenses, Applicant estimates his disposable or net 
monthly income is approximately $2,000. He testified that he had paid or was paying two 
of the SOR debts, namely, the $120 collection account for cell phone service referenced 
in SOR 1.k and the $3,800 collection account for a jewelry store account listed in SOR 
1.i. (Tr. 38-41) He did not submit any evidence to corroborate his testimony. He provided 
no evidence showing he reached out to any of his overdue creditors and paid his debts, 
or otherwise resolved any of the SOR debts.  
 
Applicant claims that some of the SOR debts may be debts incurred by his father 
with whom he shares the same name, or could be related to his failed marriages, or could 
be the result of identity theft. Shortly before the hearing, Applicant hired a credit repair 
firm. (Tr. 48) He provided documentation post-hearing showing that the credit repair firm 
successfully disputed a number of negative items appearing on some of his credit reports, 
including potentially the debts referenced in SOR 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e. Applicant admitted all 
the SOR debts in his Answer, and the record is silent as to the actual basis for the removal 
of some negative credit entries that appeared on one or more of Applicant’s credit 
reports.4 At hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he was at the beginning stages of 
getting his finances in order. (Tr. 37) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
                                                          
4 Applicant was twice advised on the record that if he submitted documentary evidence post-hearing that 
the documents needed to be clear and unambiguous on their face, and that he needed to provide a full and 
detailed explanation regarding the relevance of any post-hearing documents. Tr. 40-41, 50. It is unclear 
from the record whether the negative entries removed from one or more of Applicant’s credit reports 
occurred after Applicant challenged the validity of the debts due to identity fraud, or the credit agencies are 
no longer able to report the negative information because of the age of the debt, or other reason. See 
generally ISCR Case No. 15-03527 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2016) (adverse clearance decision affirmed where 
applicant failed to present clear, concise, and unambiguous evidence regarding SOR debts).  
 
4 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
 
Guidelines E and G, Personal Conduct and Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s drunk driving arrests in 2008 and 2014 raise the 
personal conduct and alcohol consumption security concerns. See AG ¶¶ 15, 21. 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by these two alcohol-related incidents. 
He voluntarily obtained counseling following the latest incident three years ago and has 
not been involved in another incident, alcohol-related or otherwise, which raises a 
concern about his judgment and ability to follow rules and regulations. He candidly 
disclosed this potentially adverse information on his security clearance application and 
later fully discussed the incidents during the processing of his case, including freely 
 
5 
 
 
disclosing adverse information at hearing that was unknown to the Government (or, at the 
least, not present on the face of the evidence offered by the Government). Accordingly, 
Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised by the two 
drunk driving arrests alleged in the SOR. See AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 22(a), 22(b), 22(d) 
(applicable mitigating conditions that Applicant established in full or in part). 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 As stated in the relevant portion of AG ¶ 18 quoted above, the security concern at 
issue is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial issues might be 
tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their 
debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to delinquent 
debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities essential to 
protecting classified information.5 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant admits all the SOR debts. He has been aware of the majority of these 
debts since at least the security clearance interview, which took place three years ago. 
He has repeatedly promised to take action to address and resolve these debts, but waited 
until shortly before the hearing to start putting his financial house in order. He has been 
gainfully employed as a federal contractor since 2013, and estimates that his current 
monthly disposable income is $2,000. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c) apply. None of the mitigating 
conditions fully apply. 
 
Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free. They 
are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted 
access to classified information.6 Applicant failed to meet his burden.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
whole-person factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant honorably served this nation in the military, including a lengthy 
deployment to Iraq. He incurred injuries (apparently) connected to his military service. He 
has held a security clearance for years without apparent issue beyond those discussed 
herein. This favorable evidence raises favorable inferences regarding his suitability.  
 
 However, a review of the record shows that after years of procrastinating Applicant 
has just started to take the initial steps to put his financial house in order.7 He has been 
aware for some time that his delinquent debts placed his security clearance eligibility (and 
continued employment that is dependent on maintaining a clearance) in jeopardy. He may 
in the future be able to re-establish his security clearance eligibility by showing that he is 
responsibly managing his personal finances in the manner expected of all clearance 
holders. At present, though, the questions and doubts about his eligibility that were raised 
by his financial situation remain. 
 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
7 See Tr. 14 (in opening statement, Applicant admits he put the debts on the proverbial “back burner”).  
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:         Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for continued access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
