  1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 16-00543 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate 
financial security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management on January 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make 
the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. The DOD issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated June 2, 2016, detailing security 
concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
  2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 2, 2016. He admitted the two financial 
allegations. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 28, 2016. The case 
was assigned to me on December 2, 2016. The DOD issued a notice of hearing on April 
6, 2017, for a hearing on April 27, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered five exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without 
objection as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5. Applicant testified but did not 
present any documents. I kept the record open for Applicant to submit documents. 
Applicant timely submitted one document that I admitted into the record without 
objection as Applicant Exhibit (AX) A. (GX 6, e-mail dated April 27, 2017) I received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 4, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant is a 40-year-old high school graduate with some 
community college education. He served on active duty in the Army from 1995 until 
2002, when he received an honorable discharge. He was granted eligibility for access to 
classified information while on active duty in 1995, and his eligibility was renewed in 
2003. He submitted his latest request to retain his eligibility in 2015. Applicant married 
for the first time in 1998 and divorced in 2009. He married again in 2012. He has three 
children from his first marriage that he has custody of, and his wife is required to provide 
child support. He has two children from his second marriage. The five children live with 
him and his second wife. He has been employed by a defense contractor since July 
2003 as a light armor range technician. (Tr. 14-16, 27-29; GX 1, e-QIP, dated 
September 14, 2015; GX 2, PSI, dated January 5, 2016)  
The SOR alleges a mortgage account past due for $49,575 on a balance of 
$204,174 (SOR 1.a). The SOR also alleges a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in January 
2004 and discharged in April 2004. (SOR 1.b).  
Applicant married his first wife while he was still on active duty in the Army. He 
purchased kiosks in a mall for his wife’s employment. When he left active duty in 2002, 
Applicant also worked at the kiosks. The kiosks were not doing well financially. In 2003, 
Applicant decided to move his family to the area where he was raised before joining the 
Army. He had debt from the kiosks he owned before he moved, moving expenses, 
medical expenses, and family expenses. He filed bankruptcy in January 2004, and his 
debts discharged in April 2004. Applicant has not been delinquent on any debts except 
for the mortgage discussed below since the bankruptcy discharge. He may have been 
late with some payments, but no debts went to collection or were charged off. (Tr. 37-
39; GX. 4 Bankruptcy Petition, dated January 16, 2004; GX 5, Discharge Order, dated 
April 14, 2004) 
Applicant and his first wife purchased a home in 2005 after he left active duty and 
they moved to a new location. Applicant was able to meet the mortgage payments since 
his wife contributed to the family income. His wife left him in July 2009, and Applicant 
had the care and custody of the children. His wife agreed on a separation agreement 
requiring $1,010 a month in child support. The divorce became final in early 2010. 
  3 
 
Applicant’s first wife did not make any support payments in 2009 or 2010 and only 
sporadically in 2011. In November 2012, Applicant went back to court, and the support 
payments were changed to $507 a month plus arrears of $35,000. His wife paid the 
child support only sporadically until January 2017 when she started to pay her child 
support obligation more regularly because of a pending criminal action. (Tr. 16-20, 36-
44) 
Applicant became delinquent on the mortgage for their home in 2010. His wife 
paid child support only sporadically. He lived in the house but he could not pay the full 
mortgage every month. He called the mortgage company to arrange a modify mortgage, 
but the company only wanted full mortgage payments. He became about two or three 
months behind with his payments. When Applicant realized he could not meet his 
mortgage obligations, he contacted the mortgage company to tell them about the 
foreseeable issues on the mortgage. The mortgage company sent him to a collection 
agency. He unsuccessfully tried to make arrangements with the collection agency in 
2010 and 2011. He successfully negotiated a loan modification in 2011, rented the 
house, and moved in with his future wife. He rented the house in 2011 and part of 2012, 
and was able to meet most of his mortgage payments with the rent income. However, 
he had two different renters in two years. After each move there was damage to the 
house. In late 2013, after his second renter moved out, he twice submitted papers to 
arrange for either a short sale or a deed in lieu of foreclosure. (Tr. 44-52) The house 
was finally foreclosed and sold at auction in 2016. Applicant received the required tax 
form. (Tr. 52-55; AX A, 1099-C) 
Applicant and his second wife purchased a house in 2013 for their large family, 
and they are current with the mortgage. He is current with all other bills and his taxes. 
He is meeting all of his financial obligations. (Tr. 55-57) Applicant’s net monthly salary is 
$4,400, and his wife’s net monthly salary is $2,500, for a combined monthly family 
income of $6,900. The monthly family expenses are about $6,500, leaving a monthly 
remainder of approximately $400. (Tr. 28-32) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
  4 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) The financial 
security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about an 
individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security clearance 
adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2004 after leaving active duty in the 
Army, because of debts from a failing business and moving to a new location. He was 
not able to meet his mortgage obligations after his wife left him in 2009, and she did not 
pay child support. Applicant was unable to meet his mortgage obligation, and the house 
  5 
 
was foreclosed in 2016. Applicant’s delinquent mortgage debt and bankruptcy are 
sufficient to raise the following security concerns under Financial Considerations 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts and (c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indication that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
These mitigating conditions apply. The SOR financial allegations are a 
bankruptcy petition and discharge in 2004 and a delinquent mortgage. The bankruptcy 
happened long ago and the financial problems are infrequent. Applicant’s financial 
problems are the result of a failed marriage and the reluctance of his former spouse to 
meet her court-order financial obligations. These are conditions beyond his control. He 
is no longer married to his first wife, and his second wife is working and providing 
income to the family. His financial problems are unlikely to recur.  
 
Applicant’s 2004 bankruptcy petition was to resolve debts that he and his first 
wife accumulated by a business failure, expenses incurred moving to a new area, and 
medical expenses not covered by health insurance. Bankruptcy is a legal and 
appropriate means of resolving financial issues. Credit reports show that in the 14 years 
since the debts were discharged, Applicant has met all but one of his financial 
obligations. He only had a few debts that paid late by a few months. The only financial 
delinquency listed in credit reports was the mortgage foreclosure noted at SOR 1.a. 
 
Applicant acted reasonably and appropriately to resolve the mortgage issue 
before it went to foreclosure. The mortgage delinquency was result of conditions beyond 
his control. Applicant’s first wife left him with the mortgage debt after she abandoned the 
family. She did not timely make her child support payments. After trying to pay the 
mortgage, Applicant moved in with his future wife, contacted his creditor, attempted a 
  6 
 
loan modification, and sought a short sale, or deed in lieu of foreclosure. The house 
went to foreclosure only after Applicant tried all other means to resolve the mortgage 
situation. The Applicant receive the required tax form when the house foreclosed. 
 
The conditions that led to Applicant’s financial problems were beyond his control, 
and there are no financial issues that cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant established that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. He showed his good-faith efforts to resolve all of his financial 
issues. I conclude that Applicant has mitigated security concerns based on financial 
considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s seven years 
of active service, his continued employment in support of the military, and his successful 
holding of eligibility for access to classified information since 1995. Applicant presented 
sufficient information to establish that he acted reasonably and responsibly under the 
circumstances. There is clear evidence that he will continue to responsibly manage his 
financial obligations. There is ample evidence of his honesty, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated 
security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
  7 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
