 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02790 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 18, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 10, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On November 21, 2016, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline D, Sexual Behavior and 
E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 21, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 15, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 15, 2017, scheduling the hearing for March 13, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AppX) A through G, which were 
 
2 
 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record then 
closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 21, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 61 years old. He has been employed with the Merchant Marines for 
about 16 years. (TR at page 13 line 21 to page 15 line 8.) This is his first application for 
a security clearance.  (GX 1 at page 60.) He is not married and has no children. (GX 1 
at page 15.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
engaged in sexual behavior; and thereby made questionable decisions, that indicate 
poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all 
of which raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. ¶¶ 1.a. and 2.a. of the SOR allege that on unspecified occasions, 
Applicant utilized the services of prostitutes while traveling abroad as a United States 
Merchant Marine. Applicant denied the allegations, explaining he only did it on two 
occasions, and explaining that the conduct was not illegal. (TR at page 15 line 9 to page 
22 line 3.) The Government has offered evidence as “to sex trafficking within China,” but 
there is no showing that Applicant’s conduct was illegal. 
 
1.a. and 2.a.  Applicant admits that he utilized the services of prostitutions during 
port calls in China on two occasions, once in 2010 and the last time in November of 
2011.  (Id.)  He has now submitted a Statement of Intent not to engage in such conduct 
in the future.  (AppX G.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
3 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Sexual Behavior is set out in AG 
¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant engaged the services of prostitutes on two occasions while on shore 
leave in China. This behavior could cause Appellant to be vulnerable to future coercion, 
even though his conduct appears to be legal. Further, Appellant’s behavior reflects a 
lack of discretion and judgment. The above disqualifying conditions have been 
established.  
 
AG ¶ 14 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 Appellant’s questionable conduct occurred more than five years ago; and 
although it appears to have been legal, he has pledged not to repeat it. Appellant has 
mitigated the Sexual Behavior concern. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal 
in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group. 
 
 Appellant’s behavior, although not totally illegal in the United States such as in 
the state of Nevada, may cause him to be subject to undue influence based upon his 
questionable judgment. The above disqualifying condition has been established. 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Appellant’s questionable conduct occurred more than five years ago, and he 
vows not to repeat it in the future. Appellant has mitigated the Personal Conduct 
concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines D and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. Applicant has the unqualified support of those who know him in the 
workplace and in his community.  (AppX A.) Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the sexual behavior 
and personal conduct security concerns. 
  
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
