 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00888  
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For: Applicant: Brian E. Kaveney, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline K, handling protected 
information. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline K, handling protected 
information, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The DOD acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 26, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 28, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 13, 2016, with a hearing date of January 12, 2017. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into 
the record without objection. Applicant and two witnesses testified. Applicant offered 
exhibits (AE) A through T, which were admitted with no objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 25, 2017.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant did not oppose the 
motion and I granted the same. My formal findings will reflect that the allegation was 
withdrawn.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he denied SOR ¶ 1.a, admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, and 
offered explanations for each allegation. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He is married and has two adult children. He has 
worked for his current employer, a defense contractor for 34 years. He is a senior 
engineer. He has held a security clearance since 1991. He has a master’s degree.2   
  
The allegations are relatively straightforward and the facts are not in dispute. 
The SOR cites three separate security lapses. The first occurred in December 
2011 when Applicant was tasked to prepare and send to his supervisor (located off-
site) an unclassified presentation derived from classified material. Time was of the 
essence, so Applicant prepared an unclassified presentation in approximately 1.5 
hours, which normally would have taken approximately 4-8 hours to prepare. Applicant 
checked the material that he was going to send to his supervisor to insure it only 
contained unclassified information. He gave the 50-page document to a coworker to 
scan and email because his scanner was not working. The coworker noticed one 
document with classified markings just as it went through the scanner. The scanner 
and supporting computers were immediately shut down and turned off. Applicant 
accepted responsibility immediately for missing the classified page and told his 
coworker to call security. All affected hardware was sanitized. Applicant was issued a 
type-II security violation (inadvertent). He did not receive any remedial training 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 9. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-21; GE 1; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
because of this incident.3      
 
The second incident occurred in May 2012 when Applicant walked into the 
secure lab where he works with a cell phone in his coat pocket. He did not realize at 
the time he entered that he still had his cell phone. While he was working, the phone 
rang and he immediately took the phone out of the secure area and notified security. 
He did not answer the phone while in the secure area. No classified information was 
compromised. An investigation was conducted and Applicant was issued a type-II 
security violation (inadvertent). He did not receive any remedial training as a result of 
this incident. While accepting full responsibility for the incident, Applicant pointed out 
he was suffering from sleep apnea which affected his ability to sleep. He produced 
medical records supporting this medical condition. He now has his sleep apnea under 
control resulting in higher quality sleep for him. He also had some personal issues 
affecting him at the time, including his mother’s death and his sister’s cancer 
diagnosis. These all may have played a role in causing his inattentiveness at the time. 
To insure that he will not take his cell phone into the secure lab in the future, he 
always walks into the building with his cell phone in his hand so he is reminded to 
place it in a locker before entering the secure lab.4 
 
In January 2015, the third security incident occurred. Applicant was tasked to 
prepare an unclassified document for his supervisor. In preparing the document, 
Applicant used several pieces of unclassified information. After reviewing the 
information, he prepared charts and emailed them to his supervisor. Later that day, 
while sitting in a meeting where other classified information was discussed, Applicant 
realized that classified information could be derived from the separate unclassified 
pieces of information that he had prepared earlier. He then self-reported his security 
violation. The information was contained and all affected computer systems were 
sanitized. An investigation ensued and Applicant was issued a type-II security 
violation (inadvertent). He was required to attend remedial security training.5 
 
 Applicant successfully completed the following security related training courses: 
1. Classified Information Systems User Briefing (Feb 2015); 2. IT Information Security 
Awareness (Feb 2015); 3. DOD Annual Security Refresher Briefing (September 2015); 
4. Derivative Classifier (November 2015); 5. Restricted Party Screening (December 
2015); 6. Jurisdiction and Classification (December 2015). He received additional 
training throughout 2016. Applicant’s position requires him to be exposed to classified 
information on a daily basis. To further insure he complies with all security 
requirements, he self-imposed extra security measures that he takes when dealing with 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 27-32; GE 4; AE B. 
 
4 Tr. at 33-37; GE 3; AE B. 
 
5 Tr. at 38-39; GE 2; AE B. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
classified information. Those measure are: 1. He requests peer reviews of his security 
markings whenever he generates technical information containing classified information; 
2. He does not remove any media (printed documents, electronic files, discs, etc.) from 
any classified information system. He tasks other subordinates to do so; 3. He 
mandates a “security pause” on himself whenever he is dealing with classified 
information. He stops what he is doing and asks himself a series of security questions to 
verify that he is in compliance with all security requirements. Since imposing these 
requirements on himself, he has had no additional security incidents in over two years. 
Management is fully supportive of Applicant’s self-imposed security requirements.6 
 
Applicant did not attempt to deflect or avoid responsibility for these 
security lapses. He accepted full responsibility and recognized his mistakes. It was 
clear from Applicant’s demeanor that he was extremely disappointed in himself and 
remorseful. He credibly stated that he takes security matters very seriously. To 
support his statement he provided a “statement of intent,” which details his taking 
responsibility for the three security incidents, outlines his personal security procedures, 
and acknowledges that any future incident could result in the revocation of his security 
clearance.7 
 
 Applicant is an outstanding employee as reflected by the numerous awards and 
accolades he received over the years. He was the recipient of his company’s 
prestigious President’s Award in 2008. He has received numerous other individual and 
team awards over the years for his engineering contributions.8 
 
 Applicant’s company’s chief engineer, who is responsible for 1,300 employees 
and approximately $2 billion worth of business, testified and provided a written 
statement on behalf of Applicant. He was fully aware of the three security incidents that 
form the SOR. He was asked why he was not concerned about Applicant having any 
future security incidents and his response was: 
  
It all comes down to his response. At the state when each occurred, that 
he recognized what had happened and he self-reported himself, and then 
it continues forward into the corrective actions that he's put in place to 
prevent those from occurring in the future. One, by contacting and working 
with a security professional and then two, in establishing from his personal 
process as to how he is going to do business differently to get peer 
reviews, most importantly to me, to take a pause and make sure that 
whatever time is needed is taken to get it done right. And then thirdly, to 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 40-43, 51, 54, 72; AE B, G. 
 
7 Tr. at 25; AE B, H. 
 
8 Tr. at 21-23; AE E. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
make more use of those around him in getting media prepared. I see that 
those actions correct the root cause of what was behind the ’11, the ’12, 
and the '15 incidents. 
 
He was then asked if he saw any pattern to the three incidents and his response was: 
 
I'll start with the 2012 incident which is where he had the cell phone that 
was left in his pocket. That is not a technical issue at all. That is an issue 
of where it was a mistake and he left his cell phone in his jacket when he 
entered a classified area. He self-reported it. When you look at 2011, the 
piece of information that was left in those scanned areas was clearly listed 
as classified, so that was a mistake. That was a miss on his part. 2015 
falls into an area that's very interesting for us in my product line, especially 
on SM-3 [a program] where basically you had piece of information A is 
unclassified. Piece of information B is unclassified. But when you put them 
on the same page or within the same document, a smart person can take 
A and B and derive C, which is classified. That's very difficult to discern 
and it becomes even more complicated on SM-3 because I talk to my 
security professional about this routinely. On any contract on SM-3, there 
is no less than ten classification guides that define what is classified. And 
at times, some of those overlap and conflict slightly, which makes taking 
that derivation conclusion even more difficult to do. But in this case, Sam 
did it; albeit, it was not when the document was created. And he 
recognized it. That's hard. 
 
He was asked if he believed Applicant was taking positives from the incidents and he 
responded: 
 
I think Sam's overall attitude is appropriate for where we are. He is 
remorseful and regrets the incidents that he had. And his response is 
appropriate to that where he basically went out and reached out to take 
corrective action not only to repair what had immediately occurred but 
then to get the right people in the room and understand how do I avoid 
repeating this, and then putting that into place and actually practicing it. 
And I think he practices it routinely to make sure that what has occurred 
will not happen again.  
 
He further stated that he had absolute trust in Applicant and that Applicant’s integrity 
had grown even greater in the witness’s mind because of how he reacted during the 
incidents. He stated: 
 
So to me, integrity means that you have a set of values, that you say this 
is what I believe, and then integrity comes along and says you know what, 
I will stand by those values, regardless of what it means to me personally, 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
whether it's good or bad. And when I look at these incidents and I see 
someone who takes his security that seriously, that on every time it's 
occurred, he continues to self-report himself, regardless of the fact that it 
means something bad towards him, but he still does it. I think his integrity 
is extremely high. I need those people on my programs.9 
 
 A coworker testified and provided a statement expressing similar opinions about 
Applicant. She further added that she witnessed Applicant implement his self-imposed 
security procedures by seeking peer reviews of his classified work product to insure 
security compliance.10 
 
 Seven other coworkers and a personal friend provided statements in support of 
Applicant. All the coworkers expressed the same themes: Applicant had taken 
responsibility for his actions and had implemented preventative measures to preclude 
future occurrences. Applicant is described as a man of honesty and integrity and they all 
fully support that he retain his clearance.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 75-89; AE Q-R. 
 
10 Tr. at 98-99; AE S-T. 
 
11 AE I-P. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
I have considered all the handling protected information disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 34 and determined the following apply: 
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of classified or other protected 
information to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to personal 
or business contacts, to the media, or to persons present at seminars, 
meetings, or conferences; 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, 
"palm" or pocket device or other adjunct equipment;  
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; and 
 
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
 
 Applicant failed to comply with proper procedures as outlined in the SOR 
allegations. AG ¶¶ 34(a), 34(c), 34(g), and 34(h) apply. 
 
 All the mitigating conditions for handling protected information under AG ¶ 35 
were considered and the following were found relevant under these circumstances: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant’s actions can be considered remote since he has held a security 
clearance for 27 years, is exposed to classified information every day, but has had three 
security incidents in 2011, 2012, and 2015. He has not experienced another security 
issue since that time. His actions were inadvertent. He accepted responsibility for his 
actions and took appropriate corrective measures. He participated in security training 
courses and implemented a personal security plan, with the consent of management, to 
prevent future occurrences. Management and his coworkers still have complete 
confidence in his ability to safeguard classified information. He provided persuasive 
evidence to show that sufficient time has passed since the incidents, that any security 
issues are unlikely to recur, and that his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment are not in doubt. AG ¶¶ 35(a) and 35(b) apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant’s last 
security incident occurred in 2015 without recurrence. I considered the circumstances 
surrounding each incident. I also considered that he admitted his mistakes and showed 
initiative in implementing a self-correction plan, which demonstrates his permanent 
behavior changes toward security issues and the unlikely chance of recurrence. 
Applicant met his burden and provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline K. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT   
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    WITHDRAWN 
  Subparagraph   2.a:    Withdrawn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
