 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02415 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 28, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 8, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 6, 2017. 
After coordinating with the parties, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
 
2 
 
issued a notice of hearing on February 7, 2017, scheduling the hearing for February 21, 
2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on February 28, 2017.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were 
admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. He submitted a letter that was marked AE E and admitted without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region. The request was not admitted in evidence but was included in the record as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice 
of the facts contained in HE I. I have also considered the facts contained in AE C and D. 
The most pertinent facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since 2008. He first received a security clearance in 
about 1999, but it lapsed after a few years when his employer lost a contract. He is 
reapplying for a security clearance. He has a bachelor’s degree. He has never married, 
and he has no children.1 
  
 Applicant was born in Hong Kong when it was a British territory. He lived in Hong 
Kong as a British citizen until he immigrated to the United States with his parents and 
two siblings when he was about 12 years old. He attended middle school, high school, 
and college in the United States. He became a U.S. citizen in 1990, when he was 18 
years old. His parents and siblings also became U.S. citizens at the same time.2 
 
 Applicant’s mother is deceased. Applicant’s father maintained a business in 
Hong Kong after he relocated to the United States. He continued to spend a lot of time 
in Hong Kong and relocated there permanently with Applicant’s mother in the mid-
1990s. Applicant’s mother passed away more than ten years ago. His father married a 
woman who was born in China. They live together in Hong Kong. He is retired and lives 
off his savings. Applicant does not believe that his stepmother is employed. Applicant 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 14-19, 45, 53-56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 14-17, 21-22, 28, 36, 49, 54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 
 
communicates with his father by telephone about every three months. He has limited 
communication with his stepmother, and he knows little about her family.3 
 
 Applicant’s brother works in the United States for a U.S. corporation. Applicant’s 
sister is married to a citizen of a country in the British Commonwealth. They live in Hong 
Kong. Her husband is an executive in an industry that is not directly connected to the 
Hong Kong government, but may have some affiliation with it. Applicant’s sister takes 
care of their children and is not employed outside the home. Applicant communicates 
with his sister about every two to three months.4 
 
 Applicant does not intend to go to Hong Kong or China to live. He likes living in 
the United States and considers it home. He does not have any foreign assets. He owns 
a condominium and other assets in the United States. His net worth is greater than 
$300,000. He went to Hong Kong more than ten years ago for his mother’s funeral and 
did not return until 2013, when he visited his father who had an operation. He visited his 
father and sister in 2015. He has not visited China since he was a child.5 
 
 All of Applicant’s travels since he became a U.S. citizen have been on his U.S. 
passport. When he was a child, his parents obtained for him a travel card issued by the 
Chinese government that enabled him to travel to the Chinese mainland without a visa. 
He renewed that identification card in 2015 at his sister’s suggestion in case they 
decided to travel to mainland China. They never did. He also received a different 
identification card from Hong Kong when he was a child. He renewed that card in 2005. 
When Applicant realized the cards raised security concerns, he gave them to his 
assistant facility security officer who destroyed them. Applicant credibly stated that his 
allegiance lies with the United States. He stated that he would report any attempt to use 
his family in Hong Kong against him.6 
 
 Applicant submitted a letter from his supervisor attesting to Applicant’s excellent 
job performance, reliability, professionalism, honesty, dependability, trustworthiness, 
integrity, and loyalty to the United States.7 
 
Hong Kong and the PRC 
 
 The PRC is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over 
a billion people. The PRC has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese 
Communist Party. The PRC has a poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 15, 21-25, 40-42, 50, 59-63; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 25-28, 42-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 28-32, 45-46; GE 1, 2; AE B. 
 
6 Tr. at 30-40, 64-73; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
7 AE E. 
 
4 
 
political dissent, and its practices include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced 
confessions, torture, and mistreatment of prisoners. 
 
 The PRC engages in espionage against the United States and is one of the two 
most active collectors of U.S. economic intelligence and technology. The PRC’s 
intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to 
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
access to corporate networks to steal state secrets.  
 
Hong Kong 
 
Hong Kong has been a Special Administrative Region of the PRC since July 1, 
1997, ending more than 150 years of British colonial rule. Hong Kong has a high degree 
of autonomy, except in the areas of defense and foreign policy, which are the 
responsibility of the PRC. The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region is headed by a 
Chief Executive voted on by an Election Committee made up of approximately 800 
Hong Kong residents from four constituency groups, including the PRC’s National 
People’s Congress.  
 
 While Hong Kong remains a free and open society where human rights are 
respected, courts are independent, and there is a well-established respect for the rule of 
law, concerns include the limited ability of residents to change their government, 
limitations on freedom of the press and expression, academic freedom, arbitrary arrest 
and detention, aggressive police tactics hampering freedom of assembly, trafficking in 
persons, and societal prejudice against certain ethnic minorities. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
6 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s father and sister are U.S. citizens living in Hong Kong. His 
stepmother is a Chinese citizen living in Hong Kong. The PRC has an authoritarian 
government, dominated by the Communist Party, with a poor human rights record, and 
targets the U.S. for espionage. Applicant’s contacts in Hong Kong create a potential 
conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the 
evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
Applicant was born in Hong Kong while it was still a British territory. British 
culture and capitalism influenced him as a youth, not the Chinese mainland dominated 
by the Communist Party. He immigrated to the United States with his parents and two 
siblings when he was about 12 years old, long before Hong Kong reverted to the PRC in 
1997. Hong Kong is not what it was before the reversion, but it still has a high degree of 
autonomy, except in the areas of defense and foreign policy, which are the 
responsibility of the PRC.  
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Hong Kong, but they are 
outweighed by his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
States. Applicant has been a U.S. citizen for about 27 years. His father chose to move 
back to Hong Kong and his sister lives in Hong Kong with her husband who is a citizen 
of a British Commonwealth country. Applicant has shown no inclination to follow them. 
He has made relatively few visits to Hong Kong since he immigrated to the United 
States. His life, home, assets, and professional career are in the United States. He 
credibly stated that he would report any attempt to use his family in Hong Kong against 
him. I find that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of the United States and the interests of China. There is no 
 
7 
 
conflict of interest, because Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest 
in favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are applicable.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;  
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; and 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
Applicant was a British citizen when he immigrated to the United States. He has 
never been a citizen of the PRC or of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region 
after it reverted to China. His possession of the travel and identification cards did not 
convey citizenship upon him, but he was able to obtain the cards because of his past 
status. No specific foreign preference disqualifying condition has been raised by 
Applicant’s possession of the cards. However, the action could indicate a preference for 
Hong Kong over the United States, and it is a privilege granted by Hong Kong because 
of his former status. A general foreign preference security concern under AG ¶ 9 has 
been raised, even without the applicability of a specific disqualifying condition. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant gave the cards to his assistant facility security officer who destroyed 
them. Foreign preference concerns are mitigated. 
 
 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s ties to 
Hong Kong, but they are far outweighed by his deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
