 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02316 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant received the SOR on September 23, 2016. He responded to the SOR 
on October 10, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case 
was assigned to me on January 18, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 27, 2017, scheduling the hearing for 
April 4, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
 
2 
 
through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through N, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 13, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2001. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1978 
until he retired with an honorable discharge in 1998. He seeks to retain a security 
clearance, which he has held since he served in the military. He has a bachelor’s 
degree, which was awarded in 1991, and a master’s degree, which was awarded in 
2001. He married in 1983, divorced in 1988, married again in 1992, and divorced in 
2011. He has an adult child.1 
 
 Applicant did not file his state and federal income tax returns when they were due 
for tax years 2008 through 2014. His second wife was a certified public accountant 
(CPA) and handled the family’s tax returns. After they separated and divorced, he felt 
overwhelmed and “froze.” He was in contact with the IRS, he received notices from the 
IRS, and his wages were garnished, but he could not bring himself to file the returns.2 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
November 2015. He noted that he had not filed his state and federal income tax returns 
when they were due for tax years 2008 through 2014. He estimated the total amount 
owed in taxes for those years to be $17,200. He stated that he had increased the 
amount withheld from his pay for taxes, and he was working with the IRS on filing his 
returns and a payment plan. He also disclosed that he went on multiple tourist trips to 
foreign countries from 2012 to 2015.3 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in February 2016. He 
discussed the unfiled tax returns and unpaid taxes. He stated that he intended to 
contact the IRS and obtain copies of his W-2 forms. He would then retain a CPA to file 
his returns. He stated that he intended to pay his taxes in full.4 
 
 Applicant filed his state and federal income tax returns for 2008 through 2015 on 
October 10, 2016, after he received the SOR. His state returns indicated that he would 
have been due a refund for 2008 through 2010, and that he owed $3,173 for 2011 
through 2015. The federal returns indicated that he would have been due a refund for 
2010, and that he owed $7,664 for 2012 through 2015. Those state and federal figures 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23, 28; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3; AE D, M.  
 
2 Tr. at 22-26, 32-34; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3; AE D.  
 
3 GE 1.  
 
4 GE 3.  
 
3 
 
do not include penalties and interest. Applicant sent checks totaling the above amounts 
to the state and IRS with his returns.5 
 
 Additional amounts were due for each year because of penalties and interest. 
Applicant paid an additional $6,665 to the IRS and $1,026 to the state for tax years 
2010 through 2015. He filed his 2016 state and federal tax returns on time, and he paid 
$1,241 to the IRS and $686 to the state for his 2016 taxes. Applicant believes that all 
the taxes, penalties, and interest have been paid, except for tax year 2011. He paid an 
additional $1,610 for that tax year, but the IRS has not yet calculated the final tax 
liability for that year.6  
 
 Applicant is in therapy to assist him with dealing with certain events, including his 
taxes. He retained a CPA to file his tax returns going forward. He accepted 
responsibility for his failure to act. He stated that he has learned a valuable lesson, and 
he will be compliant with all tax laws in the future.7 
 
 The SOR alleges a $164 debt to an apartment complex and two delinquent 
medical debts totaling $344 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e). Applicant paid the debts after receipt 
of the SOR.8 
 
Applicant served in combat during Operation Desert Storm. He submitted 
numerous documents and letters attesting to his excellent job performance.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 24-25, 33, 37-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE D, F.  
 
6 Tr. at 25, 36-39; AE E-G.  
 
7 Tr. at 22-27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3; AE D, G, K.  
 
8 Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, D, H, I.  
 
9 Tr. at 28; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3; AE B-D, J, L, M. 
 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant did not file his state and federal income tax returns when they were 
due for tax years 2008 through 2014. AG ¶ 19(g) is applicable.  
 
 Applicant paid the three small debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e. Those 
allegations are mitigated and concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant filed all his returns after his pay was garnished, his SF 86 was 
submitted, he was interviewed for his background investigation, and he received the 
SOR. He paid most, if not all, of the past-due state and federal taxes. He is in therapy, 
and he retained a CPA to file his tax returns going forward. He stated that he has 
learned a valuable lesson, and he will be compliant with all tax laws in the future. 
Nonetheless, Applicant’s repeated failure to file his income tax returns in a timely 
manner suggests that he does not possess the high degree of good judgment and 
reliability required of persons granted access to classified information and that he has a 
problem with complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. 
Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). This is true 
even though the returns have been filed. See ISCR Case No. 15-03481 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 27, 2016).  
 
 Applicant’s financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable, but it is 
insufficient to mitigate Applicant’s years of poor judgment. I find that financial 
considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence and his honorable military service, particularly his combat service. 
However, he shirked his tax responsibilities for years, and only came into compliance 
after he received the SOR.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
