 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01448 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
May 18, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On September 16, 2016 the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 18, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 29, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on March 30, 2017, scheduling the hearing for April 17, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 5, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AppXs) A through P, which 
 
2 
 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record then 
closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on April 25, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 43 years old. He has been employed with a Government contractor 
for about 12 years. He has held a security clearance for about 20 years. He is married 
and has three children. (TR at page 16 line 6 to page 18 line 4.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified one mortgage debt totaling approximately $275,000. Applicant admits the 
allegation, explaining that it has been resolved through a foreclosure. (TR at page 18 
line 15 to page 28 line 19, at page 35 line 1 to page 36 line 6, at page 37 line 23 to page 
38 line 17, at page 39 line 15 to page 40 line 9, and at page 47 line 18 to page 48 line 
11.) The alleged debt was listed as past due on a credit report (CR) dated October 24, 
2015, but is not listed as past due on the Government’s most recent December 2016 
CR. (GXs 3 and 4.) 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a.  Applicant purchased his first home in 2005.  However, the neighborhood 
turned out to be a bad neighborhood; and as a result, Applicant started building a house 
in the more desirable “suburbs” in 2007.  (TR at page 18 line 15 to page 21 line 2.)  
Soon thereafter, in 2008, the housing “market crashed.” (TR at page 21 lines 2~5.)  He 
tried to restructure the loan with the creditor, but to no avail.  (TR at page 21 lines 
11~19.)  He and his wife “finally met with a real estate attorney who advised . . . [them] 
to let the home go under foreclosure.”  (TR at page 21 line 19 to page 22 line 2.) 
 
 Applicant tried to rent their first home, but because of the less than desirable 
neighborhood there was a monthly shortfall of $1,000. (TR at page 23 lines 10~20.)  
After years of trying to work with the lender, the house was foreclosed on in 2016.  (TR 
at page 26 lines 3~20.)  As a result, the creditor “sent a 1099-C Form that included, not 
only the difference in the foreclosure sale and what . . . [Applicant] owed, but on top [of 
that] taxes and attorney’s fees,” as evidenced by that Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
Form 1099-C.  (TR at page 26 line 23 to page 27 line 1, and AppX N.)  Most recently, in 
April of 2017, Applicant filed his Federal taxes with the IRS, declaring the amount form 
his IRS Form as income, as evidenced by the filing.  (TR at page 26 line 21 to page 28 
line 8, and AppX P.)  Applicant has no past-due indebtedness. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had a past-due mortgage debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Three Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant was a victim of the crash of the real-estate 
market in 2008.  Following the advice of legal counsel, he opted to have his first home 
foreclosed. Applicant’s foreclosure debt has been satisfied with the inclusion of his IRS 
Form 1099-C on his 2016 income tax filing. His behavior happened so long ago, and 
occurred under such circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 
20(d) provide mitigation. 
 
 
5 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is well respected in his workplace, as evidenced by his performance 
evaluations and eight letters of recommendation.  (AppXs I and L.) Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
