 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-00107 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by 
his past financial problems. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 13, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
  
 On April 11, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. 
Applicant testified at hearing and the exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into 
the administrative record without objection. (Government Exhibits 1 – 4; Applicant’s 
Exhibits A – D.) The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on April 19, 2017, and 
the record closed on April 28, 2017.  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 58, is married with two children. For about 15 years, he worked as a 
federal contractor and held a security clearance before starting his own private 
company. He submitted a security clearance application in April 2015 in connection with 
his current job.  
 
From 1997 to 2003, Applicant operated his own business. He sold it to a larger 
company and was then principally employed as a consultant by the acquiring firm. This 
arrangement was beneficial to both parties, and Applicant was well compensated for his 
work, earning between $250,000 and $450,000 from 2003 through 2006.  
 
In 2004, Applicant purchased his home. He financed the purchase through a 
primary or first mortgage loan. Two years later, he took out a second mortgage loan to 
finance some home improvements and pay for his children’s college education. At the 
time, an independent home appraiser valued the home at over 1.5 million dollars.  
 
In 2007, as the U.S. economy slid into recession, Applicant was laid off and was 
unable to find a job for several years. He started falling behind on his bills, including the 
mortgage payments. He attempted to sell his home, but its value had decreased 
markedly with the collapse of the local housing market. He received short sale offers in 
the range of $750,000, but the lender for the second mortgage loan rejected all such 
offers. He was advised to let the property go through foreclosure and file for bankruptcy. 
He rejected this advice, because he wanted to pay his debts. He recently had his home 
appraised. It is currently worth $750,000. 
 
In 2011, Applicant was hired by his current employer. He reached out to his 
overdue creditors and steadily one-by-one addressed and resolved his debts, including 
about $40,000 in credit card debt.  
 
Applicant renegotiated his first mortgage loan in June 2014, agreeing to repay 
the outstanding balance and any associated fees and interest. (He did so despite 
knowing that the renegotiated mortgage loan is $200,000 more than the property is 
currently worth.) He brought the account current and has been paying on a consistent 
monthly basis for the past three years. His recent credit report reflects that Applicant’s 
mortgage account is in good standing and he is paying the “account as agreed.”2  
 
Applicant also resolved the debt associated with the second mortgage loan (SOR 
1.a). He disclosed this debt on his clearance application. He settled the debt for 
$120,000, made the initial $50,000 down payment, and agreed to $1,000 monthly 
payments. Applicant currently earns over $150,000 annually. He does not have any 
personal credit card or other consumer-related debt. After paying recurring monthly 
expenses, which includes the $1,000 settlement payments, Applicant has a sufficient 
net remainder to pay unanticipated expenses. He submitted extensive corroborating 
                                                          
2 Exhibit 3 at 3.  
 
3 
 
 
documentation about his past and current finances, including voluntarily providing 
copies of his tax returns going back to 2003.3 
 
At hearing, Applicant explained why he chose to repay the debts he accumulated 
while unemployed and underemployed, including the mortgages on a home that has lost 
more than half its value since 2006, as follows: 
 
It's just been my commitment to paying back my lenders. It's the way I 
believe I should run my life. That's what I've chosen to do versus other 
courses that I could have taken that were recommended to me at different 
times by lots of people in the industry as the mortgage, you know, the 
mortgage crisis happened. Lots of people recommended me taking a 
different path, which I believe is a short circuit to what I really owed the 
people who had lent me money. I did not mean to be in this situation with 
them, but I believe I've worked diligently to resolve that to the satisfaction 
of every one. 
 
*     *     * 
 
So, I don't know if this really plays into any of this. I really want to, you 
know, clear my name or get my clearance on just an honest basis based 
on my honest attempt to repay all my past debts. But I do [so] for the 
benefit of my country, [because] you know, at my age I don't need a 
security clearance [ ] to help me be employed. I think I'm very well 
employed where I am at. But I do -- I really can't explain technically why 
it's important, but I have people that are counting on my knowledge to 
improve the security of our nation. And that's really why I am here and 
that's why I want to be back inside that security envelope so I can fully use 
my knowledge and experience.4 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
                                                          
3 Exhibit A.  
 
4 Tr. 53-55.  
 
4 
 
 
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 As stated in the relevant portion of AG ¶ 18 quoted above, the security concern 
at issue is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial issues might 
be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their 
debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to delinquent 
 
5 
 
 
debt and other security-significant financial issues cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, 
self-control, and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.5 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection process. Instead, an 
administrative judge examines the way an applicant handles his or her personal 
financial obligations to assess how they may handle their security obligations.6 
Moreover, the resolution of past financial issues alone without evidence of true reform 
and rehabilitation is of limited probative value in the security clearance context.7  
 
Here, Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance was called into question by 
his past financial problems and, primarily, his failure until relatively recently to address 
the debt associated with the second mortgage loan on his home. His inability to pay his 
debts was not the result of a reckless disregard for his financial obligations, living 
beyond his means, or other circumstance that would raise a security concern. Instead, 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
6 See generally ISCR Case No. ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016). 
 
7 Compare, ISCR Case No. 12-04806 (App. Bd. July 3, 2014) (despite the presence of unresolved debt, 
notably, a second mortgage loan tied to a property that had been foreclosed, Board upheld grant because 
clear evidence of reform and rehabilitation), with, ISCR Case No. 15-03481 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016) 
(applicant’s filing of overdue tax returns alone insufficient to mitigate security concerns, where no 
extenuating circumstances to explain the late tax filing or evidence of financial reform). 
 
6 
 
 
his past financial problems were largely attributable to matters beyond his control. He 
addressed and resolved the debts, including the second mortgage loan, after becoming 
gainfully employed. The responsible manner in which Applicant addressed his financial 
obligations raises favorable inferences regarding the manner in which he will likely 
discharge his security obligations.8 His present financial situation does not raise a 
security concern. AG ¶¶ 20(a) – 20(d) apply. 
 
After a complete and thorough review of the record evidence, while remaining 
mindful of my solemn obligation to resolve any unmitigated doubt in favor of protecting 
national security, I find that Applicant met his heavy burden of proof and persuasion in 
mitigating the security concerns at issue. Furthermore, he clearly established his 
eligibility for a security clearance.9  
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 Of course, security clearance determinations are “not an exact science,” and depend in large measure 
on the thoroughness of the underlying clearance investigation. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-25941 
(App. Bd. May 7, 2004). 
 
9 In reaching this favorable conclusion, I also considered Applicant’s candor on the security clearance 
application and the level of cooperation he exhibited during the clearance process (i.e., voluntarily 
providing tax returns going back to 2003). See generally AG ¶ 2(a) (whole-person factors). 
