 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 16-01579 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges four delinquent debts totaling 
$1,584. He paid two debts, and the other two are in payment plans. The SOR also 
alleges he failed to file his income tax returns for tax years 2013 and 2014. He was not 
required to file tax returns for those years because his income was below the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) filing threshold. He has a track record of paying his debts, and 
he does not have any currently delinquent debts. Financial considerations security 
concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 1, 2015, Applicant signed his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 2) On June 2, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  
 
On July 11, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a decision 
without a hearing. (Item 1) On August 10, 2016, Department Counsel completed the File 
of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received the FORM and on September 13, 
2016, he provided some documents in response to the FORM. On May 22, 2017, the 
case was assigned to me. The case file consisted of six exhibits. (Items 1-5 and 
Applicant’s FORM response) There were no objections to consideration of any exhibits, 
and all exhibits were admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact1  
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. He 
also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old aviation mechanic helper, who has worked for a 
defense contractor since November 2015.2 He has also worked part-time in lawn care 
maintenance for 20 years. In 1979, he graduated from high school, and he received a 
certification in industrial electricity. He has never served in the military. He has never 
married, and he does not have any children. He disclosed his failure to file his federal 
tax return in 2014 and his delinquent debts.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit report, SCA, 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), SOR 
response, and FORM response. The status the SOR allegations is as follows. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant failed to file his federal and state tax returns for tax 
years 2013 and 2014. Applicant admitted he did not file his federal income tax returns 
for tax years 2013 and 2014. (Items 3, 4, FORM response) In 2013 and 2014, Applicant 
had part-time employment providing lawn care services, and he worked in an 
automobile repair shop. In 2015, he sent in two Form 1099s to the IRS because he 
wanted the IRS to determine whether he owed any taxes. (FORM response) He earned 
$800 in 2013 and $700 in 2014. (FORM response) There is no evidence Applicant failed 
                                            
1 Some details have been excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s December 
1, 2015 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86) or security clearance application 
(SCA). (Item 2) 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
to file required income tax returns. His income was below the IRS thresholds for filing 
tax returns for those two tax years, and he was not required to file tax returns.3 SOR ¶ 
1.a is refuted and will not receive further discussion in this decision.    
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a telecommunications debt placed for collection for $194. On 
September 7, 2016, Applicant paid this debt. (FORM response)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a medical debt placed for collection for $871. On December 8, 
2015, Applicant paid this debt. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e allege two telecommunications debts for $351 and $168 that 
were placed for collection.  Applicant said he arranged for $50 monthly payments for 
both creditors beginning in July 2016. (SOR response) In September 2016, he said the 
$351 debt currently has a balance of $202 and will be paid off in December 2016, and 
the $168 debt will be paid off in September 2016.   
 
Applicant’s credit report does not show any other delinquent debts. He assures 
he will pay his debts and file his tax returns.     
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
                                            
3 The IRS filing threshold for tax year 2013 for a single person under age 65 was $10,000. IRS 
Publication 501, Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and Filing Information 2. (December 3, 2013). The IRS 
filing threshold for tax year 2014 for a single person under age 65 was $10,150. IRS Publication 501, 
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and Filing Information 2. (December 20, 2014). IRS publications are 
available on the IRS website. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets 
as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, OPM PSI, SOR response, and FORM response. 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,4 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
                                            
4 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
February 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)).  
 
5 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) apply. Applicant’s delinquent SOR debt resulted 
when Applicant was underemployed or unemployed, which is a circumstance beyond 
his control. He acted responsibly by seeking employment and paying his debts when 
able to do so.      
 
Two recent Appeal Board decisions illustrate the analysis for applying AG ¶¶ 
20(a) and 20(b). In ISCR Case No. 09-08533 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010), the applicant had 
$41,000 in delinquent credit card debt and defaulted on a home loan generating a 
$162,000 delinquent debt. Id. at 2. That applicant filed for bankruptcy the same month 
the Administrative Judge issued her decision. Id. at 1-2. The applicant in ISCR Case 
No. 09-08533 was recently divorced, had been unemployed for 10 months, and had 
childcare responsibilities. Her former husband was inconsistent in his child support 
payments to her. The Appeal Board determined that AG ¶ 20(a) was “clearly applicable 
(debt occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and [the debt] does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)” 
even though that applicant’s debts were unresolved at the time the Administrative 
                                                                                                                                            
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Judge’s decision was issued. The Appeal Board also decided that the record evidence 
raised the applicability of AG ¶ 20(b) because of the absence of evidence6 of 
irresponsible behavior, poor judgment, unreliability, or lack of trustworthiness. Id. at 4.   
  
Similarly, in ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) the Appeal 
Board addressed a situation where an applicant was sporadically unemployed and 
lacked the ability to pay her creditors. The Appeal Board noted “it will be a long time at 
best before she has paid” all of her creditors. The applicant was living on unemployment 
compensation at the time of her hearing. The Appeal Board explained that such a 
circumstance was not necessarily a bar to having access to classified information 
stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which 
evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). The applicant in ISCR Case 
No. 08-06567 used his limited resources to (1) resolve some of his debts; (2) had a 
repayment plan for the remaining debts; and (3) took “reasonable actions to effectuate 
that plan.” Id. The Appeal Board remanded the Administrative Judge’s decision because 
it did not “articulate a satisfactory explanation for his conclusions,” emphasizing the 
Administrative Judge did “not explain[] what he believes that applicant could or should 
have done under the circumstances that he has not already done to rectify his poor 
financial condition, or why the approach taken by applicant was not ‘responsible’ in light 
of his limited circumstances.” Id.   
 
 Application of AG ¶ 20(c) is warranted. He acted responsibly by paying as many 
debts as possible and establishing payment plans for several debts. Although there is 
limited evidence of record that he established and maintained contact with his 
creditors,7 his financial problem is resolved and his finances are under control.      
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is partially applicable. Applicant admitted responsibility for and took 
reasonable and responsible actions to resolve his debts, establishing some good faith.  
                                            
6 Applicant has the burden of proving the applicability of any mitigating conditions, and the burden 
to disprove a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
 
7 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. He did not provide documentation establishing a 
reasonable dispute for any of his SOR debts.    
 
In sum, Applicant’s SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling $1,584. He paid 
two debts, and the other two are in payment plans. Based on Applicant’s promise to pay 
his debts and his track record of paying his debts, future new delinquent debt “is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.” His payments of his non-SOR debts showed good faith. I am confident 
that Applicant will conscientiously endeavor to maintain his financial responsibility. His 
efforts are sufficient to mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 56 years old, and he has been an aviation mechanic helper for a 
defense contractor since November 2015. He has also worked part-time in lawn care 
maintenance for 20 years. In 1979, he graduated from high school, and he received a 
certification in industrial electricity. He disclosed his delinquent debts on his SCA.  
 
In September 2016, Applicant provided proof that he paid two delinquent SOR 
debts. As of September 2016, he had two SOR debts in payment plans, and together 
they totaled less than $300. There is no evidence of currently delinquent debts, and he 
assures he intends to pay his debts. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in 
the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
payment as indicated in his credit report, OMP PSI, SOR response, and FORM 
response. He understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his financial 
responsibility. He took reasonable actions under his particular financial circumstances to 
address his delinquent debts. I am confident he will continue to maintain his financial 
responsibility.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
