                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 16-02402
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his use of drugs. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
History of Case
On September 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 4, 2016, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on December 16, 2016, and was scheduled for hearing
on March 7, 2016. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of three exhibits (GEs
1-3). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and one exhibit (AE A). The transcript
(Tr.) was received on March 15, 2017. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, the Government moved to amend SOR
allegation ¶ 1.c to substitute the words issued a citation for arrest for marijuana
possession in January 1999. (Tr. 45-46) There being no objections, and for good cause
shown, the Government’s motion was granted.
Prior to the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with performance evaluations.
There being no objections, and for good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven
days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded two days to respond. 
Applicant did not supplement the record.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly (a) used marijuana between 1977 and
July 2014; (b) used marijuana after being a granted a security clearance in 1993 and
2006; and (c) was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana in January 1999
(later amended to substitute the words issued a citation for arrest). No further details are
provided.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant  admitted most of the allegations with
explanations. He denied only his being arrested for marijuana possession in January
1999. He expressed contrition and claimed he takes national defense very seriously and
would never do anything to jeopardize national security or any secret information
entrusted to him. He claimed he has been employed by his employer for approximately
32 years, has held a security clearance for many of those years, and is a high-
performing employee who has been entrusted with managerial duties.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 55-year-old field systems engineering senior manager for a
defense contractor who seeks a security clearance. (GE 1 and AE A; Tr. 29, 41) The
allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and
material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in May 1991 and has one adult child (age 22) from this
marriage, in addition to one adult stepchild (age 29) and two adult adopted children
(ages 24 and 22).  (GEs 1-3) He earned an Associate’s degree in July 1984 and
reported no military service. Applicant has been employed by his current employer since
2
July 1984 (over 32 years) and currently serves as a systems engineering senior
manager for his employer. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 20)
Drug history
Applicant presents with considerable drug use history. He was introduced to
marijuana in high school in January 1977. (GEs 1-3) Between January 1977 and July
1984, he used marijuana weekly some times, monthly on other occasions, and mostly
on weekends. (GE 3; Tr. 19, 30-31, 36-37) Before 2014, he used marijuana mostly at
home. This marijuana he obtained from his neighbor. (Tr. 37-38). Crediting his
maturation process and continued pressure from his brother-in-law, he ceased using
marijuana at home in 2012 and shifted over to obtaining and using it on a spotty basis
with his brother-in-law, mostly on weekends. (Tr.19-20, 32-35, 39) He attributed
pressure from his brother-in-law as a major factor in his continued use of marijuana into
the 2014 calendar year. (Tr. 35-36)
In January 1999, Applicant was cited for marijuana possession. In his court
appearance on the citation, the court fined him and ordered him to attend a substance
abuse awareness program. (Tr. 33) He informed no one at work of the citation. (Tr. 34) 
When asked by the agent from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) why he did
not decline marijuana offers from his brother-in-law in social situations, Applicant could
not offer any explanations. (GE 3; Tr. 36)  
Applicant assured he has not used marijuana or any illegal drugs since July
2014, and will abstain from any future use should marijuana ever be offered to him. (GE
3; Tr. 36-37) Applicant received his first security clearance in 1993 and has held
security clearances for most of his professional career with his current employer. (GEs
1-3; Tr. 20, 31-32)  He acknowledged that his employer has a zero tolerance drug policy
that subjects employees who violate the employer’s drug policy to disciplinary action or
termination. (Tr. 40) He expressed contrition for using marijuana while holding a security
clearance and assured he takes national defense very seriously. He assured he is a
high-performing employee with excellent performance ratings over the past 20 years
and would do nothing to jeopardize national security information entrusted to him. (Tr.
19-21) 
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by his managers and colleagues. (AE A)  Applicant’s
senior program manager, who has known and worked with him for over 20 years
considers him to be a very dependable and trustworthy manager who cares deeply
about the defense programs he is assigned to. (AE A) He credited Applicant with
tireless dedication to the company’s software programs and expressed pride in
promoting him to the senior manager level. (AE A) 
Other program managers who have worked with Applicant extolled his relentless
pursuit of excellence in results without sacrificing any of his team building and
relationship-building skills. They vouched for his integrity, honesty, and ability to execute
his responsibilities faithfully. (AE A)
3
Of note, none of Applicant’s character references expressed any knowledge of
his past drug use while holding a security clearance. Without more information from
Applicant’s references, performance evaluations, or other sources as to how much, if
any, Applicant’s character references knew about Applicant’s past marijuana use, their
positive impressions of Applicant’s character must be tempered somewhat.
          Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account
factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as
well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. 
The AGs include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could
mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or not a
security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of
the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with
AG ¶ 2(c)
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
4
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations  AG ¶ 24.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Between January 1977 and July 2014, Applicant used marijuana at varying
frequencies. Most of his drug use occurred between 1984 and July 2014 while he held a
security clearance. Applicant was at all times aware of his employer’s zero tolerance
drug policy as well as the DOD’s anti-drug use federal policy.
On the strength of the evidence presented, several disqualifying conditions of the
Adjudicative Guidelines for drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” 
DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase,
sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” and DC ¶ 25(g), “any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance.” Judgment concerns exist over
Applicant’s past drug use while holding a security clearance with acknowledged
5
awareness and aware of the anti-drug use policies placed in force by his employer and
inferred awareness of the DOD’s anti-drug policiy. 
In assessing security concerns associated with drug use and drug offenses, the
Appeal Board has established no bright lines for determining whether the drug use and
related conduct is sufficiently dated to mitigate. Each determination must be based “on a
careful evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.”
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4 2004) See ISCR Case No. 14-05095 at
3n. 1 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2016) (affirming lack of bright-line test for recency of illegal drug
use)(citing ISCR Case No. 14-01847 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2015) 
Applicant’s use of marijuana is longstanding. Historically, he has used the
substance at varying frequencies over a period of almost 40 years. For most of the years 
he used marijuana (ie., between 1984 and July 2014) he held a security clearance while
employed by his current employer. And Applicant fully acknowledged his awareness of
the anti-drug policies of his employer and DOD. 
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s marijuana use over a
course of many years, potentially pertinent mitigating conditions covered by AG ¶ 24
have only limited application at this time. Neither MC ¶ 24(a), “the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment,” nor  MC ¶ 24(b), “a demonstrated intent not to use any drugs in the
future, such as (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, and (3) an
appropriate period of abstinence,” have more than minimal application to Applicant’s
situation. Appeal Board decisions finding insufficient passage of time for applicants with
long histories of illegal drug use and relatively brief periods of time elapse since
cessation of drug use while holding security clearances include the following: ISCR Case
No. 005-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006); ISCR Case No. 15-03403 at 2-3 (App.
Bd. Dec. 20, 2016).
Applicant is credited with good judgment and reliability by his senior managers
who have worked closely with Applicant for a number of yea. While Applicant’s credited
contributions to his employer are impressive from a whole-person perspective, they are
not enough to surmount security concerns over his recurrent use of marijuana over a 37-
year period. Safe predictable judgments cannot be made at this time about his ability to
avoid recurrent drug involvement. 
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
recurrent drug use over the course of 37 years, and still brief period of sustained
cessation of illegal drug use. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a-1.c of Guideline H.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
6
GUIDELINE H: (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):        AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:                    AGAINST  APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
8
