
  2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 15 and August 10, 2016. He admitted the 
20 allegations of delinquent debt. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
October 6, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on December 2, 2016. DOD issued 
a notice of hearing on January 19, 2017, for a hearing on February 14, 2017. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered four exhibits that I 
marked and admitted into the record without objection as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
to 4. Applicant testified and submitted eight exhibits that I marked and admitted into the 
record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through H. I kept the record open 
for Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted four additional 
documents that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as AX I to L. I 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 23, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant is 34 years old. He served on active duty in the Air 
Force from September 2000 until December 2015 when he left active duty with an 
honorable discharge. He was eligibility for access to classified information while on 
active duty. He has worked for his defense contractor employer as an acquisition 
specialist since December 2015. He received a bachelor’s degree in 2015, and is 
studying for a master’s degree. He married in 2008 and has two children. (Tr. 25-28)  
 
Applicant’s net monthly income is $6,200. His wife is a former service member 
who is attending school under the GI Bill. She receives $1,600 monthly in living-
expense benefits in addition to tuition benefits. The family has a total monthly income of 
$7,800. Their monthly expenses, including payments on debts, is approximately $7,200, 
leaving approximately $600 a month in discretionary income. (Tr. 30-36, GX 1, e-QIP, 
dated August 17, 2015; GX 2, Personal Subject Interview, dated October 16, 2015)  
The SOR alleges, and credit reports (GX 3, dated August 26, 2015; GX 4, dated 
September 29, 2016) confirm the following delinquent debt for Applicant; a loan past 
due for $746 with a balance of $796 (SOR 1.a); a credit card debt charged off for $771 
(SOR 1.b); a loan placed for collection for $774 (SOR 1.c); a loan charged off for $1,541 
(SOR 1.d); a loan charged off for $168 (SOR 1.e); a medical debt placed for collection 
for $159 (SOR 1.f); a closed bank account charged off for $644 (SOR 1.g) two credit 
card debts to the same creditor for $3,660 (SOR 1.h), and $3,692 (SOR 1.i); and a loan 
placed for collection for $10,862 (SOR 1.j). Also listed are traffic camera tickets for the 
same city for $250 (SOR 1.k ), $65 (SOR 1.l), $250 (SOR 1.m), $250 (SOR 1.n), $400 
(SOR 1.o), $360 (SOR 1.p), $240 (SOR 1.q); and $240 (SOR 1.r). The credit reports 
also list a loan placed for collection for $541 (SOR 1.s), and a bank loan placed for 
collection for $724 (SOR 1.t). The total amount of the delinquent debt is approximately 
$26,000. 
Applicant’s wife served on active duty. She was attending school using her GI Bill 
educational benefits when she experienced medical problems after the birth of their first 
child in 2009. She was unable to work or continue to attend school and could no longer 
collect her GI Bill benefits. Applicant took out loans and used credit cards to sustain the 
  3 
 
family and cover household expenses. Applicant hoped to repay the loans and credit 
cards over time when his wife could work or attend school and again receive GI Bill 
benefits. His wife was able to return to work and receive GI Bill benefits for a time. They 
were able to sustain the household without going too far into debt. Applicant’s wife 
became pregnant again and could not work or attend school. Applicant again resorted 
to using credit cards and loans to meet expenses. As Applicant described it, he had to 
“rob Peter to pay Paul.” The loans and credit cards he used had high interest rates, and 
Applicant could not keep up with the growing living expenses and debt payments. He 
did not pay his debt as agreed so he could maintain his household’s standard of living. 
After 15 years on active duty, he decided to leave the military in December 2015 to 
follow a career path with defense contractors where he could potentially receive a 
higher income. He went from an active duty pay of approximately $89,000 a year as a 
master sergeant (E-7) to a civilian pay of approximately $123,000 a year. Applicant 
claims to have been paying his loan and credit card debts since he started working as a 
civilian in December 2015. (Tr. 16-19, 23-25)  
Applicant contracted with a credit servicing company in 2008 and paid them over 
$500 per month to assist him in pay his bills. Applicant did not want to continue paying 
the high fees, so he started paying the debts directly in November 2008. (AX J, e-mail, 
dated March 1, 2017) The debts remaining to be paid are listed in the SOR. Applicant 
provided sufficient information to establish that he paid in full the personal loan debt at 
SOR 1.a. The credit card debts at SOR 1.b and 1.c are duplicate debts. Applicant 
presented sufficient information to show that the debt has been paid in full and resolved. 
(Tr. 18-19, 22,36-37; AX B, e-mail, dated February 1, 2017; AX D, Letter, dated 
February 2, 2017) 
The debt at SOR 1.d is a personal loan. Applicant contacted the creditor to 
arrange a payment plan. He is waiting to hear from them concerning his offer. He made 
some small payments on this loan when he could. (Tr. 19, AX C, Letter, dated January 
26, 2017) He paid the personal loan debt at SOR 1.e in full. (Tr. 19, 35) The medical 
debt at SOR 1.f arose when Applicant was on active duty, and should have been paid 
by the military medical system. In spite of this fact, Applicant disputed the debt with the 
creditor, and then decided to pay it himself. He is waiting for the final documents from 
the creditor to show that the debt is resolved. (Tr. 19-20) The debt at SOR 1.g is the 
balance from a bank account Applicant thought was closed. There were payment of bills 
associated with the account that continued to be debited from the account creating a 
deficit. Applicant’s plan is to pay and resolve this debt after completing payment on the 
debts he is now paying. (Tr. 20, 36-42)  
The debts at SOR 1.h and 1.i are to the same creditor specializing in loans for 
military members but for different loans totaling approximately $7,000. SOR 1.j is also a 
loan from a lender specializing in loans to military members. Applicant contacted both 
creditors concerning payment plans for the debts. Both creditors requested large down 
payments to initiate a payment plan because of the age of the loans and the amount of 
the debts. The amount borrowed on the loans was not large but the debts increased 
because of interest and penalties. Applicant is saving funds to make the payments. (Tr. 
20-21) 
  4 
 
The debts at SOR 1.k through 1.r are for traffic camera tickets to a city. Applicant 
did not receive notice of the tickets and the fines. After receiving the SOR and learning 
of the fines, Applicant contacted the city. The city does not have a procedure for an 
individual issued a ticket to establish a plan to pay the ticket. The ticket must be paid at 
one time. Applicant intends to use his tax refund for 2016 to pay for the tickets. 
Applicant did not present any information on the amount of the funds he saved to pay 
these tickets. (Tr. 21) Applicant is attempting to negotiate a payment plan on the credit 
card debt at SOR 1.s. (Tr. 22) Applicant settled and paid the bank debt at SOR 1.t. (Tr. 
43-44; AX I, e-mail, undated)  
Applicant’s credit score increased as he has paid some of his debts. (Tr. 21-22; 
AX E, Credit Score, dated February 9, 2017) Applicant presented five letters of 
recommendation from former supervisors and associates. They favorably commented 
on his leadership and management skills and performance. He successfully negotiated 
and managed high-dollar complex contracts. They noted that Applicant is trustworthy, 
reliable, with the highest integrity. He accepted responsibility and was a frequent 
volunteer for duties in the unit. (AX F, Letters of Recommendation). Applicant’s military 
performance reports show his work performance that consistently exceeded 
expectations, the highest rating. (AX G, Enlisted Performance Reports) Applicant also 
received many Letters of Recommendation and Commendations for the quality of his 
service and performance. (Tr. 22-27; AX H, Letters, various dates) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
  5 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) The financial 
security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about an 
individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security clearance 
adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant’s history of delinquent debts is 
documented in his credit reports and in his admissions. Applicant’s wife was unable to 
work because of pregnancy and childcare issues. After losing his wife’s income, 
Applicant used credit cards and personal loans to maintain their lifestyle thereby 
incurring delinquent debt. The information raises an issue about Applicant’s willingness 
and ability to meet his financial obligations. Once the Government has established the 
  6 
 
adverse financial issue, the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the 
issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts raise the following security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indication that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20 (a) and (b) do not apply. Applicant accumulated 
debts he could not pay within his income when his wife became pregnant, had children, 
could not work, and the family had to rely on Applicant’s income only. While the loss of 
his wife’s income was not within his ability to control and could recur, the direct cause of 
his delinquent debts was within his ability to control. His income alone was not sufficient 
to maintain the family lifestyle and pay their debts. He did not present any evidence that 
he changed his lifestyle to live within his lower income level. Instead, he used credit 
cards and personal loans to continue his lifestyle and make ends meet. Applicant also 
accumulated a number of traffic camera fines that were within his control to avoid.  
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant presented evidence of 
financial counseling, but that was in 2008. That counseling has no bearing on the debts 
in the SOR. His financial situation is not under control. 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Good faith means acting in a way 
that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. 
  7 
 
Applicant is not required to be debt-free nor must his plan require paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that Applicant act responsibly given 
his circumstances. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve 
financial problems, and that he has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
Applicant’s plan must evidence a systematic method of handling debts, and Applicant 
must establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A meaningful track record of 
debt payment can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of 
debt through payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for 
a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible 
manner.  
 
Appellant presented sufficient information that he has paid four debts. (SOR 1.a, 
1. b, 1.e, and 1.f.) Because of duplication, he has resolved two additional debts. (SOR 
1.c. and 1.t) The payment of these debts still leaves many debts unpaid and is not 
sufficient to establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. Applicant claims he 
contacted most of his creditors to establish payments plans. However, he presented no 
documentation of any plans he is negotiating or finalizing for his other delinquent debts. 
He presented no documents to show any present payments made to creditors. He 
claims to be saving funds to make payments, but he did not present any evidence to 
show that the funds are saved and may be available to pay debts. His promise to save 
funds and pay in the future is not a substitute for a meaningful track record of debt 
payment. He has not established a track record of paying his debts in a timely manner 
and acting in a financially responsible manner. His lack of responsible financial conduct 
is likely to continue. There is evidence of a lack of responsible behavior, good judgment, 
and reliable conduct and actions by Applicant towards his finances. 
 
Applicant has not met his burden to establish his good-faith efforts to resolve his 
remaining debts. He has not established that he acted with reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and an adherence to duty and obligation towards his financial obligations. With 
evidence of delinquent debt and no documentation to support responsible management 
of his finances, it is obvious that Applicant’s financial problems are not under control, 
and that Applicant is not managing his personal financial obligations reasonably and 
responsibly. His financial problems are not behind him. Applicant’s failure to act 
reasonably and responsibly towards his finances is an indication that he may not protect 
and safeguard classified information. Applicant has not presented sufficient information 
to mitigate security concerns for financial considerations.  
 
 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
  8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant 15 years of 
commendable active service in the Air Force. I considered the comments and 
recommendations contained in his performance evaluation reports from the Air Force 
and the laudatory comments of his supervisor, leaders, and peers.  
 
Applicant incurred delinquent debt when he did not modify his spending after the 
loss of his wife’s income. He used credit cards and personal loans to maintain his 
family’s lifestyle. While he paid some debts, he has not established an adequate plan to 
resolve his remaining delinquent debts. Applicant has not presented sufficient 
information to establish that he acted reasonably and responsibly towards his finances 
under the circumstances. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has 
not mitigated security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f: For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.t:   For Applicant 
 
  9 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
