 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00270 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 22, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 17, 2016, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he 
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge (AJ). The case was assigned to 
this AJ on July 25, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on August 8, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
August 31, 2016.  
 
 
2 
 
 At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibit 
A, which was also admitted without objection. The record was kept open until 
September 14, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. The documents 
that were timely received have been identified and entered into evidence without 
objection as Exhibits B through E. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on 
September 9, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony 
of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including 
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon 
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 43 years old.  He is married, and he has three biological children and 
one adopted child. He was married one time before. Applicant received some college 
credits. He served in the United States Army for five years, and he received an 
Honorable Discharge. He reenlisted in 2007, and served for an additional five years, 
until 2013, when he was medically separated. He also received another Honorable 
Discharge. Applicant is employed by a Government contractor as a Cable Technician, 
and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the 
defense sector. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists 23 allegations (1.a. through 1.w.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The debts that were incurred 
over many years total $46,616. Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations in his 
RSOR with the exceptions of 1.i. and 1.o., which he denied, 1.g. and 1.w., which 
Applicant claimed were debts that he paid off, and 1.j., which Applicant claimed he 
owed less than was alleged on the SOR. The total of undisputed delinquent debts is 
$40,213. All of the SOR debts were established by Exhibits 3, 4, and 5. Applicant has 
not proven that any of these debts has been resolved.  
 
The SOR delinquent debts included but were not limited to: two vehicles that 
were repossessed as recently as a few months before the hearing for failure to make 
payments, and several credit cards and loans. Applicant even purchased a timeshare in 
2015, which has become delinquent. When Applicant was asked why he bought a 
timeshare as recently as 2015, when he had so many overdue debts, he could give no 
reasonable answer. (Tr at 44-50.)    
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he began the process of filing for 
bankruptcy in March 2016, but it took him until August 2016, until he was able to save 
the amount of $1,480 to be able to actually file the bankruptcy. He was informed that by 
November 2016, his bankruptcy will be complete, and all of the SOR debts are included 
 
3 
 
on the bankruptcy filing and will be discharged in bankruptcy. He and his wife also took 
an online counseling course to help them manage their finances. (Tr at 30-33.)  
 
Applicant stated that his overdue indebtedness occurred because of his 
unemployment in 2013. However, he conceded that he had steady employment, either 
in the Army or with private companies from 1997 through 2013, but he still had a 
significant amount of delinquent debt during that period. He admitted that he was living 
beyond his means during the time he was working full time, which contributed to his 
indebtedness. Applicant also conceded that at the time of the hearing, he and his wife 
had not formulated any kind of a budget to help him with his finances. Applicant also 
conceded that in 2008, while he was in the Army, he received notice that he would lose 
his security clearance if he did not get his finances in order, but he still was unable to 
resolve all of his delinquent debt. (Tr at 43-44, Exhibit E.) 
 
While Applicant averred that he was tired of living in debt, he could not offer any 
significant evidence to establish that he would be more financially responsible in the 
future, including establishing a budget for his wife and him. (Tr at 49-52.)  
 
Applicant submitted a Notice of Bankruptcy Case Filing, showing that a 
bankruptcy was filed on Applicant's behalf on August 19, 2016. (Exhibit A.) He also 
submitted documents showing that some of his debts were current while he was serving 
in the Army. (Exhibits B, C, and D.) Finally, Applicant submitted three positive character 
letters from individuals who know Applicant in a professional capacity. (Exhibit E.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The record is clear that Applicant has significant debt incurred over many years 
to many different companies. This includes recently purchasing a timeshare in 2015, 
and having two of his vehicles be repossessed only a few months before the hearing. 
His filing a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy in 2016 that may have discharged his debt at that 
 
5 
 
time. Finally, he had his security clearance suspended in 2004, for failing to meet his 
financial responsivities. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
 One Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition under AG ¶ 20 is potentially 
applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 Some of Applicant's financial challenges occurred because of his periods of 
unemployment. However, I do not find that he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. While he has attempted to use the legal remedy of bankruptcy, it was 
only filed a very short time before the hearing. There is no way to know if that will 
resolve his overdue debts. At this point, there are no indications that Applicant's debts 
have been resolved or reduced, or even that he has ever contacted these creditors to 
attempt to develop a payment plan. Also, Applicant has failed to prepare a budget or in 
any other way establish that he will be more responsible in the future. Therefore, I do 
not find that this mitigating condition or any other mitigating condition is applicable in 
this case. Until Applicant can show financial responsibility and a legitimate attempt to 
resolve his delinquent debts, and be responsible with his future debts, the concern 
remains unmitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
6 
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. There are significant unresolved 
concerns about Applicant’s finances and judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns 
under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.-1.w.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
