 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 16-01890 
                 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant possessed child pornography between about 2012 and March 2014. 
Sexual behavior security concerns are not mitigated; however, personal conduct 
security concerns are mitigated as a duplication. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 8, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On October 
25, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. 
Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual behavior) and E 
(personal conduct). (HE 2) 
 
On November 10, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a 
hearing. On December 5, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On 
January 10, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On February 27, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing 
for March 13, 2017. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was conducted as scheduled. Applicant 
waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of his hearing. (Tr. 
12-13) 
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered seven exhibits; Applicant 
offered seven exhibits; and all proffered exhibits were admitted without objection. 
(Transcript (Tr.) 17-18, 27; GE 1-7; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-F) On March 21, 2017, 
DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact1  
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted with explanations the SOR allegations. (HE 
3) He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. (HE 3) His admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact. Additional factual findings follow.  
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old senior principal information security engineer and 
software developer employed by a defense contractor for the previous 14 years. (Tr. 5-
6, 27; GE 1) He occupies a sensitive security position where he is entrusted with 
significant responsibilities. (AE E) In 1999, he graduated from high school, and in 
December 2002, he received a bachelor’s degree. (Tr. 5-6) He has not served in the 
U.S. armed forces. (Tr. 6) In 2003, he married, and he has two stepchildren who are 
ages 19 and 23. (Tr. 7) He has held a top secret security clearance since 2006. (Tr. 27) 
Applicant committed several security violations over the years; however, all of them 
were reported to his facility security officer (FSO). (Tr. 24; AE A) No adverse inference 
is drawn from his security violations, and he is credited with disclosing the adverse 
information to his FSO. Applicant received excellent performance evaluations from his 
employer. (Tr. 25, 67-71; AE A; AE F) Applicant is proud of his contributions to his 
employer and national security. (Tr. 25-26) There is no evidence of abuse of alcohol or 
use of illegal drugs. (GE 1)     
 
Sexual Behavior and Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant suffered from depression from age 10 or 11. (Tr. 22; AE A) His 
pornography compulsion started around age 13. (Tr. 22; AE A) Over the years, he 
hoarded hundreds of gigabytes of pornography. (Tr. 22; AE A) His urge to view 
                                            
1 Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
pornography ebbed and flowed as he went through “binge and purge episodes.” (Tr. 22) 
During his binges, he would view pornography for up to six hours at a setting. (Tr. 30) 
 
In 2012, Applicant was prescribed drugs to treat his depression. (Tr. 22; AE E) 
Beginning in 2012, he began to be attracted to 14-year-old and older girls. (Tr. 29) From 
2012 to January 2014, he downloaded child pornography from the Internet. (Tr. 22-23) 
He viewed images of underage girls performing sex acts on adults. (Tr. 31) Some of the 
children in the images appeared to be as young as 12 years old. (Tr. 31) When he 
viewed the pictures, he masturbated. (Tr. 31-33) Approximately once every six months, 
he opened videos of girls ranging from age 8 to 18 engaging in sexual acts with adult 
males. (Tr. 32) He estimated the ages of the girls and women based on their signs of 
puberty and maturation. (Tr. 32) He had approximately 1,000 images and 100 videos of 
child pornography on his personal computer. (Tr. 33-34; AE C) He was attracted to the 
innocence of the children in the child pornography. (Tr. 39) He hoarded child 
pornography. (Tr. 34) He denied that he was sexually interested in children. (Tr. 59, 
101) He ended his possession of child pornography in March 2014. (Tr. 23, 36) After 
March 2014, he limited his compulsion to adult pornography. (Tr. 23) He has never 
distributed child pornography. (AE C) 
 
In March 2014, Applicant took a polygraph examination conducted by another 
government agency (AGA), and he described his “pornography compulsion.” (Tr. 23, 27; 
GE 2-6) Shortly after his AGA polygraph, he ended his viewing and possession of child 
pornography. (Tr. 36-37) He continued to have adult pornography compulsions; 
however, he was able to refrain from viewing child pornography. (Tr. 37-38) After March 
2014, his compulsions are less frequent and shorter in duration depending on the 
medications he takes for depression. (Tr. 38, 49-50; AE E) His pornography 
compulsions have been dramatically reduced through ongoing therapy over the 
previous two years. (Tr. 45-52; AE C) His depression and suicidal ideation have been 
greatly reduced in the past year. (Tr. 52) 
 
Applicant received therapy and treatment from a psychiatrist. (Tr. 24; AE C) He 
disclosed his pornography compulsion and viewing of child pornography to his therapist. 
(Tr. 44) Applicant’s therapist believes his risk of returning to child pornography is very 
low. (Tr. 72) Applicant’s therapy sessions and psychometric testing results supported 
the conclusion that reoffending is unlikely. (Tr. 72-95; AE D) Applicant is a truthful and 
responsible patient who has made significant progress in controlling his pornography 
compulsion. (Tr. 75-77; AE C) His therapist opined that Applicant was trustworthy, did 
not have pedophilic interests, and should continue to have access to classified material. 
(Tr. 78, 98; AE D) 
 
Applicant disclosed his pornography compulsion to his spouse and employer; 
however, he did not disclose his viewing and possession of child pornography to his 
spouse or to his employer. (Tr. 37, 41; GE 5) His spouse is supportive of his efforts and 
therapy to control his pornography compulsion. He acknowledged the “strong stigma 
attached” to child pornography and the strain disclosure would cause in his relationships 
with his coworkers. (Tr. 42)  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant was aware that possession of child pornography is a federal crime. (Tr. 
54) Possession of child pornography is also illegal under the state law where Applicant 
resides. (Tr. 100) Applicant got rid of his child pornography the night after the polygraph 
where he admitted his involvement with child pornography. (Tr. 55; AE C) He never 
considered going to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to inform them he was 
possessing or had possessed child pornography. (Tr. 56) 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision 
on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Sexual Behavior 
 
  AG ¶ 12 describes the security concern pertaining to sexual behavior: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
   
  AG ¶ 13 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted;  
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder;  
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior that . . . reflects lack of discretion or judgment. 
 
  The record established that Applicant viewed and possessed about 1,000 images 
of child pornography. Possession of child pornography is a federal and state crime. 
Public disclosure of his possession of child pornography would damage his reputation 
and cause him to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress. The record 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
establishes AG ¶¶ 13(a), 13(c), and 13(d). The record does not establish AG ¶ 13(b) 
because Applicant was able to stop his viewing and possession of child pornography in 
March 2014.   
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
  AG ¶ 14 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply; however, Applicant presented some 
important mitigating information. Applicant received therapy and counseling and his 
spouse is supportive of his efforts to refrain from viewing pornography. His therapist 
believes his risk of returning to child pornography is very low. His therapy sessions and 
psychometric testing results supported the conclusion that reoffending is unlikely. His 
therapist believes Applicant is a truthful and responsible patient who has made 
significant progress in controlling his pornography compulsion. His therapist opined that 
Applicant was trustworthy, did not have pedophilic interests, and should continue to 
have access to classified material. His viewing of pornography is private and discrete. 
Applicant disclosed his viewing of child pornography to AGA, his psychiatrist, his 
therapist, and DoD security officials.   
  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
I am mindful that “[a]s a general principle, the First Amendment bars the 
government from dictating what we see or read or speak or hear. The freedom of 
speech has its limits; it does not embrace certain categories of speech, including 
defamation, incitement, obscenity, and pornography produced with real children.” 
Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 535 U.S. 234, 246-47 (2002).  Pornography depicting 
actual children can be proscribed whether or not the images are obscene because of 
the State’s interest in protecting the children exploited by the production process. New 
York v. Ferber, 458 U.S. 747, 758, 761 (1982). “[W]here the speech is neither obscene 
nor the product of sexual abuse, it does not fall outside the protection of the First 
Amendment. See id. at 764-765 (‘The distribution of descriptions or other depictions of 
sexual conduct, not otherwise obscene, which do not involve live performance or 
photographic or other visual reproduction of live performances, retains First Amendment 
protection’).” Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 421.  
 
  Applicant’s private viewing of adult pornography on a personal computer or other 
privately owned media, and masturbation in private are protected conduct under the 
First Amendment and the liberty interest of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. See Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 
(2003)(discussing right to engage in private, consensual sexual behavior); United States 
v. Playboy Entertainment Group, Inc., 529 U.S. 803 (2000) (discussing adult 
pornography and First Amendment). His sexual conduct or behavior involving adult 
pornography in the privacy of his home is not a basis for coercion or duress, and it does 
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
  Applicant viewed or possessed about 1,000 images of child pornography from 
2012 through March 2014. His masturbation on numerous occasions when considering 
children engaged in sexual activity raises the concern that his compulsion was strong, 
and he will revert to viewing child pornography. His history of involvement with child 
pornography “creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress” because 
such as conduct affects his “personal, professional, or community standing.” See AG ¶¶ 
13(c), 14(c), and 16(e). He has only refrained from viewing and possessing child 
pornography for about three years. More time without involvement with child 
pornography is necessary. Sexual behavior security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's 
time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
  
The SOR cross-alleges under the personal conduct guideline the same conduct 
alleged under the sexual behavior guideline. His viewing and possession of about 1,000 
images of child pornography under Guideline D is sufficient to warrant revocation of his 
security clearance without incorporating or applying Guideline E. The concerns under 
Guidelines D and E address identical issues involving judgment, trustworthiness, and 
reliability. All personal conduct security concerns described in the SOR are directly 
related to his viewing and possession of child pornography. Personal conduct security 
concerns are established; however, as alleged in the SOR Guideline E concerns 
constitute an unwarranted duplication of the concerns under Guideline D, and 
accordingly are found for Applicant. 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines D, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old senior principal information security engineer and 
software developer employed by a defense contractor for the previous 14 years. He 
occupies a sensitive security position where he is entrusted with significant 
responsibilities. In December 2002, he received a bachelor’s degree. Applicant received 
excellent performance evaluations from his employer, and he made important 
contributions to his company. Applicant is proud of his contributions to his employer and 
national security. There is no evidence of abuse of alcohol or use of illegal drugs.   
 
Although Applicant’s spouse is unaware of his child pornography possession, 
she supports his rehabilitation from his pornography compulsion. He received therapy, 
and his episodes of pornography compulsions are dramatically reduced after March 
2014. His therapist believes his risk of returning to child pornography is very low. His 
therapy sessions and psychometric testing results support the conclusion that 
reoffending is unlikely. His therapist believes Applicant is a truthful and responsible 
patient who has made significant progress in controlling his pornography compulsion. 
His therapist opined that Applicant was trustworthy, did not have pedophilic interests, 
and should continue to have access to classified material.    
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant committed serious criminal offenses. He viewed and possessed 
about 1,000 child pornography images from 2012 to March 2014. His criminal sexual 
conduct is relatively recent. There are unresolved questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. More time without criminal 
sexual behavior is necessary to fully mitigate security concerns. 
  
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude personal conduct security 
concerns are mitigated as a duplication; however, sexual behavior security concerns 
are not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to 
classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT (Duplication) 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant (Duplication) 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
