KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: As best we can discern, Applicant is challenging the Judge’s conclusions that he
falsified his SCA by failing to disclose he was fired from a job in 2011 and had reportable
delinquent debts.  The SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified his SCA.  From our review of
the record, the Judge’s findings about Applicant falsifying his SCA were based on substantial
evidence or constituted  reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the record.  A Judge
may consider conduct not alleged for purposes such as evaluating an applicant’s evidence in
mitigation, assessing credibility, or applying the whole-person concept.  We find no basis for
concluding the Judge considered non-alleged conduct in an inappropriate manner. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-06431.a1
DATE: 03/07/2019
DATE: March 7, 2019
In Re:
----------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-06431
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 19, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  On January 10, 2018, the SOR
was amended by withdrawing some Guideline F allegations and adding Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) allegations. Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 24, 2018, after the hearing,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Caroline E. Heintzelman
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant, who is 57 year old, has worked off and on for defense contractors since the early
1990s.  He has married twice and has three children.  In 2011, he was fired from a company for
improperly charging about 530 hours of work to Government contracts.  Although he received
training regarding timecard accounting, he claims he did not know he improperly charged hours to
the Government.  He contends that he kept personal time records and only failed to account for 60
hours.   Due to his conduct, he was barred from working on Executive Branch contracts from May
2012 to March 2015.  He was given an opportunity to present evidence challenging the debarment,
but did not provide matters in opposition.
In February 2012, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) at another
company in which he did not disclose his prior employment termination.  He indicated the he left
that job due to downsizing.  He also failed to disclose that he had two debts over 120 days
delinquent and had a vehicle recently repossessed.  While he testified that an agency hired to help
him complete the SCA failed to disclose negative information in that form, he also acknowledged
he knew the information was not truthful when he signed it.  
At the time of the hearing, Applicant had 14 delinquent debts totaling about $42,000.  With
the exception of three debts, he admitted each of them.  He claims he paid about $1,000 toward some
to the debts, but provided no proof of the payments.  His recent credit reports reflect two new
delinquent debts totaling over $800.  He and his wife earn about $227,000 annually.  Applicant
“blames his financial struggles on his unexpected unemployment in 2011.”  Decision at 3.  Since
then, he experienced periods of unemployment, and he and his wife maintained separate households.
In 2014, he purchased one vehicle and leased another that resulted in monthly payments of almost
$1,600. 
When his first marriage ended in divorce, Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which
included credit card debt and the balance owed on a repossessed vehicle.   A 2004 JPAS entry
reflected Applicant misused a company credit card by making personal purchases totaling over
$4,500.  He testified he only charged $200 and was unaware he could not use the card for personal
2
purchases.  At the time of the hearing, he had not filed his 2017 Federal and state tax returns and
owed the IRS about $50,000 in past-due taxes for 2011-2016.  He has been making monthly
payments to the IRS of $690 since 2017.   
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant provided no proof of payments to resolve his delinquent debts.  His periods of
unemployment were not shown to be circumstances beyond his control.  His financial problems
reflect poor self-control, lack of judgment, and unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations.
Applicant admitted the Guideline E allegations, but disputed the number of hours he
improperly charged to the Government.  He did not contest his 2012 debarment.  He provided false
information in his 2012 SCA.  His dishonest behavior is not infrequent.  At the hearing, he
minimized his behavior and failed to accept responsibility for his actions.  
Discussion
Applicant’s appeal brief contains documents and assertions that are not included in the
record.  The Appeal Board is prohibited from considering new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶
E3.1.29. 
As best we can discern, Applicant is challenging the Judge’s conclusions that he falsified his
SCA by failing to disclose he was fired from a job in 2011 and had reportable delinquent debts.  The
SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified his SCA.  From our review of the record, the Judge’s
findings about Applicant falsifying his SCA were based on substantial evidence or constituted 
reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at
3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).  A Judge may consider conduct not alleged for purposes such as
evaluating an applicant’s evidence in mitigation, assessing credibility, or applying the whole-person
concept.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-07369 at 3(App. Bd. Aug. 16, 2017).  We find no basis for
concluding the Judge considered non-alleged conduct in an inappropriate manner.   
Applicant further contends the Judge erred in concluding his periods of unemployment were
not conditions beyond his control.  In doing so, he states, “It is because, after the termination in
2012, my employment has been very restricted and very unstable, and unemployment occurred very
often due to my clearance status.”  Appeal Brief at 8.  Since Applicant’s periods of unemployment
can be traced back to his wrongful conduct, we find no basis to disturb the Judge’s challenged
conclusion. 
Applicant makes a number of other arguments that are, in essence, a challenge to the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence.  For example, he contends that the number of hours he improperly charged
the Government was significantly inflated, that a number of years have passed since that incident
happened, that his unexpected firing caused his financial problems, and that he is in the process of
resolving his tax problems.  Additionally, he challenges the Judge’s conclusion that he minimized
his behavior and failed to fully accept responsibility.  These arguments, however, are insufficient
3
to show the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-00650 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2016).   
Finally, Applicant argues, if he is unable to work, he cannot resolve his debts.  But, it is well
established that the adverse impact that an unfavorable decision may have on an applicant is not a
relevant or material consideration in evaluating an applicant’s security eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-04202 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 24, 2015).   
Applicant has not established that the Judge committed any harmful errors.  The Judge
examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor  of the national
security.”
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
