1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
----------------- ) ISCR Case No. 17-00726 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
 For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
     For Applicant: Troy Nussbaum 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On June 21, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).1 In a response notarized on June 4, 2018, he admitted all but one of 
the allegations. He also requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. I was assigned the case on February 22, 2018. A 
hearing originally scheduled for May 9, 2018, was cancelled to give Applicant more time 
to retain an attorney. A May 10, 2918, notice, setting the hearing for June 11, 2018 was 
issued. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
The Government offered eight documents, accepted into the record as exhibits 
(Exs. 1-8). Exs. 1-5 and 7-8 were accepted without objection while Ex. 6 was accepted 
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
03/15/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
over objection.2 (Tr. 11-17) Applicant gave testimony, introduced a live witness, and 
proffered nine exhibits, accepted without objection as Exs. A-I. The record was held 
open through July 2, 2018, for submission of additional items; this was extended to July 
23, 2018, at Applicant’s request. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 20, 2018. 
Three character references and a page of argument were timely received and accepted 
into the record as Exs. J-M without objection. The record was then closed on July 23, 
2018. Based on the testimony, materials, and record as a whole, I find Applicant failed 
to mitigate personal conduct security concerns. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old senior professional engineer who has worked for the 
same employer for four years. He has earned a bachelor’s degree and is presently 
working on a master’s degree. Applicant is married with two minor children.  Although 
born in the United States, Applicant’s family is from a foreign country, where he spent 
many years in school.3 
 
 After five years of diligent study at university in the United States, Applicant 
thought he had graduated in the spring of 2000. He had timely completed his final 
semester’s coursework and received final grades for his courses. He applied and was 
permitted to participate in spring commencement exercises. He rented his cap and 
gown, and received his graduation token or pendant when his name was called. Shortly 
thereafter, he began taking graduate courses for about a semester before he decided to 
start working full time.4 In 2001, he completed a security clearance application indicating 
he had received a bachelor’s degree in May 2000. 
 
In 2003, Applicant again applied to take graduate courses. This time, he was told 
he could not enroll in graduate courses because he did not have a bachelor’s degree. 
For years, he tried to reconcile this confusion, which appeared to be related to money 
owed the university. It appears between 2000 and 2003, whatever issues barring his 
unconditional graduation that existed had become a major obstacle.  
 
Meanwhile, in 2003, Applicant married his pregnant girlfriend, the couple had a 
child, his wife went back to school, and Applicant needed to find a way to support his 
family. Specifically, “he needed to be able to earn the amount he should have been 
entitled to for finishing his bachelor’s and master’s degree which he would’ve finished at 
the time had he not been denied the bachelor’s degree.” (Tr. 19)  
                                                          
2 Regarding the objections to Ex. 6, it was taken into evidence but is accordingly given appropriate weight 
under the circumstances. It is also noted that Applicant volunteered portions of the exhibit during his 
direct testimony. 
 
3 This fact is potentially relevant given any cultural or linguistic issues that may have arisen with regard to 
Guideline E. However, it is also noted that his several siblings are all graduates of U.S. universities. 
 
4 SOR allegation 1.a. Applicant was not enrolled in the graduate program, but the school permitted 
students to take two or three course offerings before applying for acceptance into the program. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
In 2006, Applicant falsified multiple documents from the university indicating he 
had both a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree in engineering.5 (Tr. 46, 70) He 
then used those documents to apply for a job, which was later offered and accepted.6 In 
2009, Applicant’s falsity was caught during a government background investigation.7 
Applicant confessed the truth to both his employer and the government. Applicant’s 
manager expressed his displeasure at these developments, noting he needed a degree 
to continue with the company. The two discussed the time Applicant should resign and 
finish his degree. (Tr. 19) There is no documentary evidence reflecting a formal letter of 
resignation or notice. He did not want to attend an up-coming meeting where he would 
now be viewed as only a high school graduate. A week later, however, he received a 
certified letter reflecting that upper management had made the decision to terminate 
him. Apparently, word of this agreement was not well-spread. Around that time, a co-
worker wrote an email to another colleague noting that Applicant had simply 
“disappeared” over a week prior and was no longer working at the company. (Ex. D) 
 
After he completed the bachelor’s degree, Applicant knew he wanted to obtain a 
graduate degree from the same institution. He updated his resume to indicate a 
master’s degree with an anticipated graduation date in the future. He was not then 
enrolled in the master’s program. That section of the resume, submitted to his next 
employer in October 2006, stated: 
 
EDUCATION: MS (Engineering; University; City) May 2003 
     BS (Engineering; University; City) May 20008 
 
In 2014, Applicant submitted a resume to his then-prospective employer that stated: 9 
 
           EDUCATION 
                                                         (University; City) 
         Master of Science in Electrical Engineering 
               Expected May 2018 
      Concentration in Communications and Signal Processing 
 
 
                                                          
5 When asked why he also falsified having earned a master’s degree, Applicant stated: “I would have 
been done with a master’s [degree] by that time had things not gone the way they did at [his 
undergraduate school] the first time. And I spoke to the hiring manager . . . and I realized having a 
master’s degree would make [my] case a lot better.” (Tr. 48) 
 
6 SOR allegation 1.b. These included falsified academic transcripts, resume, and application. 
 
7 Compare Ex. 6 at 3, Applicant noted that he “misled the [company] into believing I had a college degree 
from [ ] This came to light during my 2008 (5 year) investigation to renew my clearance.” (emphasis 
added) 
 
8 Ex. 3. 
 
9 Ex. 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
        (University; City) 
       Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering 
              May 2013 
 
In fact, at the time, Applicant was not enrolled in a master’s program at that university.10 
 
Applicant testified that he did not mean his resume wording to imply he was 
actually enrolled in a master’s program at that university. (Tr. 53) He was told by a 
“professional” that this was but a way to let prospective employers “know that you intend 
to get a master’s degree or you’re taking graduate level course [sic] and you intend to 
get a master’s degree.” (Tr. 53) He was told that the wording “let’s them know you don’t 
have a degree but you have started the process.” (Tr. 54) It is unclear how not having 
first been enrolled in the program started the process of earning a graduate degree. 
Later, Applicant told the hiring partner that he was not yet in the master’s degree 
program. (Ex. B) Ultimately, Applicant was offered his present position, where he has 
been a well-regarded employee. 
 
In July 2014, Applicant certified a security clearance application (SCA) in which 
he stated he left his employer in 2009 by mutual agreement, rather than by unilateral 
termination by upper management.11 Applicant maintains that he believes the facts 
reflect that the agreement between himself and his manager show his departure was 
meant to be as they had contemplated: that he would leave the office and return to 
school. A week later, he received the certified letter from higher management that he 
was terminated for violating company policy. No formal charges were filed against him. 
(Tr. 61) He feels it is unfair that the employer should be able to dictate the terms of his 
departure from their company after he and his immediate manager had already 
discussed the issue. (Tr. 62) 
 
During a personal subject interview in May 2015, Applicant stated that he was 
only asked whether he had a college degree after he was hired in 2006. The interviewer 
never mentioned the falsified application, academic transcript, and resume included in 
his application submission documents.12 Applicant points to Ex. E to show the 
interviewer only made notes regarding Applicant’s comments regarding the fact he did 
not have the degree. Because the interviewer’s notes do not inquire about the falsified 
application, transcript, and resume, Applicant believes he did his duty and the 
interviewer failed to ask about those documents. He takes no responsibility for 
neglecting to disclose the falsifications he omitted or obscured. In that same interview, 
Applicant failed to disclose that he was terminated by management, not simply left by 
                                                          
10 SOR allegation 1.c. Applicant is still working on this master’s degree at this time.  
 
11 SOR allegation 1.d. In that application, Applicant did note that he left under allegations of misconduct. 
 
12 SOR allegation 1.e. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
mutual agreement.13 He did so because he still does not view management’s letter to 
be the formal or official action for his departure or for violating company policy. 
 
Aside from issues related to personal conduct, three delinquent debts are noted 
in the SOR (2.a-2.c). They are student loans amounting to approximately $41,200. At 
some point after the summer of 2000, Applicant got a job that would enable him to make 
payments on his student loans. He then started making payments on them after they 
were no longer in deferment status. When subject to a layoff in December 2001, 
Applicant became delinquent on the loans and they went back into deferment. When 
again employed, he resumed payments until June 2009, when he again defaulted on 
the loans after leaving a job. (Tr. 32) He then returned to school later that year while 
unemployed, and did so without taking any additional loans.  
 
The family relied on Applicant’s wife’s income and Applicant’s retirement account 
and investments, which were liquidated. Applicant attributes his acquisition of the 
delinquent debts to financial stress experienced during this nearly five-year time span 
studying and not working. He has since had one loan put into rehabilitation and the 
other two consolidated with that loan. Therefore, he is now dealing with only one lender. 
(Tr. 37) Applicant provided a payment history going back to May 2018. (Exs. F-G) The 
lender is now being paid $252.72 a month for his loan balance. The loans are now in 
timely repayment. (Exs. F-G)   
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision after a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility and will be 
resolved in favor of the national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only 
those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the record evidence. 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR. Under the Directive, an applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
                                                          
13 SOR allegation 1.f. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in those to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Decisions are in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying. Here, Applicant denied making certain falsifications or strategic omissions 
on his SCAs, on job application materials, and during a May 2015 personal subject 
interview. If Applicant’s answers and materials were intentionally false or meant to 
mislead or misrepresent, the following disqualifying conditions could apply:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
AG ¶ 16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental 
health professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a 
national security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; and 
 
 AG ¶ 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, or duress by a foreign 
intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct includes: (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . .  
 
 
 
 
7 
 I find that several of the untrue, inconsistent, or omitted facts were intentionally 
put forth to set Applicant in a better light. The first issue arose on Applicant’s 2001 SCA, 
in which he wrote he had graduated from a particular university with a bachelor’s degree 
in May 2000. Applicant believed he had graduated at that ceremony because he had 
completed his coursework, was given permission to attend commencement exercises, 
walked the stage in cap and gown, and was given a token of some sort. Then 
unbeknownst to him was the fact he apparently had an outstanding financial issue that 
had to be addressed before he could formally be considered a graduate.  
 
 Apparently, Applicant was unaware that occasions arise when one is given the 
opportunity to go through the motions of graduation with one’s peers before all 
graduation criteria have been met, such as when there is an unpaid balance, health 
issue, or missing academic credit. Apparently, Applicant failed to cross his “t”s and dot 
his “i”s with this regard in the intervening year before he completed the SCA. On the 
other hand, it is not implausible that this situation was the result of naiveté. (SOR 1.a) 
Applicant fully admits, however, that he submitted a falsified application package to a 
prospective employer in 2006, a package including a falsified application, falsified 
academic transcript, and a false and misleading resume. (SOR 1.b) 
 
 As part of an application package for a job in 2014, Applicant detailed under 
“EDUCATION,” the name and city of a university, “Master of Science in Electrical 
Engineering, Expected May 2018, Concentration in Communications and Signal 
Processing. (SOR 1.c) Applicant dismisses this entry as merely a showing of his 
intention to pursue that degree, a tip-off to the prospective employer that it was his 
immediate aim. He testified a professional gave him this explanation.  
 
I disagree, however, as to how that advice was meant or implemented. Inclusion 
of an expected or anticipated graduation date for a future degree is predicated not on a 
desire or hope, but on significant steps – ie. enrollment in the program and, perhaps, 
some completed coursework. Here, Applicant was not enrolled in the master’s program 
at that particular university. There is no documentary evidence reflecting that his 
enrollment had been initiated or was guaranteed. While Applicant was no doubt firm in 
his commitment to seek that degree, obstacles to its fruition were still potentially ahead 
at that point. Given the conviction of his testimony on this point, however, I find he relied 
on and misunderstood professional advice.  
 
 On his July 2014 SCA, Applicant wrote that he left a job in 2009 by mutual 
agreement. (SOR 1.d) He maintains that is the fact, and stresses it despite other facts 
surrounding his departure. He needed a bachelor’s degree to maintain the job. He 
discussed his lack of a degree with immediate management and it was decided that he 
would resign and pursue his bachelor’s degree. Then, apparently, he disappeared; co-
worker’s were concerned at his disappearance. Applicant was embarrassed about 
potentially attending a meeting where it could be disclosed he only had a high school 
diploma. A week after meeting with his manager, he received a certified letter from 
upper management that he was terminated for violating company policy.  
 
 
 
 
8 
Applicant thinks it is unfair a company can dictate how his departure is 
characterized. There is no documentary evidence, however, showing that he formally 
disputed or appealed this designation with human resources or a higher manager. 
Instead, he chose to move on accepting only his version of the facts. To do so was not 
only at his own peril, but it shows a lack of acceptance to the facts here.  
 
 Finally, in a personal interview from May 2015, Applicant discussed the truth 
about his alleged bachelor’s degree graduation date, but failed to disclose the fact he 
had also submitted to that employer falsified application materials, a falsified academic 
transcript, and a falsified resume. (SOR 1.d) Applicant points to the investigator’s notes 
and shows that there is no query by the investigator concerning those admittedly 
falsified documents. Applicant misses the point. In concealing the information, the 
investigator had no basis upon which to pose questions regarding those documents. 
This process demands honesty and candor; it relies on an applicant being forthcoming. 
Here, Applicant failed to meet those standards, and superior judgment should have told 
him these were not insignificant or irrelevant facts. Moreover, in that same interview, 
Applicant again failed to discuss his termination in 2009 by upper management for a 
policy violation, instead continuing to adhere to his original position that the first action – 
discussion with his immediate manager – trumped the official action taken by the 
company’s hierarchy after he ceased reporting for work. (1.e)   
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government offered documentary evidence reflecting that Applicant 
has three delinquent student loans. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do so; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Four conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
                    The student loans at issue have been in and out of deferment on more than one 
occasion as various factors interrupted Applicant’s education. The credit reports in 
evidence were apparently pulled during a period when Applicant was technically 
delinquent on those accounts. It is hard to attribute their delinquency to conditions 
beyond Applicant’s control if he truly left employment simply to return to school full time; 
if he was terminated from his job, AG ¶ 20(b) could apply in part, although he presented 
deficient evidence showing he acted responsibly during that period.  
 
                    Moreover, there is no documentary evidence that Applicant tried to address these 
debts before the issuance of the SOR in June 2017. Indeed, the payment history 
submitted only goes back to May 2018. Given the ultimate disposition of this case, 
however, and the fact these student loans are now in repayment, I find AG ¶ 20(b) and 
AG ¶ 20(d) both apply in part. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the her  
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those 
factors. I am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to 
grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old senior professional engineer who has worked for the 
same employer for four years. He has earned a bachelor’s degree and is presently 
working on a master’s degree. Married, Applicant has two minor children. Over the past 
years, Applicant has been in and out of college. As a result, his student loans have 
been in and out of deferment, rehabilitation, and in repayment. Last year, he had his 
three student loans consolidated. They are now in timely repayment. 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
What is most troublesome with Applicant’s case is the matter of various 
inaccuracies or omissions related to SCAs, interviews, and job application. The most 
worrisome is the 2006 production of falsified student academic transcripts, an incorrect 
and misleading resume, and falsified application (1.b). This admitted and obviously 
purposeful maneuver casts a pale on Applicant’s efforts to promote himself in a 
favorable light. However, I do find it conceivable that two of the allegations could be 
based on semantics or simple misunderstanding (1.a and 1.c).  
 
The falsifications alleged at 1.d-1.f, however, seem to fall into the same category 
as the one at 1.b. Indeed, it seems as if Applicant is either truly unaware of how the 
arguments here stack up, or simply prefers to rely on an argument more beneficial to his 
cause. While that is his choice, it fails to explain away the alternative facts offered or the 
security concerns they raise. Taking these factors together, I find that Applicant 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns, but failed to mitigate personal 
conduct security concerns.  
   
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.d-f:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a-2.c:   For Applicant 
   
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge 
