KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline H; Guideline J
DIGEST: In the case before us, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had not met his burden of
persuasion is sustainable. An applicant who uses marijuana after having been placed on notice of
its security significance, such as using after having completed a clearance application, may be
lacking in the qualities expected of those with access to national secrets. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 17-03191.a1
DATE: 03/26/2019
DATE: March 26, 2019
In Re:
--------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-03191
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On 
November 6, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse),
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On
December 17, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Roger C. Wesley denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact were
based upon substantial evidence and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline E are not at issue in this appeal. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant’s SOR alleged numerous instances of illegal drug use, criminal conduct, and
professional difficulties (a performance plan due to illegal drug use).  The allegations that the Judge
found against Applicant consist of the following: Under Guideline H, Applicant used marijuana with
varying frequency from about 1974 until about 2016, and he sold and purchased marijuana from
about 1981 until about 1985.  Applicant’s most recent uses of marijuana occurred in 2016, during
which time he held a security clearance.  Regarding Guideline J, Applicant was arrested, charged,
and/or convicted of criminal offenses regarding his drug involvement, such as possession of
marijuana and drug paraphernalia; felony possession and distribution of marijuana; and burglary and
possession of marijuana.  In addition, Applicant’s instances of drug misuse were cross alleged under
Guideline J.  
Because of his 2016 arrest for possession of illegal drugs and drug paraphernalia, Applicant’s
employer placed him on a performance plan.  He was required to seek substance abuse counseling,
maintain a drug-free lifestyle, and pass random drug tests.  Applicant’s drug tests yielded negative
results.  He has not used marijuana since September 2016, and he has disassociated himself from
persons who use illegal drugs.
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for the quality of his duty performance.  He is
considered to be a strong worker who is thoughtful and trustworthy.  He provided vital support to
modernizing a company project, enabling his employer to stay abreast of the newest technologies
and protocols.
The Judge’s Analysis
As noted above, the Judge resolved many of the allegations in Applicant’s favor, principally
non-drug criminal conduct that he found to have been mitigated by the passage of time.  However,
he entered adverse findings regarding Applicant’s use and possession of marijuana and for his drug-
related criminal conduct.  He noted evidence that Applicant had resumed marijuana use in 2016 after
2
a nearly 20-year period of abstinence.  Because of this, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s much
briefer period of abstinence since 2016 is not sufficient to show that his security concerns have been
resolved through attenuation.  He noted that several of Applicant’s drug-related criminal infractions
were old, but he concluded that they form part of a pattern of misconduct that extends to 2016, when
Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
Discussion
Applicant’s brief includes matters from outside the record, which we cannot consider.
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant argues that the Judge’s findings contained errors, for example in the
nature and disposition of several of his criminal charges.  We have examined the Judge’s findings
in light of the record.  We conclude that the Judge’s material findings of security concern are based
upon substantial evidence or constitute reasonable conclusions that could be drawn from the
evidence.  Many of the Judge’s findings were based on the answers Applicant provided to his
interviewer and on his testimony at the hearing.  Applicant has cited to no error in the Judge’s
findings that likely affected the outcome of the case. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 16-02640 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jul. 2, 2018).
Applicant contends that the processing of his case took too long.  He argues that if he were
truly a security risk his adjudication would have been accomplished more expeditiously.  We have
no authority to rule on the manner in which officials conduct clearance investigations and
adjudications.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04186 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 28, 2015).  Applicant has 
not demonstrated that the time it took to process his case resulted in identifiable prejudice to him.
The balance of Applicant’s brief constitutes a challenge to the manner in which the Judge
weighed the evidence in mitigation.  He argues that he has overcome the concerns raised in the SOR
and that “I am a reasonable person and I deserve this mitigation.”  Appeal Brief at 4.  He argues that
some of the concerns raised under Guideline J are redundant with those under Guideline H.  He also
contends that the Judge did not consider his favorable evidence, such as his character references.
The Supreme Court has held that no one has a right to a security clearance.  Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  In fact, there is a strong presumption against the grant
or maintenance of a security clearance.  See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir.
1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the Government presents evidence of security
concern, the applicant assumes responsibility for demonstrating mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
In the case before us, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had not met his burden of persuasion
is sustainable. An applicant who uses marijuana after having been placed on notice of its security
significance, such as using after having completed a clearance application, may be lacking in the
qualities expected of those with access to national secrets.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-04198 at
2 (App. Bd. Jan. 15, 2019). Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered
all of the evidence in the record, nor has he shown that he Judge weighed the evidence in a manner
that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Id.  Concerning Applicant’s redundancy argument,
the Government can allege the same conduct under different Guidelines and weigh the evidence
differently.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-01281 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2014).         
3
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record. “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, supra.  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                    
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
