1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 17-03548 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
 For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On December 22, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a response 
notarized on January 22, 2018, Applicant admitted all allegations and requested a 
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. 
I was assigned the case on July 20, 2018.  
On September 5, 2018, a notice setting the hearing for October 2, 2018, was 
issued. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered three 
exhibits (Exs.), noted as Exs. 1-3, and Applicant presented 15 exhibits, marked as Exs. 
A-O. With no objections, all exhibits were accepted into the record. Applicant was
granted through October 19, 2019, to submit any additional materials. On October 18,
2019, a final file was offered by Applicant and admitted without objection as Ex. P. The
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
03/15/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
record was then closed. In the interim, the transcript (Tr.) was received on October 11, 
2019. Based on the testimony, materials, and record as a whole, I find Applicant failed 
to mitigate security concerns. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old configuration and data manager who has been in that 
particular position for two years, and with the same entity for 13 years. She receives 
positive appraisals annually and earns approximately $135,000 a year. She has 
supported the military in some capacity since she was about 18 years old, and earned 
an income since she was 13 years old. She earned a high school diploma and attended 
some college. Her husband recently began a job as a bus driver after being let go from 
a transit agency, where he earned about $55,000. He accepted that job, which pays  
$40,000 a year, after being unemployed from May 2018 to August 2018. The couple 
has a teenage son. Applicant is highly community-minded and devoted to this country. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began when her husband was subject to a 
corporate downsizing maneuver in October 2011, reducing their joint income by 
$55,000. He remained unemployed until December 2012, leaving the entire burden of 
marital bills, child-rearing, and mortgage on Applicant alone. Since that time, Applicant 
has received no monetary assistance from her husband, although he currently pays for 
their child’s private school tuition. Financially maintaining their family of three on her 
salary alone, currently amounting to about $135,000, has been “very hard.” (Tr. 25) She 
admits her financial situation is “a mess.” (Tr. 45). She recently started a part-time job to 
supplement her income. (Tr. 46) Applicant has received financial counseling. She 
concedes she did not act as quickly on her debts as she should have. (Tr. 45-46) 
 
 At issue in the SOR are 15 delinquent debts (1.a-1.o). The debt at 1.a is a 
mortgage past due in the amount of approximately $7,019. This situation has been 
rectified and the Applicant is now current on that account. (Ex. K; Tr. 26)  
 
The debts noted in the SOR at 1.b-1o consist primarily of credit card balances, 
amounting to about $81,000, plus the debts at 1.l (personal loan for $7,178) and 1.o 
(time share-related judgment for $995 on a share acquired in 2011). In the past, only a 
smattering of payments was ever applied to these debts. She acquired so much 
delinquent credit card debt because she expected her husband to contribute more to 
the family coffers, a dilemma dating back to 2008. (Tr. 27) At that point, she only had 
one credit card. Doing her best, working hard, and applying her bonuses, however, did 
not help. She relied increasingly on payday loans then credit cards. (Tr. 27, 35)  
 
 In September 2018, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, a 
solution she had hoped to avoid. (Ex. N) She had previously filed for bankruptcy around 
2004. (Tr. 32) Applicant recently submitted a proposed payment plan under which she 
would pay $100 a month for two months, then pay $500 per month for 58 months. At the 
time of the hearing, her proposal was pending approval. In the bankruptcy paperwork, at 
Schedule J, Applicant calculated her monthly net income. (Ex. N; Tr. 36-37) It resulted 
 
 
 
 
3 
in a negative net monthly remainder. She hopes to ameliorate this situation with a 
home-based part-time job and the completion of monthly payments on her car ($435). 
 
 After the hearing, Applicant provided documentary evidence that two payments 
of $100 were submitted to her bankruptcy trustee in October 2018, scheduled for 
deposit in October and November 2018, respectively. She provided a screen shot 
indicating the one check was posted in October 2018. It is unclear whether her 
proposed payment plan has been formally implemented by the bankruptcy court. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
necessarily include consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government offered documentary evidence reflecting that Applicant 
has numerous delinquent debts. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do so; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Four conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
There are multiple delinquent debts at issue, some dating back a decade. The 
rest appear to have been acquired as Applicant’s husband’s lack of financial 
contributions continued despite his status as employed. To meet the challenges posed 
by insufficient income, she tried to manage the debts and took a part-time job, but was 
 
 
 
 
5 
unsuccessful. This is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 20(b) with regard to her acquisition of 
delinquent debt.  
 
Applicant has received financial counseling, but the only tangible progress she 
has made is with regard to SOR allegation 1.a, the past-due sum on her mortgage 
(about $7,000). Meanwhile, nearly $90,000 in delinquent debt has been bundled into 
her Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition filed in September 2018, the month arrangements 
for this October 2018 hearing were being made. Applicant provided evidence that one 
check for $100 has been presented to the bankruptcy trustee. Otherwise, there is no 
documentary evidence establishing a record of consistent and meaningful payments on 
this bankruptcy action or any of the debts incorporated therein. At best, catching up on 
her mortgage, receiving financial counseling, and taking the first steps to seek 
protection under Chapter 13 bankruptcy raise AG ¶ 20(c) to a limited extent. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the her  
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those 
factors. I am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to 
grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old configuration and data specialist who has devoted her 
adult life to the military and working as a defense contractor. She is a lauded employee. 
Applicant is a loyal American and active within her community. She and her husband 
are raising their teenage child. For reasons yet unclear, Applicant’s husband ceased 
contributing to their family coffers a number of years ago, regardless of his employment 
status, except for providing for their child’s tuition. This shifted the family’s financial 
burden onto Applicant, not as a temporary situation, but as a permanent status. 
Applicant has tried hard to make ends on her notable salary through budgeting and 
part-time work, but the effort was futile and she relied increasingly on credit. She 
protracted filing for bankruptcy protection in hopes that an alternative could be found, 
but none appeared. 
 
Today, Applicant is poised to regain her financial footing with her current Chapter 
13 bankruptcy petition set to address the nearly $90,000 of delinquent debt. Her filing, 
however, was ill-timed in light of her hearing date. This process does not require an 
applicant to satisfy all her delinquent debts. It does, however, demand that one show 
they have implemented an appropriate scheme for addressing that debt, and 
documentation reflecting a meaningful and significant track record of timely payment. 
Here, insufficient time had passed to provide such documentation. Consequently, 
financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
   Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
           Subparagraphs 1.b-1.o:   Against Applicant 
                       
        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge 
 
