KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: Directive ¶ E3.1.20 permits the admission  at a DOHA proceeding of official records
or evidence compiled in the regular course of business, without an authenticating witness. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.19 provides that the Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE) serve as a guide in
DOHA proceedings.  FRE 803(6) permits the admission of records of regularly conducted
business activity.  A report that an employer is legally required to make is part of the employer’s
regular course of business.  Accordingly, under the facts of this case, a document that
Applicant’s former employer was required to submit by the provisions of the NISPOM relevant
to Applicant’s eligibility for access to national security information is an official record under ¶
E3.1.20.  It is also a business record under FRE 803(6).  Such evidence is admissible despite a
hearsay objection because it is considered inherently trustworthy.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-03446.a1
DATE: 03/05/2019
DATE: March 5, 2019
In Re:
---------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-03446
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Michael J. Harris, Esq.
Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On October
17, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On
November 1, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Robert E. Coacher denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred by admitting
hearsay; whether the Judge’s credibility determination was in error;  and whether the Judge’s overall
adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Government contractor since 2016.  Before that, he worked for
another contractor, resigning from that employment in April 2016.  While in the previous
contractor’s employ, Applicant was advised that he would be laid off.  He found other work within
the same company, which he performed until his resignation.  
In late March 2016, Applicant was called to a meeting with the company’s Human Resources
(HR) officer and with a representative of the corporate office.  He was questioned by the corporate
representative about nearly 500 hours that Applicant allegedly worked at night.  Applicant claimed
that he was given authority to work outside core hours, but he did not provide corroboration. 
Believing that he had no future with the company, Applicant resigned.
A letter from the company’s security manager stated that Applicant resigned in lieu of
termination as result of an internal investigation.  This investigation concluded that he had
mischarged his time during 2015 and 2016 for a total of nearly 500 hours.  This conclusion was
based upon a review of Applicant’s badge access records, witness interviews, and Applicant’s 2015
performance review.  
Applicant’s former supervisor stated that Applicant never attempted to manipulate the system
for personal gain.  His current supervisor described him as reliable, and performance appraisals from
his prior job show that he met expectations.
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant did not corroborate his claim that he had authority to work outside core hours. 
“His action of resigning from a position he held for 16 years immediately after being confronted by
HR about his time mischarging creates a reasonable inference that he did so to avoid termination for
cause.”  Decision at 5.   The Judge found Applicant’s denial of wrongdoing to be lacking credibility. 
2
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred by admitting Government Exhibit (GE) 2, the letter
referenced above that summarized the findings and conclusions of the company inquiry into his
alleged mischarging of hours.  He argues that admission of this document denied him the right to
confront witnesses against him, as set forth in Directive ¶ E3.1.22, which forbids admission of oral
or written statements adverse to an applicant unless there is an opportunity for cross examination. 
He also argues that the admission of this document was contrary to the Supreme Court’s holding in 
Greene v. McElroy, 360 U.S. 474 (1959).  We evaluate a Judge’s rulings on the admissibility of
evidence to see if they are arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-
05047 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 8, 2017).
As the Judge found, GE 2 is a letter from the facility security officer (FSO) of Applicant’s
previous employer.  It states that, in compliance with paragraph 1-302a of the National Industrial
Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM),1 it constitutes notice to the Defense Security
Service of Applicant’s resignation in lieu of termination for the reasons described by the Judge in
his findings.  This letter is unquestionably hearsay, and Applicant did not have an opportunity to
cross examination the FSO.  However, despite the broad language of ¶ E3.1.22 when read by itself,
hearsay is generally admissible in DOHA hearings.  The Directive does not grant a right of
confrontation greater than, or even coextensive with, that enjoyed by criminal defendants, in whose
cases out of court statements are often admitted under exceptions to the hearsay rule.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 11-12461 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 14, 2013).  Paragraph  E3.1.22 must be read in light
of the Directive as a whole and not in such a way that it would render other provisions therein a
nullity.  Id.  Therefore, ¶ E3.1.22 does not forbid the admission of hearsay evidence that is
admissible under other paragraphs of the Directive.  See, e g., ISCR Case No. 06-06496 at 4 (App.
Bd. Jun. 25, 2009). 
 
As Department Counsel argues in her Reply Brief, Directive ¶ E3.1.20 permits the admission 
at a DOHA proceeding of official records or evidence compiled in the regular course of business,
without an authenticating witness.  Additionally, Directive ¶ E3.1.19 provides that the Federal Rules
of Evidence (FRE) serve as a guide in DOHA proceedings.  FRE 803(6) permits the admission of
records of regularly conducted business activity.  A report that an employer is legally required to
make is part of the employer’s regular course of business.  See, e.g., Lewis v. Baker, 526 F.2d 470,
473-4 (2d Cir. 1975).  
Accordingly, under the facts of this case, a document that Applicant’s former employer was
required to submit by the provisions of the NISPOM relevant to Applicant’s eligibility for access
1DoD 5220.22-M, dated February 2006, ¶ 1-302a: “Adverse Information.  Contractors shall report adverse
information coming to their attention concerning any of their cleared employees.”  See also ¶ 1-300: “Contractors are
required to report certain events that . . . impact the status of an employees personnel security clearance[.]”
3
to national security information is an official record under ¶ E3.1.20.2  It is also a business record
under FRE 803(6).  Such evidence is admissible despite a hearsay objection because it is considered
inherently trustworthy.  The trustworthiness of GE 2 is enhanced by the extent to which it is
corroborated by Applicant’s admissions in GE 1, security clearance application (SCA), at 12.  In this
exhibit, Applicant stated that his employer questioned the time that he charged for work done and
that he decided it was in his best interest to resign.  
Concerning Greene v. McElroy, we concur with Department Counsel’s argument that in this
case the Supreme Court did not establish an absolute right to confrontation in a security clearance
adjudication.  Rather, it held that the procedures employed by the DoD in denying a clearance
without granting the applicant a right of confrontation had not been properly authorized either by
the President or by Congress.  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry, upon which the Directive is founded, corrects this legal infirmity.  All in all, we conclude
that the Judge’s decision to admit GE 2 was not arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  
Applicant challenges the Judge’s conclusion that his denials of wrongdoing were not
credible.  We are required to give deference to a Judge’s credibility determinations unless they are
contradicted by other evidence.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1; ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 6 (App. Bd.
Aug. 18, 2015).  In this case, the challenged conclusion is a reasonable interpretation of the record. 
GE 2 states that an inquiry conducted by his employer established that Applicant had overcharged
his hours.  An employer’s description or characterization of events underlying an adverse action are
entitled to at least some degree of deference.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00114 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep.
30, 2014).  As stated above, this document is corroborated by other evidence.  In addition to GE 1,
Applicant’s testimony at the hearing supports its credibility.  See Tr. at 31-34, in which he
acknowledged that company representatives accused him of overstating his hours, after which he
resigned from the company because he decided that he “didn’t see any future there afterwards.”  We
also note the Judge’s finding that Applicant did not corroborate his claim to have been authorized
to work outside his normal duty hours.  We find no reason to disturb the Judge’s credibility
determination.  
We are persuaded by Department Counsel’s argument that Applicant’s brief constitutes, in
large measure, a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  Such a disagreement, or
an ability to argue for an alternative interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to show that the
Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 17-02463 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 10, 2018).    
2The term “official records” in E3.1.20 is not defined.  Official records are not listed as an exception to the
hearsay rule in the FRE; however, public records are listed.  The term “public records” is defined, in part, as “[a] record
or statement of a public office if . . . it sets out . . . a matter observed while under a legal duty to report . . . .”  FRE
803(8).  We interpret “official records” to include writings authorized by law or regulation to be recorded or filed in a
public office, such as adverse information reports.  Compare, FRE 901(b)(7) and 902(4).  We also note the FRE shall
serve as a guide and the technical rules of evidence may be relaxed in security clearance proceedings.  Directive E3.1.19. 
Furthermore, the criminal penalty under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 for knowingly and willfully providing false documents to the
U.S. Government provides an indicia of reliability and trustworthiness to documents recorded or filed as required by law
or regulation.   See also, FRE 807.
4
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
