1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-00312 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Guideline E, personal conduct concerns were not established. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
     Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 9, 2014. On 
March 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The DOD CAF 
acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on June 8, 
2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 14, 2017. He denied 7 of the 12 SOR 
allegations and admitted the others with explanations. He denied the falsification 
allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge in May 2017 and 
transferred to me on October 16, 2017. On January 18, 2019, the Defense Office of 
03/05/2019
 
2 
 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the video teleconference hearing 
(VTC) hearing was scheduled for February 7, 2019. I convened the VTC hearing as 
scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. I left the record open at Applicant’s request until February 21, 2019, and he 
provided several post-hearing documents by email of February 13, 2019, that were 
collectively marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and admitted without objection. On 
February 21, 2019, Applicant provided more supplemental documents that were 
collectively marked as AE B and admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on February 21, 2019.  
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 57 years old. He graduated from high school in 1979 and had some 
college. Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 1979 and served honorably for 14 years 
before accepting a voluntary separation incentive to retire early as a senior chief petty 
officer (E-8). He served as an electronics technician, including submarine duty, and 
participated in Operation Desert Shield in 1990. Applicant earned numerous awards 
including four Navy Achievement Medals (NAMs) for his service. (Tr. 26-27) He has 
been married three times: 1979 to 1986; 2003 to 2005; and presently since 2014. He 
reported three adult-children by his first wife. Applicant has been employed as a project 
manager for a federal contractor since 2008. He has worked for federal contractors, with 
a security clearance, for over 25 years without infractions. (Tr. 22) Applicant travels 95% 
of the time for his job. (Tr. 23)  
  
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts totaling approximately $26,571, including a 
past-due second mortgage on his primary residence in the amount of $14,681 at SOR ¶ 
1.i. The SOR also alleges three delinquent medical debts, utility and credit-card debts. 
Applicant did not disclose any of these delinquencies in section 26 (Financial Record) of 
his SCA. (GE 1)   
 
Applicant’s credit reports reflect that he obtained a primary mortgage in the 
approximate amount of $148,000 in March 2006. (GE 2) At the same time, he obtained 
a home equity loan or second mortgage in the amount of $37,000. Both loans were 
transferred several times, and Applicant has continuously paid his primary mortgage as 
agreed. (GE 2–6) His 2014 credit report indicates that the second mortgage was past 
due in the amount of $14,681, and the last activity on the account was in December 
2011 before it was closed and transferred. (GE 2) A real property transaction record 
concerning his primary residence, reflects that at some point the second mortgage was 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s July 9, 2014 security 
clearance application (SCA) and the summaries of his security clearance interviews on February 17, 
2015, and November 1, 2016. 
 
 
3 
 
transferred to Countrywide Mortgage Company.2 (GE 7) It fell off Applicant’s later credit 
reports without explanation. (GE 5-6)  
 
In his personal subject interview (PSI) with a clearance investigator in February 
2015, Applicant stated he had been making payments of $350 per month on the second 
mortgage when he fell behind on payments. (GE 8) He tried to negotiate, but the 
creditor wanted payment of the full $14,681 due, and he could not afford to pay that. 
Applicant testified credibly that since then, the second mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.i) was 
transferred and he has made multiple phone calls to try to discern the present creditor 
holding that loan, to no avail. (Tr. 53-54) He fell behind on payments because he had a 
heart attack in 2011. He was disabled, and out of work, for six months. (Tr. 33, 55) The 
creditor stopped communicating with Applicant. He testified that he refinanced his 
primary residence in August 2018 without problems and there was no mention of the 
second mortgage by his present lender. (Tr. 57-60) Applicant corroborated this by 
providing supplemental, post-hearing documents including a closing disclosure 
statement showing a payoff of $124,195 to the previous mortgagee and no reference to 
any second mortgagee.3 (AE A)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a is for a medical debt placed for collection in the amount of $2,229. 
Applicant testified that this was a result of an ambulance ride required to transport him 
between hospitals after his heart attack. (Tr. 37) He felt that the total ambulance bill of 
$4,000 was exorbitant for a short ride. Nonetheless, he is now in a payment plan and 
making monthly payments of $150 per month on this debt. (AE A) SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d 
are also medical debts placed for collection by the same creditor as a result of co-
payments that were not covered by Applicant’s medical insurance. These have been 
paid in full. (Tr. 39-40, AE A, GE 5) Applicant testified that the charged-off debt for $242 
at SOR ¶ 1.b was for the purchase of a horse trailer. (Tr. 38) It was paid in full in May 
2017. (AE A)  
 
Applicant testified that the debt placed for collection in the amount of $1,077 at 
SOR ¶ 1.e was disputed with the three major credit-reporting-bureaus as it is not his 
credit-card debt. (Tr. 40-41) He researched the matter and made phone calls to the 
original creditor (bank). Applicant provided post-hearing documentation that the creditor 
was unable to substantiate these debts and no longer considers them valid collection 
accounts. (Tr. 42, AE B) Applicant was overseas for extended periods of time for his 
job, and he admits that he did not check his credit reports for about 10 years. (GE 8) He 
                                                          
2 This disgraced mortgage-lender was “at the epicenter of the mortgage meltdown that in 2008 brought 
the nation’s economy to its knees.” (N.Y. Times, June 24, 2016 article) John Leibowitz, Chairman of the 
Federal Trade Commission was quoted “Its business model was based on deceit and corruption, and the 
harm caused to the American consumer is absolutely massive and extraordinary.”  Countrywide was a 
subsidiary of Bank of America (BOA). The U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) reached a $16.65 Billion civil 
settlement with BOA in 2014 for systematic mortgage fraud – the largest civil settlement against a single 
entity in American history. See DOJ Office of Public Affairs press release dated August 21, 2014 – Bank 
of America to pay $16.65 Billion in Historic Settlement for Financial Fraud Leading up to an during the 
Financial Crisis. 
 
3 I infer that a proper title search was completed before this closing in compliance with prevailing real-
estate law and practices.  
 
4 
 
told the clearance investigator he was not aware of the credit-card debts and he ignored 
some debts. He has an active account with the creditor at SOR ¶ 1.e. He testified that 
the same status applies to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.g ($1,466) and ¶ 1.l ($4,419), which 
are for a credit-card debt placed for collection in the amount of $4,419 and an account 
placed for collection for $1,466. These were effectively disputed and the creditor no 
longer considers them to be valid debts. (AE B)  
 
The credit-card debt placed for collection by a bank at SOR ¶ 1.h was also 
effectively disputed to the three credit bureaus, and the creditor no longer considers it a 
valid debt. (AE B) This was a credit card for a home-improvement store. (GE 8) The 
debt placed for collection by a telecommunication company in the amount of $197 at 
SOR ¶ 1.f has been paid in full. (GE 5-6) The retail store debt placed for collection in the 
amount of $1,157 at SOR ¶ 1.j was compromised and settled for $354. (AE A) The 
delinquent phone bill at SOR ¶ 1.k for $296 was paid in full in July 2014. (AE A, Tr. 46) 
The debt placed for collection by a bank in the amount of $1,466 at SOR ¶ 1.l was for a  
computer that Applicant never received. (GE 8) He disputes this debt.  
 
Applicant testified that he had a salary of $135,000 to 140,000 in 2018. (Tr. 60) 
He receives $600 a month in military retirement, and he has approximately $15,000 in 
savings. He told the clearance investigator that he and his wife have residual or 
discretionary income of approximately $ 3,000 each month. (GE 8) Applicant completed 
his SCA in Korea in July 2014. He did not list his delinquent debts because he was not 
aware of them, and he admits making financial mistakes and not checking his credit 
reports. (Tr. 70) He testified credibly that he was honestly unaware of these 
delinquencies and he did not deliberately intend to deceive the government or falsify the 
SCA.  
 
         Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
6 
 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.4 Applicant has met that burden. The second mortgage and other delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR have been adequately addressed.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant endured a heart attack, a divorce, and extensive overseas travel for 
work. Arguably, these conditions were beyond his control. Once he realized that the 
delinquencies might affect his eligibility for a security clearance, he effectively disputed 
some debts, and paid others. He acted responsibly under the circumstances and he 
produced relevant or responsive documentation either in response to the SOR or in 
post-hearing documents. Applicant has the burden to provide sufficient evidence to 
show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred 
under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. He met that burden. AG ¶¶ 
20(a),(b),(d) and (e) apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
                                                          
4 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes….  
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
        Applicant testified credibly that he was in Korea when he completed his SCA in 
2014 and he honestly was not aware of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Since 
the evidence shows that his largest debt, the second mortgage, does not exist, and 
many other debts were successfully disputed or paid off, I find his testimony to be 
compelling and I accept his explanation. It has not been established that he deliberately 
or intentionally falsified his SCA or tried to deceive the government. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
8 
 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guidelines.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns and that personal conduct 
concerns were not established.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:                       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:                                   For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
         ________________________ 
         Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                               Administrative Judge 
