1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 17-03643 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 Appearances 
 For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esquire, Department Counsel 
  For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On November 17, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a response 
notarized on January 29, 2018, Applicant addressed all allegations and requested a 
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. 
I was assigned the case on July 20, 2018.  
On August 8, 2018, a notice setting the hearing for September 26, 2018, was 
issued. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered four exhibits 
(Exs.), noted as Exs. 1-4, and Applicant presented six exhibits, marked as Exs. A-F. 
With no objections, all exhibits were accepted into the record. Applicant was granted 
through October 10, 2018, to submit any additional materials. On October 10, 2018, a 
file of material was offered by Applicant and admitted without objection as Ex. G. The 
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
03/28/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
record was then closed. In the interim, the transcript (Tr.) was received on October 4, 
2018. Based on the testimony, materials, and record as a whole, I find Applicant failed 
to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old project manager who has been with his current 
employer for over four years. In 2013, he earned an associate’s degree in business and 
administration. The father of four children, he is currently going through a divorce. 
Applicant has never received financial counseling. Over time, when the stress of being 
the sole provider in his home would impact him financially, he did not know how to try to 
work with his lenders. (Tr. 44-45) At issue in the SOR are 10 delinquent debts 
amounting to about $10,000.  
 
In 2013, Applicant graduated from college. He was scheduled to begin payments 
on his student loans (SOR allegations 1.a-1.d and 1.f-1.g) in 2014, but he did not have 
the financial means to do so. (Tr. 36-37) He wanted to go back to school, which would 
have deferred his existing student loans, but by then the loans were in default. He did 
not apply for forbearance or deferral because he was not aware of such programs. He 
did not contact his lenders to let them know he could not afford to pay. (Tr. 38)  
 
By early 2016, Applicant began receiving bills from a collection agency for the 
lender. (Tr. 38) At that point, he decided to make inquiries concerning the debts. 
Applicant recalls making about four such payments on the loans in or by December 
2017. At hearing, the parties agreed that there were at least two payments for $50 each. 
(Tr. 39) Evidence was also presented indicating two additional payments were made in 
2017, for $15 and $30, respectively. (Ex. G) 
 
 In March 2018, a primary lender contacted Applicant to inform him it now held his 
defaulted student loans. It gave him the opportunity to resume making payments, or to 
provide some information by which he and the lender could arrive at a mutually 
agreeable installment plan to make him eligible for loan rehabilitation or pay-off 
consolidation. (Tr. 39) It was suggested Applicant could make monthly payments of 
$600, but Applicant was unable to pay that sum. A few months later, the loans again 
went into collection. At present, Applicant is waiting for paperwork to initiate the process 
of consolidation.  
 
 Also at issue are four other delinquent accounts (SOR allegations 1.e, 1.h, 1.i, 
1.j) The parties agreed at the hearing that the debt at 1.j ($290) was shown paid. (Tr. 
44) In his post-hearing package, Applicant provided evidence of the following: The $438 
debt at 1.i was made subject to a settlement agreement and the final payment of $131 
paid in October 2018. The $655 debt at 1.h was settled in full on or about October 1, 
2018. Applicant testified that the $5,592 debt at 1.e was made subject to a $100-a- 
month repayment plan. A copy of that plan was not submitted, but documentary 
evidence of a $100 payment from September 2018 was offered. (Ex. D)  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Today, Applicant is living within his means. (Tr. 47) He only has one credit card 
with a small credit limit he rarely uses. At the end of the month, after all regular bills are 
paid, he has a remainder of between $500-$800 from a net monthly income of 
approximately $5,000. He does not expect to suffer financially from his pending divorce. 
He has a retirement and a savings account. Once divorced, he will live with his parents.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. Decisions necessarily include consideration 
of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard such 
information. Decisions shall be in terms of the national interest and do not question the 
loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
 
 
 
 
4 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government offered documentary evidence reflecting that Applicant 
has numerous delinquent debts. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do so; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Four conditions could mitigate the finance-related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
There are multiple delinquent debts at issue, some dating back to after 
Applicant’s 2013 college graduation. Applicant cites to no event out of his control that 
led him to acquire these delinquent debts; he only points to periods of time when being 
the sole-earner in his family was insufficient to meet all expenses. Applicant has not 
received financial counseling. He is, however, presently living within his means.  
 
Applicant’s credible testimony reflects that he has begun approaching the 
situation with his student loans in earnest. His protraction in addressing the matter, 
however, left him rushing to gather documentary evidence regarding plans to address 
the loans before, during, and after the hearing. At present, Applicant is waiting for 
paperwork to initiate the process of student loan consolidation. Otherwise, there is only 
documentary evidence of a couple of payments toward the loans made long ago.  
 
 
 
 
5 
The parties agreed at the hearing that the debt at 1.j ($290) was previously paid. 
The debt at 1.i ($438) was settled and paid in October 2018. The debt at 1.h ($655) was 
settled in full on or about October 1, 2018. Applicant failed to offer documentary 
evidence, however, reflecting that the $5,592 debt at 1.e was, in fact, put formally into a 
repayment plan under which he had developed a meaningful track record for 
repayment. At best, AG ¶ 20(d) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those factors. I 
am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old project manager who has worked for his current 
employer for over four years. He earned an associate’s degree in business and 
administration in 2013. Married, but currently undergoing a divorce, he is the father of 
four children. Applicant acquired delinquent debt due to insufficient income, not through 
circumstances beyond his control. When faced with financial difficulties, he would not 
know where to turn or how to proceed. Applicant has never received financial 
counseling. At issue in the SOR are 10 delinquent debts amounting to about $10,000. 
 
Today, Applicant is living within his means, but his delinquent debts remain 
largely unaddressed. Only about $1,400 of the total debt at issue has been satisfied, 
with two of those debts having been satisfied in October 2018, after the SOR issuance. 
He has apparently expended effort on resolving his student loan issues, but he delayed 
addressing those debts and the procedure to do so has been more protracted and 
onerous than expected, with scant evidence of how he should proceed available. Until 
more information and paperwork is received, Applicant remains in limbo. Meanwhile, the 
debt at 1.e for a sum in excess of $5,000 lacks sufficient documentary evidence as to its 
status. 
 
This process does not require an applicant to satisfy all his delinquent debts. It 
does, however, demand that one show he has implemented an appropriate scheme for 
addressing that debt, and documentation reflecting a meaningful track record of timely 
payment. Here, insufficient time has passed to provide such documentation. 
Consequently, financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated.   
 
   Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
            Subparagraphs 1.h-1.j:   For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
