1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
[REDACTED] ) ISCR Case No. 17-02653 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the potential security concerns raised by his 2012 one-time 
illegal drug use, his 2014 positive drug test, and his failure to timely file and pay his 2010 
state taxes. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on February 24, 2016. 
On August 29, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement), F (Financial 
Considerations), and E (Personal Conduct). The DOD acted under Executive Order (Ex. 
Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017.  
Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR on September 18, 2017, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
November 1, 2017, and the case was assigned to me on March 20, 2018. On May 22, 
03/25/2019
2 
 
2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant through 
counsel that the hearing was scheduled for June 7, 2018. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called six witnesses, and Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
I were admitted without objection. I left the record open until June 14, 2018, to enable 
Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX J, which I 
have admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 14, 2018. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old electronics technician currently employed by a defense 
contractor since February 2016. He received his general equivalency degree in 2005. He 
served on active duty in the U.S. Army from July 2008 until April 2013, when he received 
a general discharge. He was granted a secret security clearance while on active duty. 
(GX 1; Tr. 18-19.)  
 
Under Guideline H, the SOR alleges that in November 2012, while on active duty, 
Applicant tested positive for cocaine. He received an Article 15 and was fined, sentenced 
to extra duty, placed on restriction for 45 days, and reduced in rank. He was later 
separated from the Army with a general discharge. Applicant tested positive for opiates 
in 20141 while enrolled in a Veterans court deferred program after having been arrested 
and charged for suspicion of driving under the influence of alcohol. Under Guideline F, 
the SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file and/or pay state taxes for tax year 2010. 
Finally, the SOR cross-alleges the Guidelines H and F allegations under Guideline E. 
Applicant admits the cocaine-related allegation, and that he tested positive for opiates, 
however, he denies having ever used opiates. He admits that he did not timely file or pay 
his 2010 taxes, but states that he has since resolved all his tax obligations. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
In November 2012, Applicant was 24 years old and on active duty in another state. 
He was living in an off-base apartment complex where other soldiers who he worked with 
also lived. Applicant was at a party that was attended by soldiers and civilians who lived 
in the apartment complex. Applicant was drinking alcohol. One of the civilians, with whom 
Applicant was previously acquainted, offered Applicant cocaine. He made a “poor 
decision” and tried the cocaine. Later that month, Applicant tested positive for cocaine in 
a random urinalysis. He was ultimately separated from the Army with a general discharge. 
(GX 2; Tr. 38-40.) Although unalleged, Applicant held a security clearance at the time he 
tried cocaine, and his clearance was revoked when he was separated. (GX 2.) He regrets 
his behavior and considers it to be a serious mistake. Applicant has not used any illegal 
drugs or misused prescription drugs on any other occasion. (Tr. 41-49.) Applicant 
provided a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and substance 
misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of his security clearance. (AX F.) He moved back to his home state and does not 
associate with any of the people who were at the party or anyone else who uses illegal 
drugs. (Tr. 41.)  
                                                          
1 Applicant's positive urinalysis was actually on July 6, 2014, not in November 2014,as alleged in the SOR. AX H. 
3 
 
In July 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with suspicion of driving under 
the influence of alcohol (DUI). The previous night, Applicant met up with a friend in the 
friend’s hometown and they took a cab to a bar. Applicant had left his vehicle at his friend’s 
apartment complex. His friend left the bar before Applicant, who later took a cab back to 
his friend’s apartment. Applicant’s friend was not home, so Applicant slept in his vehicle. 
When he awoke, his cell phone battery was dead. Applicant was attempting to drive home 
when he was pulled over for speeding. The officers smelled alcohol on Applicant, had him 
perform field a sobriety test, and asked him to take a breathalyzer. Applicant refused the 
breathalyzer and was arrested for suspicion of DUI. (Tr. 41-43.) 
 
The DUI charge was referred to the veterans court where Applicant’s case was 
placed in a deferral program. Applicant was required to pay approximately $1,200 in fines 
and court costs. The program required that Applicant call in every day for one year to find 
out whether or not he was scheduled for urinalysis on that day. In July 2014, Applicant 
tested positive for opiates, specifically morphine, on a random urinalysis. Applicant 
adamantly denies any use of any type of opiate ever, and does not have an explanation 
for the positive test result. His drug screenings from the day before and five days after the 
positive result were both negative. (Tr. 45-49; Tr. 56-61.) Applicant’s 39 other random 
drug screenings were negative. (AX H.) Protocol for testing positive for drug use was 48 
hours in jail and an additional 6 months in the program. Applicant spent 48 hours in jail, 
but was not given any additional time. Applicant successfully completed the deferral 
program in November 2014. (AX I.) He has not had any subsequent alcohol-related 
events. (Tr. 70.) His voluntary June 2018 drug screening was negative. (AX J.) 
 
While in the Army, Applicant was deployed overseas for just under one year in 
2010 and 2011. He did not file his state tax return or pay his state taxes owed for tax year 
2010 because he mistakenly thought he was exempt due to his deployment. When 
preparing his 2011 tax returns, Applicant realized he was required to file his 2010 state 
tax return and filed it with his 2011 return. However, Applicant did not pay the 2010 taxes 
owed at that time. Between 2011 and 2016, the state retained Applicant’s refunds to offset 
the balance owed by Applicant, which was approximately $250. Applicant fully paid the 
balance owed for his taxes before September 2017. Applicant timely filed and paid 
Federal and state taxes for all other tax years including 2018. (GX 2; Tr. 72-77; AX G; Tr. 
52.) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor, site lead, and operations lead testified that they have 
known Applicant since February 2016 and are aware of the SOR allegations. Collectively 
they consider Applicant to be trustworthy, reliable, and a person of strong moral character. 
They do not think that Applicant’s past mistakes are reflective of the person his is today. 
(AX A; Tr. 14-33.) Applicant’s field support lead, site supervisor, and assistant program 
manager have also worked with Applicant since February 2016 and consider his honesty 
and integrity to be unquestionable. (AX A.) Each of Applicant’s character references 
highly recommend Applicant for a security clearance. (AX A; Tr. 14-33.) Applicant was 
sincere, candid, and humble while testifying. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
5 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances . . . can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations.  
 
Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the record evidence, establish the 
potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 25(a) any substance misuse. 
 
The following mitigating conditions may also apply: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment were drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
6 
 
 Applicant used cocaine on one occasion in 2012, more than six years ago. He was 
punished and ultimately separated from the Army with a general discharge as a result of 
this conduct. He has not used cocaine or any other illegal substance since 2012. Over 
the course of one year from November 2013 until November 2014, as a requirement of a 
deferral program for a DUI arrest, Applicant underwent 40 random drug screenings, 39 of 
which were negative. In July 2014, more than four years ago, Applicant tested positive 
for morphine. He adamantly and consistently denies having used any opiate or any other 
illegal or illicit substance. He does not have an explanation for what he deems was a false 
positive result. His voluntarily drug screening in June 2018 was negative. He successfully 
completed the deferral program. He does not have a social circle that includes people 
who use illegal substances.  
 
Applicant recognizes that his decision to use cocaine was a mistake, accepts 
responsibility for his actions, and has provided a written statement in which he 
acknowledges the use, states his intent of no future use of any illegal drugs, and 
recognizes that any such use will result in the loss of his security clearance.  
 Applicant’s single use of cocaine in 2012 and his 2014 positive drug screening are 
not recent. The Directive does not define "recent," and there is no "bright-line" definition 
of what constitutes "recent" conduct. ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 
2006). The Judge is required to evaluate the record evidence as a whole and reach a 
reasonable conclusion as to the recency of an applicant's conduct. ISCR Case No. 03- 
02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006). He will not use any illegal substance in the future. 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
The following disqualifying condition applies: 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file . . . annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
7 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file and pay his 2010 state taxes because he thought his 
2010 to 2011 deployment made him exempt from being required to file and pay. Upon 
learning of his error, Applicant filed his 2010 state tax return when he timely filed his 2011 
return. However, Applicant did not pay the past-due taxes of approximately $250 at that 
time. The state withheld Applicant’s refunds for several years, then Applicant paid the 
remaining balance prior to September 2017. Applicant’s failure to timely file and pay his 
state taxes was due to a misunderstanding of the tax requirements, not a willful disregard 
for rules or regulations. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(g) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Any potential personal conduct concerns are mitigated for the reasons set forth 
under the analyses of Guidelines H and F. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
8 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H, E, and F in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, 
but I have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant is highly regarded and trusted by his supervisors and site and program 
leads. Applicant’s one-time use of cocaine while holding a security clearance places a 
heavy burden on Applicant to establish mitigation. After considering the record as a 
whole, specifically, the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s age and the circumstances 
of his one-time use of cocaine, the length of time that is passed since that single use, and 
Applicant’s remorse for his actions, I conclude that applicant has met his heavy burden 
of proof and persuasion. Applicant’s cocaine happened under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur, and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. Applicant’s testimony was credible and sincere.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H, E, 
and F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his past conduct. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F, (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
9 
 
 
 
