1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--- ) ISCR Case No. 17-02491 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial considerations 
and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On October 24, 2005, and again on March 14, 2011, as well as on December 2, 
2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) versions of a Security Clearance Application. On 
August 4, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued her a set of 
interrogatories. Applicant responded to those interrogatories on November 6, 2017. On 
September 4, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, under Executive Order (Exec. 
Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and 
Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (December 10, 2016) (AG), for all covered individuals who require initial or 
03/14/2019
 
2 
                                      
 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position, effective June 8, 2017. 
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct) and detailed reasons why the DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated September 27, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR 
and elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by 
DOHA on January 14, 2019, and she was afforded an opportunity after receipt of the 
FORM to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In 
addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the 
Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to her case. Applicant received the FORM on January 
22, 2019. Applicant apparently chose not to respond to the FORM, for as of March 8, 
2019, she had not done so. The case was assigned to me on March 8, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with comments, all of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.n.), 
and the factual allegation pertaining to personal conduct in the SOR (SOR ¶ 2.a.). 
Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration 
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been serving 
as a provisioning specialist with her current employer in three different geographical 
locations since April 2005. A 1987 high school graduate, Applicant attended a community 
college for three months in 2002, but she did not earn a degree. She enlisted in the U.S. 
Air Force in June 1987, and served on active duty until February 1996, when she was 
honorably discharged. She was first granted a secret clearance in 1987, and it was 
renewed in 2005. Applicant has never been married. She has two children, born in 1993 
and 1995.  
 
  
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations1 
It is unclear when Applicant first started having financial difficulties, although in her 
2005 e-QIP she identified some accounts that had been delinquent since 2001. Her 
December 2005 credit report also lists a number of delinquent accounts that became 
delinquent in 2001. Applicant identified only three factors that she attributed to her 
financial difficulties: she is the single mother of two children; she was unemployed for 
nearly a full year in 2001; and she has exhibited poor management and made poor 
financial decisions (including supporting a family that resided with her).2 The record refers 
to one period of unemployment, starting in May 2001, and lasting until October 2001, as 
well as one period of under-employment with the state department of social and health 
services, providing day-care services, starting in October 2001, and lasting until August 
2002. Applicant claimed to have either set up payment plans or intended to do so with 
several creditors or collection agents; claimed to be making monthly payments on some 
accounts; and intended to have all of her delinquent debts resolved by the end of 2006.3  
In her December 2015 e-QIP, Applicant acknowledged only one continuing 
financial issue, identified as unpaid federal income tax for the tax year 2010, but indicated 
that she was working with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) on a payment plan.4 
Applicant apparently had insufficient funds to cover all of her monthly bills, and accounts 
became delinquent. Some accounts were charged off, and two judgments were filed 
against her. Applicant’s wages were garnished in 2011, but it is unclear as to which 
creditor the garnishment was associated. Applicant also failed to timely file her federal 
income tax returns over a multi-year period, essentially claiming that she did so because 
she knew she owed tax because of insufficient withholding and insufficient funds to pay 
her 2010 taxes,5 and she now owes a substantial sum of unpaid taxes to the IRS. 
                                                          
1 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in 
the following exhibits: Item 8 (Combined Experian and TransUnion Credit Report, dated December 1, 2005); 
Item 9 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated April 1, 2011); Item 10 
(Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated January 22, 2016); Item 11 (Equifax 
Credit Report, dated July 3, 2017); Item 12 (Equifax Credit Report, dated January 2, 2019); Item 7 
(Enhanced Subject Interview, dated December 19, 2016); Item 4 (e-QIP, dated October 24, 2005); Item 5 
(e-QIP, dated March 14, 2011); Item 6 (e-QIP, dated December 2, 2015); and Item 3 (Answer to SOR, 
dated September 27, 2018). 
 
2 Item 4, supra note 1, at 39; Item 3, supra note 1, at 4. 
 
3 Item 4, supra note 1, at 35-40. 
 
4 Item 6, supra note 1, at 30-32. 
 
             5 The legal requirement to file a federal income tax return is based upon an individual’s gross 
income and other enumerated conditions. Once it is determined that there is an obligation to so file, the 
following applies: 
 
Any person required under this title to pay any estimated tax or tax, or required by this title 
or by regulations made under authority thereof to make a return, keep any records, or 
supply any information, who willfully fails to pay such estimated tax or tax, make such 
return, keep such records, or supply such information, at the time or times required by law 
or regulations, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be guilty of a 
 
4 
                                      
 
Applicant did not discuss the reasons for her subsequent failures to timely file her federal 
income tax returns for the tax years 2011 through 2015. There is no evidence that 
Applicant ever received financial counseling. 
In addition to unfiled federal income tax returns covering the tax years 2010 
through 2015; $43,237 in unpaid taxes owed to the IRS; and a garnishment of $3,989 in 
wages, the SOR identified seven delinquent accounts that had been placed for collection, 
charged off, or reduced to judgments as generally reflected by Applicant’s five different 
credit reports. Those seven debts, total approximately $2,690. There are also 
approximately one dozen delinquent debts that were not alleged in the SOR.6  Although 
Applicant has repeatedly promised that she would address her delinquent debts within 
certain stated time frames, she has offered little documentation to indicate that: she has 
contacted her creditors or collection agents to negotiate payment plans; established 
payment plans; made payments in an effort to resolve any delinquent debts; or actually 
paid off any of her debts. The sole exceptions were her entering into two installment 
agreements in 2013 and 2016 with the IRS with respect to her federal income taxes for 
the tax year 2010, and the cancellation of those agreements associated with Applicant’s 
failures to remain in compliance with them, and her request to the IRS for tax transcripts 
covering the tax years 2010 through 2015, on November 7, 2017.7  
Among the federal income tax returns that Applicant failed to timely file were: the 
income tax return for the tax year 2010, which was eventually filed in February 2012, for 
which there was an unpaid balance of approximately $6,745, and only one payment was 
made for $100 in June 2012 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.f.);8 the income tax return for the tax year 
                                                          
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $25,000 
($100,000 in the case of a corporation), or imprisoned not more than 1 year, or both, 
together with the costs of prosecution. In the case of any person with respect to whom 
there is a failure to pay any estimated tax, this section shall not apply to such person with 
respect to such failure if there is no addition to tax under section 6654 or 6655 with respect 
to such failure. In the case of a willful violation of any provision of section 6050I, the first 
sentence of this section shall be applied by substituting "felony" for "misdemeanor" and "5 
years" for "1 year." 
  
26 U.S.C. § 7203, Willful failure to file return, supply information, or pay tax. 
 
6 Unalleged conduct can be considered for certain purposes, as discussed by the DOHA Appeal 
Board. (Conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an applicant's credibility; (b) to 
evaluate an applicant's evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular 
provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis 
under Directive § 6.3.). See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003)). See also 
ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). Applicant’s unlisted and unalleged 
delinquent accounts will be considered only for the five purposes listed above.  
 
7 Item 7 (Account Transcript (2010), dated November 7, 2017), at 2; Item 7 (Request for Transcript 
of Tax Return (Form 4506-T), dated November 6, 2017. 
 
8 Item 7 (Account Transcript (2010), supra note 7. 
 
5 
                                      
 
2011, which was eventually filed in December 2015, for which there was an unpaid 
balance of approximately $5,471, and only one payment was made for $10 in April 2012 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.f.);9  the income tax return for the tax year 2012, for which there was 
an unpaid balance of approximately $9,058, and no evidence that the income tax return 
has yet been filed (SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.f.);10 the income tax return for the tax year 2013, 
which was eventually filed in December 2015, for which there was an unpaid balance of 
approximately $7,641, and only one payment was made for $1 in April 2014 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d. 
and 1.f.);11 the income tax return for the tax year 2014, which was eventually filed in 
December 2015, for which there was an unpaid balance of approximately $14,323, and 
no evidence of any payments made (SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f.);12 and the income tax return 
for the tax year 2015, which was eventually filed in September 2018, for which there was 
an unpaid balance of approximately $3,520, and no evidence of any payments made 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.).13 Other than three miniscule payments totaling $111 over the multi-year 
period, there is no evidence that other agreements have been made or that other 
payments, other than through garnishment, have been made by Applicant. While most of 
the federal income tax returns were eventually filed, Applicant still owes a substantial sum 
to the IRS. These accounts have not been resolved, and there is little evidence that they 
will soon be in the process of being resolved. 
In addition to the unpaid federal income taxes, the SOR listed seven delinquent 
accounts. Those debts, none of which have been addressed or resolved by Applicant 
since her December 2016 interview with an investigator with the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), or since her SOR was issued in September 2018, are described as 
follows: a charge account with an unpaid balance of $904 that was charged off (SOR ¶ 
1.g.); an unspecified type of account with an unpaid balance of $436 that was purchased 
from the original creditor (SOR ¶ 1.h.); a cable television or Internet account with an 
unpaid balance of $305 (SOR ¶ 1.i.); a cellular telephone account with an unpaid balance 
of $239 (SOR ¶ 1.j.); a medical account with an unpaid balance of $74 (SOR ¶ 1.k.); an 
unspecified type of account with an unpaid balance that was reduced to a judgment for 
$149 (SOR ¶ 1.l.); and an apartment lease with an unpaid balance that was reduced to a 
judgment for $583 in 2009 (SOR ¶ 2.m.).  
It is not known what Applicant’s current financial resources may be because she 
did not report her current net monthly income; monthly expenses; and any monthly 
remainder that might be available for discretionary spending or savings. There is no 
evidence of a budget. Although Applicant noted that her children are now grown, and they 
no longer rely on her as much, and that she is currently in a better position to be able to 
                                                          
9 Item 7 (Account Transcript (2011), dated November 7, 2017). 
 
10 Item 7 (Account Transcript (2012), dated November 7, 2017). 
 
11 Item 7 (Account Transcript (2013), dated November 7, 2017). 
 
12 Item 7 (Account Transcript (2014), dated November 7, 2017). 
 
13 Item 3 (Statement from Accountant, dated October 1, 2018). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
start resolving all of her current indebtedness,14 she offered no evidence to indicate that 
her financial situation is now under control.  
Personal Conduct 
 
 In 2011, although there were continuing financial issues from 2005, Applicant 
lacked candor, and in her 2011 e-QIP, she denied any such issues. Her failure in this 
regard is unalleged conduct, as it was not alleged in the SOR. 
 
On December 2, 2015, when Applicant completed her e-QIP, she responded to 
certain questions pertaining to her financial record found in Section 26. Some of those 
questions asked if, in the past seven years, she had defaulted on any type of loan; had 
bills or debts turned over to a collection agency; had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; and been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt not previously entered; as well as if she is currently over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt? Applicant answered “no” to all of those questions, and certified 
that her responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of her knowledge and 
belief.15 In fact, her answers were incorrect, for Applicant actually had delinquent 
accounts that clearly came within the scope of the questions asked.  
 
There was one other question in Section 26 that could have been cited in the SOR, 
but for some reason it was not specifically cited: In the past seven years did she have a 
judgment entered against her? Applicant also answered “no” to that question.16 In her 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that she had deliberately falsified the material 
facts in her responses to the e-QIP inquiries, although she modified that admission by 
claiming she misunderstood the question and was answering it based on her credit report 
at the time. Nevertheless, even though she claimed to now understand the question, she 
admitted that she did falsify material facts.17 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”18 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
                                                          
14 It should be noted that the Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts 
in the future are not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting 
in a financially responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
15 Item 6, supra note 1, at 31-32. 
 
16 Item 6, supra note 1, at 31. 
 
17 Item 3, supra note 1, at 3, 5. 
 
18 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”19   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”20 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.21  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
                                                          
19 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
20 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
21 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”22  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”23 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG 19:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
                                                          
22 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
23 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant had seven delinquent accounts, totaling approximately $2,690, placed 
for collection, charged off, or reduced to judgments; she failed to timely file federal income 
tax returns for the tax years 2010 through 2015; and she has unpaid federal income tax, 
totaling approximately $43,237. Those delinquent accounts and unpaid federal income 
taxes remain unaddressed and delinquent. The failure to timely file income tax returns 
has security implications because:24 
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002). As we 
have noted in the past, a clearance adjudication is not directed at collecting 
debts. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). By 
the same token, neither is it directed toward inducing an applicant to file tax 
returns. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment and reliability. Id. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her 
legal obligations does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment 
and reliability required of those granted access to classified information. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See 
Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 
183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 
 
The Appeal Board clarified that even in instances where an “[a]pplicant has 
purportedly corrected [his or her] federal tax problem, and the fact that [applicant] is now 
motivated to prevent such problems in the future, does not preclude careful consideration 
of [a]pplicant’s security worthiness in light of [his or her] longstanding prior behavior 
evidencing irresponsibility” including a failure to timely file federal income tax returns.25 In 
this instance, while Applicant eventually filed her late federal income tax returns for 
several years, and she may now be properly motivated, she waited nearly one year after 
she was interviewed by the OPM investigator to obtain information regarding her unpaid 
taxes; and did not file her 2015 federal income tax return until three weeks after the SOR 
was issued. There is still no evidence that her 2012 federal income tax return has been 
filed. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f) have been established. As there is no evidence that 
                                                          
24 ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016) (emphasis in original). See ISCR Case 
No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002)); 
ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). 
 
25 See ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 3 and note 3 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016) (characterizing “no harm, 
no foul” approach to an Applicant’s course of conduct and employing an “all’s well that ends well” analysis 
as inadequate to support approval of access to classified information with focus on timing of filing of tax 
returns after receipt of the SOR).   
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Applicant was unwilling to satisfy her debts regardless of the ability to do so, AG ¶ 19(b) 
has not been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;26 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;27  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
                                                          
26 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
27 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or 
statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies, but none of the remaining mitigating conditions 
apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties 
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent,” or that it 
is “unlikely to recur.” Applicant identified only three factors that she attributed to her 
financial difficulties: she is the single mother of two children; she was unemployed for 
nearly a full year in 2001; and she has exhibited poor management and made poor 
financial decisions (including supporting a family that resided with her). The record refers 
to one five-month period of unemployment in 2001, as well as one ten-month period of 
under-employment in 2001-2002. Applicant has had 18 years to resolve her financial 
issues, but with the exception of one garnishment in the amount of $3,989, three minimal 
income tax payments, totaling $111, and two aborted attempts to comply with installment 
agreements with the IRS, her resolution efforts have been non-existent.  
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
resolution of such issues, one at a time. Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without 
further confirmed action, are insufficient. In this instance, to date, there is little evidence 
that any corrective actions have been taken by Applicant. There is no evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s finances are under control. Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.28 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
                                                          
28 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 16:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
As noted above, in December 2015, when Applicant completed her e-QIP, she 
responded to certain questions pertaining to her finances found in Section 26. Some of 
those questions asked if, in the past seven years, she had defaulted on any type of loan; 
had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency; had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; and been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt not previously entered; as well as if she is currently over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt? Applicant answered “no” to all of those questions, and certified 
that her responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of her knowledge and 
belief. In fact, her answers were incorrect, for Applicant actually had delinquent accounts 
that clearly came within the scope of the questions asked.  
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that she had deliberately falsified 
the material facts in her responses to the e-QIP inquiries, although she modified that 
admission by claiming she misunderstood the question and was answering it based on 
her credit report at the time. Nevertheless, even though she claimed to now understand 
the question, she admitted that she did falsify material facts. 
 
Applicant’s comments provide sufficient evidence to examine if her submission 
was a deliberate falsification, as alleged in the SOR, or merely an inaccurate answer that 
was the result of oversight or misunderstanding of the true facts on his part. Proof of 
incorrect answers, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or 
state of mind when the falsification or omission occurred. As an administrative judge, I 
must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is a direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning Applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
 
13 
                                      
 
alleged falsification or omission occurred. I have considered the entire record, including 
Applicant’s initial and subsequent comments.29 
The December 2015 e-QIP asked the same questions that Applicant was asked in 
her October 2005 and March 2011 e-QIPs. In 2005, Applicant responded appropriately 
to the questions, citing several different financial issues, and indicating her plans for 
addressing them. In 2011, although there were continuing financial issues, Applicant 
lacked candor, and she denied any such issues. Her failure in this regard is unalleged 
conduct as described above. In 2015, faced again with the same inquiries, Applicant 
simply listed her 2010 income tax issue, but denied the other financial delinquencies. In 
light of Applicant’s familiarity with the e-QIP, her lengthy history of financial difficulties 
involving routine delinquent commercial accounts and her federal income tax issues, and 
her admission that she deliberately falsified her responses, notwithstanding her claimed 
misunderstanding the question, AG ¶ 16(a) has been established. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 17 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from personal conduct. They include: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
Neither of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s pattern of behavior, including 
her e-QIP denials, both alleged and not alleged in the SOR; and her denial to the OPM 
investigator in 2016 that she had any delinquent accounts, until she was confronted with 
a number of such accounts, also unalleged conduct, reflect a general lack of candor that 
is not minor or infrequent, and it does not occur under unique circumstances. 
Furthermore, Applicant has not taken any positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Applicant’s actions under the 
                                                          
29 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). See also ISCR Case No. 08-05637 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010) (noting an applicant’s level of 
education and other experiences are part of entirety-of-the-record evaluation as to whether a failure to 
disclose past-due debts on a security clearance application was deliberate).  
 
 
14 
                                      
 
circumstances continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.30   
There is very little evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant is a 49-year-
old employee of a defense contractor, and she has been serving as a provisioning 
specialist with her current employer since April 2005. A 1987 high school graduate, 
Applicant attended a community college for three months in 2002, but she did not earn a 
degree. She enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in June 1987, and served on active duty until 
February 1996, when she was honorably discharged. She was first granted a secret 
clearance in 1987, and it was renewed in 2005. Although Applicant failed to timely file her 
federal income tax returns for a multi-year period, she eventually filed most of them, well 
after the required filing dates. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. Applicant had seven delinquent accounts, totaling approximately $2,690, 
placed for collection, charged off, or reduced to judgments; she failed to timely file federal 
income tax returns for the tax years 2010 through 2015; and she has unpaid federal 
income tax, totaling approximately $43,237. There are also approximately one dozen 
delinquent debts that were not alleged in the SOR.  Applicant made arrangements on two 
occasions with the IRS to establish installment agreements with respect to her 2010 
federal income taxes, but both agreements were cancelled because of her failure to 
remain in compliance with the arrangements. All of those delinquent accounts, both 
                                                          
30 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
alleged and non-alleged, and the unpaid federal income taxes remain unaddressed and 
delinquent. There is still no evidence that she has filed her federal income tax return for 
the tax year 2012. Applicant has displayed a lengthy pattern of a lack of candor. She has 
repeatedly denied having delinquent accounts when in fact there were some. It is now 
mid-March 2019, and Applicant has shown little voluntary efforts to address her delinquent 
debts. Applicant’s current financial situation is unknown. Considering the lack of evidence 
regarding her current finances, I am unable to reach a positive conclusion pertaining to 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:31 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an extremely poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, failing to take any substantial corrective actions with respect to her 
delinquent debts. Paying only $111 over a multi-year period on an unpaid balance of 
$43,237 in federal income taxes, as well as having her wages garnished in the amount of 
$3,989, does not qualify as a good-faith effort to resolve debts. Overall, the evidence 
leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial considerations and personal 
conduct. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
  
                                                          
31 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
16 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.n:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant    
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
