1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-03912 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Brittany White, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns raised by her unwillingness to repay a debt to a former 
employer incurred under unfavorable circumstances. Clearance is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On January 31, 2018, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to a Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge for a determination whether to deny 
her security clearance.  
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on September 26, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective June 8, 2017.   
03/27/2019
 
2 
 
without objection. Applicant did not submit any documentation. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on October 4, 2018.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 34, has worked for her current employer, a federal contracting 
company, since February 2018. She was initially granted access to classified 
information when she served in the U.S. Navy between 2004 and 2008. She completed 
her most recent security clearance application in July 2016, while working for a different 
employer, and disclosed a $200 delinquent debt. An April 2016 entry in the Joint 
Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) indicated that Applicant resigned from a position 
in September 2015 after allegations that she falsified her timecard in June 2015. The 
ensuing investigation also revealed that Applicant owed that employer a $13,000 debt 
for tuition assistance.2 
  
 Between October 2012 and September 2015, Applicant worked for a different 
federal contracting company. She accepted tuition assistance to pursue her graduate 
degree with the understanding that she would be required to repay any benefits she 
received if she left the company within 12 months of receipt. In July 2015, Applicant 
learned that she was the subject of an investigation into allegations that she was doing 
schoolwork during work hours. While the investigation did not substantiate that 
allegation, it prompted a review of her time cards, which showed that Applicant over 
charged her time on three days in June 2015. Applicant believes a coworker with whom 
she had a bad relationship made the initial allegation of misconduct.3  
 
In September 2015, Applicant resigned in lieu of termination. Upon her 
resignation, Applicant signed a promissory note, agreeing to repay $13,000 in tuition 
assistance benefits. Under the terms of the promissory note, she agreed to pay $1,088 
from her last paycheck and $665.01 for 18 months. She claims that the employer told 
her that someone would contact her with the details of submitting her monthly 
payments. Because no one from the company reached out to her, she did not make any 
payments. However, the promissory note provided payment instructions, including point 
of contact information.4  
 
 When she reported the resignation on her July 2016 security clearance 
application, Applicant indicated that she left the job “for a better opportunity.”5 She then 
reported three months of unemployment. When asked about the disclosure during her 
August 2017 interview, Applicant admitted that she was concerned about how the 
departure would affect her background investigation. She also admitted that she quit the 
job before she was fired. At the hearing, Applicant stated that she was not informed that 
                                                          
2 Tr. 13-14; GE 2 - 4. 
 
3 Tr. 15-16, 21-22. 
 
4 Tr. 16-18; GE 1 - 4.  
 
5 GE 1.  
 
3 
 
she was going to be fired, but that she chose to leave on her own terms before the 
investigation was completed. She claims to have contacted her former employer after 
the background interview to honor the promissory note, but she failed to follow through.6  
 
 Applicant and her husband have a household income of over $200,000. In 2017, 
they purchased a home for $725,000 and a vehicle for $80,000. She testified that she 
has the means to repay the education benefits, but has chosen not to do so, prioritizing 
other issues in her life.7   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
6 Tr. 18-19, 23, 34-38; GE 1, 4. 
 
7 Tr. 19, 27-30, 33-34.  
 
4 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Failure to meet one’s financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.8 Applicant admits that she owes a previous employer $13,000. 
She has been on notice since her August 2017 background interview that the 
outstanding debt raised a potential issue. Despite having the means to pay the debt, 
she is unwilling to do so.9 She failed to present any evidence to explain, rebut, refute, or 
mitigate the underlying concern. None of the financial considerations mitigating 
condition apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Accordingly, doubts remain about Applicant’s security worthiness. In reaching 
this decision, I have considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). It is not the 
purpose of security clearance adjudications to serve as debt collection proceedings, but 
rather to determine if an applicant’s treatment of their financial obligations is indicative 
of an inability to follow the rules related to the protecting and handling of classified 
information. Here, Applicant’s continued unwillingness to repay her debt raises ongoing 
issues about her judgment and trustworthiness. Her inconsistent statements during the 
adjudication process regarding the circumstances of her September 2015 resignation 
also raise concerns about her credibility and reliability. While Applicant’s finances are 
not a likely source of vulnerability or exploitation, her behavior regarding the treatment 
of her outstanding debt support a negative whole-person assessment that indicates that 
she may not honor her fiduciary duty to the government when faced with negative or 
seemingly unfair consequences.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 18. 
 
9 AG ¶ 19(b). 
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
