1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
[Name Redacted] ) ISCR Case No. 17-03777 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Kelly Folks, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leon J. Schachter, Esquire 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant submitted an application for a security clearance (e-QIP) on June 3, 
2015. On March 12, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented within the Department of Defense on June 8, 2017.  
On May 19, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 12, 2018. 
Another administrative judge was assigned the case on September 12, 2018.  On 
December 19, 2018, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing on January 
29, 2018. The case was transferred to me on January 29, 2018, because of the 
unavailability of the assigned administrative judge. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
During the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits which were admitted as 
Government (Gov) Exhibits 1 - 5. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and offered 
one exhibit which is admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which consisted of 15 
subparts without objection. The transcript was received on February 7, 2018. Based 
03/29/2019
2 
 
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all the SOR allegations, some with 
explanations.    
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old senior systems analyst for a DOD contractor 
(Contractor 1) who seeks a security clearance. She has been employed with Contractor 
1 since February 2018.  She previously worked for Contractor 1 from May 2015 to 
March 2017. Between March 2017 and February 2018, she worked for another DOD 
contractor (Contractor 2). She was granted an interim security clearance in September 
2015. She has a bachelor’s degree. She is married, has a four-year-old daughter, and is 
expecting another child. She is the primary breadwinner. Her husband stays at home to 
care for the children.  (Tr. 22, 43-44, 53; Gov 1) (Note: The facts in this decision do not 
specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, or locations in order to protect 
Applicant and her family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information.)  
 
Under the drug involvement concern, the SOR alleged Applicant used marijuana 
from 2015 to November 2017, after she was granted access to classified information 
(SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 2 at 3, 8); received treatment from Dr. R. from May 2012 to November 
2013 for Drug Dependence (SOR ¶ 1.b Gov 2 at 7; Gov 3 at 2); received treatment at a 
substance abuse institute from April 2007 to May 2011 for Drug Dependence (SOR ¶ 
1.c: Gov 2 at 7; Gov 3 at 2,4); and received treatment at a county health substance 
abuse center from August 2000 to April 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 2 at 11). 
 
Additional allegations include:  use of cocaine with varying frequency from 
January 2007 to April 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 2 at 9); use of the following prescription 
medications without a prescription: OxyContin, Oxycodone, Heroin, and Methadone 
between December 2003 and October 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 2 at 8-9); used marijuana 
with varying frequency between 1996 and November 2017 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 2 at 11; 
Gov 3 at 3); misuse of prescription opiates from December 2003 to December 2008 
(SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 3 at 3); purchase of crack cocaine for personal use from January 2005 
to January 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 3 at 3); illegally purchased opiates for personal use 
between May 2003 and December 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.j: Gov 3 at 3); and a July 2001 arrest 
for Possession of Marijuana and Drug Paraphernalia (SOR ¶ 1.k: Gov 2 at 11; Gov 4; 
Gov 5). 
 
  The same conduct is cross-alleged under the personal conduct concern. (SOR 
¶ 2.a) In her response to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations, but explains some 
of her illegal drug use was more intermittent and sporadic than the language of the SOR 
implies. (Response to SOR, dated May 19, 2018)  
  
 Applicant began drinking alcohol and using marijuana at age 12. Her alcohol use 
varied from daily, when she was younger, to once every few months, to once a week 
during the past few years before she quit drinking in November 2017. Her marijuana 
use was daily when she was younger. She stopped using for several years and her 
3 
 
most recent use occurred once or twice a year. She stopped using marijuana after her 
November 2017 use. Applicant first used cocaine when she was 16. Her cocaine use 
was sporadic from age 16 to 22.  From age 22 to 27, she used cocaine on varying 
occasions from several times a week to once a month. (Gov 3 at 3)  
 
Applicant first used opiates around 2001, when she was 19. She became 
addicted to opiates when she was 22. She would use any form of opiate she could find 
in order to keep from going into withdrawal. She eventually used heroin because it was 
cheaper. From 2007 to 2011, Applicant was prescribed and administered Methadone to 
combat her opioid addiction. In 2012, she began seeing a psychiatrist, Dr. R., who 
prescribed her the drug suboxone to help her become free of opiates and to help treat 
her underlying psychological issues. She was able to ween herself off the suboxone by 
November 2013 (age 32). She has not abused opiates since that time. In November 
2015, she was prescribed Percocet after she gave birth to her daughter. She has not 
used opiates of any sort since her daughter’s birth. (Gov 3 at 3)  
 
Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant sporadically used LSD (twice a year 
to every other year) from 1998 to 2004 (age 14 – 21); psilocybin (mushrooms) on three 
occasions between 1999 to 2004 (age 17 – 21); and crystal methamphetamine a few 
times in 2006 (age 23). (Gov 3 at 3) Because the use of these drugs was not alleged in 
the SOR, I will not consider the use under the disqualifying conditions. However, I will 
consider them under the extenuation and mitigating circumstances. In ISCR Case No. 
03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in 
which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to 
consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; 
(d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis under 
Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-
0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003)).  
  
In July 2001, Applicant had one drug-related arrest for Possession of Marijuana 
and Drug Paraphernalia.  After her arrest, she was ordered to attend treatment at the 
county substance abuse center. SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant received a diagnosis 
of drug dependence during this treatment.  The records from this treatment program are 
not in the record, so the diagnosis of drug dependence during this treatment is not 
confirmed. (Gov 4; Gov 5)   
 
Applicant voluntarily attended drug treatment at an institute that prescribed her 
methadone from April 2007 to May 2011. Applicant realized that if she continued using 
heroin it would be a death sentence. The methadone replaced her heroin cravings.  
However, during this time frame, Applicant was offered and used crack cocaine on 
various occasions. Her explanation at hearing was that the methadone clinic was in a 
4 
 
bad area and it was common for other drugs to be available. (Tr. 57-58; Gov 1 at 41-
153; Gov 2 at 7; Gov 3 at 2,4)   
 
After several years of using methadone, Applicant felt that she was replacing one 
addictive substance for another. In 2012, she sought the assistance of Dr. R., a 
psychiatrist, who treated her for drug dependence as well as her issues with depression 
and anxiety. Dr. R. prescribed Applicant suboxone. If applied properly, suboxone is 
helpful for heroin users to ween off heroin and methadone. Applicant wanted to be 
completely clean from both narcotics. She was able to be completely free of opiates by 
November 2013. (Tr. 25-27, 51-53; Gov 1 at 46; Gov 2 at 7; Gov 3 at 2-4) Applicant 
continues to take medication to deal with her depression and anxiety. (Gov 3 at 4-7)  
 
When Applicant completed her security clearance application on June 13, 2015, 
she fully disclosed her history of illegal drug use. When commenting on the extent of her 
drug use in Section 23 – Illegal Use of Controlled Substances, Applicant stated several 
times: 
 
I last smoked marijuana about 2 ½ years ago. I have been clean from all 
illegal substances for about 4 years. I was once addicted to opiates, but I 
have undergone extensive treatment for the disease of addiction and for 
the underlying medical conditions for which I was self medicating. I am a 
different person now than I was back then. I have married, started a family 
and earned my bachelor’s degree (graduating with honors). I do not 
associate with those who use illegal drugs, nor do I have any desire to use 
again.  
 
I am a proud mother to a beautiful 7 month old baby girl. I want to be there 
for her in every way I can, and I want to set a good example for her (and 
for my future children). I want to continue to be a productive and law-
abiding member of society. I intend to improve upon myself and build a 
good life for myself and my family. (Gov 1 at 40-43)  
 
Despite her good intentions, Applicant used marijuana on two occasions in 2017. 
On the first occasion, she used marijuana in April 2017 when her cousin died 
unexpectedly. She was at a post-funeral gathering, was drinking alcohol, and admits to 
being intoxicated. Her cousin lit up a marijuana joint and Applicant smoked the joint with 
her cousin. The last time she used marijuana was in November 2017. Applicant was on 
a business trip.  The hotel where she stayed had free happy hour. Applicant drank 
several alcoholic drinks during happy hour.  She stepped outside and a stranger was 
outside smoking a marijuana joint. The stranger offered the joint to Applicant and she 
used the marijuana joint with the stranger. At the time of use, Applicant was aware that 
marijuana use is illegal under federal law and is against DOD policy. (Tr. 24, 46-51, 59-
63)   
 
In response to interrogatories sworn by Applicant on February 9, 2018, Applicant 
clarified some inaccuracies in the sworn statement she provided during a background 
investigation interview on June 6, 2017.  In response to Item: 014 of her Personal 
Subject Interview, Applicant commented: 
5 
 
Investigator states “Subject’s last use of marijuana was on 01/2017” – this 
is incorrect, last use at the time was 4/2017.  Investigator also stated 
“subject smoked by herself” – this is incorrect; I was at a family gathering 
after a funeral service and smoked with a cousin. Investigator also stated: 
“Subject states she smokes about one a year, but stopped after 01/2017 
due to having a new baby and a new job.”  - This is incorrect; I stopped 
smoking marijuana around 2007 and did not smoke again until 2015 (I had 
my daughter 11/2014). Use has been very infrequent since 2015. (Gov 2 
at 3)  
  
Applicant testified she had been drinking alcohol on both occasions when she 
used marijuana in 2017.  Drinking alcohol made her uninhibited. She claims that she did 
not abuse alcohol. She never got into trouble. Eventually, she realized the connection of 
her alcohol use and her decision to use marijuana. Applicant claims she would not have 
used marijuana if she had not been drinking. Applicant sought help by attending 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and developed a support system around her. She attends 
AA meetings. She has a sponsor and attends a home group. She claims AA helped her 
look at her life defects and helped her to become a better person. Her life is now 
different and she has a strong network of friends. (Tr. 28-29) 
 
Applicant attends two AA meetings each week. During the Sunday meeting, she 
makes coffee and helps out in a service position. She also attends a program called 
Celebrate Recovery which is a church-based 12 step program that she attends on 
Friday night with her daughter.  Applicant explained the 12 steps as well as the books 
that she uses in the program. She recently received her one-year chip celebrating her 
sobriety. She has abstained from alcohol for a year. She abstained from marijuana for 1 
½ years. Her last use of illegal opiates was over 10 years ago. Applicant’s definition of 
sobriety is abstinence from all mind-altering substances. Her goal is to continue to work 
the program and help others with sobriety. (Tr. 29-36) 
 
Applicant admits that she did not dedicate herself to her previous treatment 
programs. She claims the difference is now she is actually working the program. 
Attending AA has been a blessing for Applicant. Attending meetings helps her maintain 
sobriety. She is happier when she is helping other people and working on herself. 
Applicant testified that her sober life is too important to give up. (Tr. 37-40, 68)  
 
 Ms. S., Applicant’s AA Sponsor, testified during the hearing.  She is retired and 
has never held a security clearance. She met Applicant over a year ago at an AA 
meeting.  After the meeting, Applicant approached her and asked if she would be her 
sponsor. As a sponsor, she provides support and helps Applicant work through the 12 
steps. She says Applicant has worked hard at her steps and has an understanding of 
what happened in her life and how her life is now different. She has seen a lot of 
changes in Applicant over the past year.  Applicant now has a fine appreciation of the 
gifts that she has in her life. She also understands that she cannot use any kind of 
substance that is considered a drug. Ms. S. testified, “A drug is a drug is a drug. 
Whether it be a legal drug, illegal drug, or alcohol. It is a mind-altering substance.” (Tr. 
79-83) 
 
6 
 
 Ms. S. testified that Applicant not only attends meetings, but is a home group 
member. She took a service position and developed close friendships with people who 
are living sober lives and getting their lives on track. (Tr. 81)  Applicant understands that 
when she drinks alcohol, she is at risk of using drugs. Ms. S. said that Applicant went to 
great lengths to become clean and sober. She meets with Applicant every Sunday and 
talks to her several times during the week. Applicant has reading assignments. The 
assignments are used to gain a clear understanding of what recovery means. (Tr. 81, 
83-84) 
 
Over the past year, Applicant has become more self-aware. She is honest and 
open. She is working on making amends to her family and other people. She is 
accountable for her actions. She is aware of the damage she caused and the underlying 
circumstances. Applicant has a good grasp on recovery. She sometimes needs 
encouragement, but understands that this is “a life and death business.” She is very 
proud that Applicant recently received her one year chip. Applicant has worked very 
hard in achieving and maintaining sobriety. She believes that Applicant will maintain 
sobriety indefinitely. (Tr. 85-91)   
 
Applicant provided a formal statement indicating that she has no future intent to 
use any illegal controlled substances or abuse prescription drugs. She is willing to 
undergo random drug testing and agrees to be subject to revocation of her security 
clearance in the event of any future positive drug test.  (AE A Tab 13, Exhibit G)  
 
Whole-Person Factors 
 
 Ms. B., Applicant’s current supervisor, testified on her behalf. She currently holds 
a secret clearance and has an interim top secret clearance. She met Applicant in the fall 
2015. They were co-workers at Contractor 1. They became friends outside of work as 
well. Applicant left to work for Contractor 2 for about a year. She returned in February 
2018. Ms. B. became her supervisor when she returned. Ms. B. describes Applicant’s 
duty performance as excellent. (Tr. 71-72) 
 
Ms. B. is aware of the SOR allegations. She is aware that Applicant used 
marijuana while holding an interim security clearance. During the year Applicant worked 
Contractor 2, Applicant told Ms. B. that while she was on official travel she got drunk 
and smoked marijuana. Applicant told Ms. B. that she needed help because her drinking 
was impairing her decision making. Applicant then began to attend AA and another 
church-based recovery program. (Tr. 72-74) 
 
 Ms. B. would not recommend someone for a security clearance who is currently 
using illegal drugs. She states that Applicant is a sober person who is taking measures 
to stay sober. She is dedicated to her recovery program. She is aware Applicant attends 
AA meetings as well as another church-based recovery program. Applicant has a strong 
will to stay sober. Applicant’s husband, family, and co-workers support her efforts to 
stay sober. Ms. B. is confident Applicant will remain sober and has no reservations with 
Applicant holding a security clearance. (Tr. 73-76) Ms. B. also wrote a letter of 
recommendation on Applicant’s behalf saying similar things. (AE A, Tab 11)  
 
7 
 
  Mr. T., the director of IT, Client Solutions, for Applicant’s current employer, has 
known Applicant for three years. He worked with her on daily basis between May 2015 
and March 2017. They have also become friends and occasionally socialize outside of 
work. He has reviewed the SOR and is aware of the nature of the government’s security 
concerns. He does not believe the allegations are reflective of Applicant’s character, 
patriotism, or willingness or ability to protect classified information. He says Applicant is 
one of the most genuine people he knows and possesses a high degree of integrity, 
responsibility, and honesty. He recommends her for a security clearance. (AE, Tab 8, 
Ex F1)  
 
  Mr. Y., Applicant’s program manager at Contractor 2, provided a statement 
indicating Applicant was highly recommended candidate for a job as program manager. 
She interviewed well and was hired. She worked for Contractor 2 from 31 March 2017 
to 7 February 2018. She left Contractor 2 because of some funding-related work 
stoppages in her division. During her time in Contractor 2’s employ, Mr. Y. found 
Applicant performed at a high level. She was highly dependable and responsible. He is 
familiar with the allegations in the SOR, but claims the allegations bear no resemblance 
to the person who he worked with over the past year. They interacted many times 
during the day when she worked at Contractor 2. She had no appearance of being 
under the influence or inebriated. She is a self-sufficient and responsible mother. Based 
on his interaction with Applicant, he believes the U.S. Government would benefit from 
Applicant being granted a security clearance. He believes the issues alleged in the SOR 
have been resolved. She sought help, got clean, and turned her life around. Mr. Y. 
states, “Based on my time working with [Applicant] she is concentrating her time and 
efforts on expanding her professional skill set, maintaining a great work ethic, raising 
her family, and moving on from her past indiscretions. I feel that if allowed to continue 
working as a cleared employee she would continue down this path.” (AE A, Tab 10, 
Exhbit F3) 
 
  One Applicant’s co-workers and her former boyfriend’s sister provided favorable 
reference letters on her behalf. (AE A, Tab 9 , Ex F2 and Tab 12, EX F5)  Applicant 
provided copies of her 2015, 2016, and 2017 Performance Reviews. All were favorable. 
(AE A, Tabs 1 -4).  Applicant often contributes to local charities and “Go Fund Me” 
causes. (AE A, Tabs 6-7)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
8 
 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:       
  
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of  
prescription drug and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other 
substances that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a 
manner inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled 
substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic 
term adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed 
above.  
 
9 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following drug involvement disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case.  
 
AG & 25(a) any substance misuse; 
 
AG & 25(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia;  
 
AG & 25(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health 
professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed 
clinical social worker) of substance use disorder;    
 
AG & 25(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified 
information or holding a sensitive position; and 
 
AG & 25(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance 
misuse, or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such 
misuse.  
  
The SOR alleges and Applicant admits to a long history of polysubstance abuse 
from 1996 to November 2017, including marijuana, cocaine (to include crack cocaine), 
OxyContin, Oxycodone, Heroin, and Methadone. At times, Applicant illegally purchased 
and possessed illegal substances.  AG & 25(a) and AG & 25(c) apply.   
 
Applicant was treated by Dr. R. for Drug Dependence (Opiates) from May 2012 
to November 2013, and received treatment at an institute from April 2007 to May 2011 
for drug dependence. AG & 25(d) applies.  
 
Applicant’s last use of marijuana occurred on two occasions in 2017, after she 
had been granted an interim security clearance.  AG & 25(f) applies.  I find AG & 25(g) 
applies because although she stated on her June 2015 security clearance questionnaire  
that she had no desire to use illegal drugs again, she illegally used marijuana in April 
2017 and November 2017.      
  
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The burden shifted to Applicant 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
(Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
  
Guideline H also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to the Applicant’s case:  
 
10 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG & 26(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
     
 AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply because Applicant’s last use of marijuana occurred in 
November 2017, after she had been granted an interim security clearance. Applicant’s 
last use occurred with a stranger when she was on travel for her employer. This raises 
concerns about Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. Such 
conduct made her vulnerable to being compromised. Considering her long history of 
polysubstance abuse, it is too soon to conclude that she will remain drug free.   
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies in that Applicant has not used illegal drugs since 
November 2017, and she signed a statement of intent to refrain from all illegal drug 
involvement. However, this mitigating condition is given less weight because Applicant 
stated on her June 2015 security clearance questionnaire that she had no intent to use 
illegal drugs in the future, yet she illegally used marijuana on two occasions after being 
granted an interim security clearance.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security or adjudicative processes.  
 
 The following disqualifying conditions potentially apply to Applicant’s case: 
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and 
11 
 
 
AG & 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if know, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.   
  
 AG ¶ 16(c) applies to Applicant’s marijuana use of two occasions after being 
granted a security clearance. Applicant’s use of marijuana in June and November 2017  
raises issues about her judgment, reliability, and willingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. This raises doubts as to Applicant’s ability to protect classified information.   
 
 AG & 16(e) applies because Applicant’s illegal marijuana use has the potential to 
affect her personal, professional, or community standing. When Applicant used 
marijuana she was a mature woman. Despite her past history of illegal drug use, she 
was given the opportunity to demonstrate her trustworthiness and was granted an 
interim security clearance. She abused that trust and demonstrated poor judgment 
when opting to use marijuana on two occasions after being granted an interim security 
clearance.   
 
 Under Guideline E, the following mitigating conditions potentially apply in 
Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
   
AG ¶ 17(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
AG & 17(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. While Applicant’s marijuana use occurred about a 
year ago, it is considered recent. Considering her long history of illegal drug use, not 
enough time has passed to conclude that Applicant will not use illegal drugs in the 
future.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) applies because Applicant acknowledged her mistakes and has been 
an active member of AA for over a year.  She is taking steps to deal with her problems. 
However, not enough time has passed to demonstrate that Applicant will remain drug 
free in the future. 
12 
 
 
 AG & 17(e) applies because Applicant has openly disclosed her illegal drug use. 
This mitigating condition is given less weight because Applicant’s most recent use of 
marijuana occurred on two occasions after being granted an interim security clearance. 
Applicant was aware that marijuana was illegal under federal law and against DOD 
policy. Serious questions are raised about Applicant’s judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
Applicant is a devoted wife and mother. She is well regarded by her supervisor 
and co-workers. She should be commended for working on her addiction issues and 
earning her bachelor’s degree. I found Applicant to be honest during the hearing. 
However, serious questions are raised about Applicant’s judgment because of her 
decision to illegally use marijuana on two occasions after being granted an interim 
security clearance. While Applicant is commended for seeking help through AA, after 
her last use of marijuana, it is too soon to conclude there is no risk in granting Applicant 
a security clearance based on her long history of polysubstance abuse. In cases where 
there is doubt, I am required to rule in favor of national security. Security concerns 
under Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
13 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
    
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.   
 
                                             
    
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
