  1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-04262 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq. 
Brittany Muetzel White, Esq., Department Counsels 
For Applicant: Eileen B. Xenakis, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate 
financial considerations and foreign influence security concerns. 
Statement of the Case 
On September 21, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to continue a security clearance. DOD issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated January 17, 2018, detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. The SOR action was taken under Executive 
Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
03/20/2019
  2 
 
Applicant answered the allegations on February 9, 2018, admitting the six 
allegations (SOR 1.a – 1.f) of delinquent student loans and two consumer delinquent 
debt allegations (SOR 1.g and 1.h), but provided receipts to verify that the debts had 
been paid. He denied the three delinquent consumer debt allegations at SOR 1.i to 1.k. 
In his denial, Applicant noted that he could not determine the identity and address of the 
creditors so he was unable to pay the debts. His SOR response included nine exhibits 
including performance evaluations; achievement awards; his college diploma; 
memorandums of support from his supervisor and employer; correspondence to the 
student loan service provider; receipts for payment of the debts at SOR 1.e and 1.f; a 
personal financial statement; W-2 tax forms for 2017; and a certificate of completion for 
a financial recovery course.  
 
The Government was ready to proceed on June 21, 2018, and the case was 
assigned to me on September 10, 2018. DOD issued a notice of hearing on September 
12, 2018, for a hearing on November 7, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
November 7, 2018.  
 
At the start of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to add 
a Guideline B, Foreign Influence allegation because Applicant had married and his wife 
was a citizen and resident of the Philippines. (Hearing Exhibit I). Department Counsel 
provided supporting documents for the allegation. (Hearing Exhibits II to V) Since 
neither Applicant nor his counsel had received adequate notice of the amendment 
under DOD Directive 5220.6. I postponed the hearing until Applicant’s counsel could 
research the allegation, provide an answer, and prepare a defense. (Transcript (Tr.) 
November 7, 2018 hearing) 
 
I reconvened the hearing on February 27, 2019. At that hearing, Department 
Counsel presented a motion to amend the SOR to add and reword two allegations 
under Guideline B; that Applicant’s wife and stepson are citizens of the Philippines 
(SOR 2.a), and that Applicant’s wife’s parents are citizens and residents of the 
Philippines (SOR 2.b). Applicant answered the Guideline B allegations at the hearing 
and admitted both allegations but argued that the facts of the allegations did not raise a 
security concern.  
 
At the hearing, the Government’s six exhibits (GE 1-6) were admitted into the 
record without objection. Applicant testified, and introduced 13 exhibits (AE A through 
AE M) that were admitted into the record without objection. I received the transcript of 
the second hearing (Tr.) on March 13, 2019.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts concerning the Philippines, and both provided relevant documents. (GE 6; 
AE B and AE C) I will take administrative notice of facts concerning the Philippines as 
noted in my Findings of Fact.  
Findings of Fact 
  3 
 
 
After a thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 32 years old and a college graduate with a bachelor’s degree in electrical 
engineering received in June 2013. Prior to attending college, he served four years on 
active duty in the U.S. Navy as an aviation electrician’s mate, and made two 
deployments on an aircraft carrier. He was discharged honorably in January 2010 as a 
third class petty officer. He used the GI Bill and student loans to attend college from 
September 2011 until June 2013 when he received his degree. He has been employed 
as an electrical engineer for a defense contractor since June 2013. He has worked in 
the United Arab Emirates (UAE) for the contractor since January 2014.  
 
Applicant married in May 2018. He has a stepson, and a daughter born in 
December 2018. Applicant has had a security clearance since 2005 when he entered 
active duty in the U.S. Navy. (Tr. 26-28; GE 1, e-QIP, dated September 21, 2015; Case 
File, Response to SOR, Exhibit C, Diploma)   
 
Applicant received a housing subsidy when he was first arrived in the UAE in 
January 2014, so his monthly salary was approximately $18,000. (Case File, Response 
to the SOR, Exhibit H, Personal financial Statement, Exhibit I; Pay Statement, Exhibit I) 
His company now provides housing so his monthly salary has been reduced but he has 
no housing cost. His monthly salary is now approximately $10,600, with monthly 
recurring expenses of $5,800, leaving a net monthly remainder of approximately $4,000. 
(Tr. 61-64; AE G, Personal Financial Statement, dated February 16, 2019) He has a 
retirement account with his employer with a balance of approximately $19,000. (AE E, 
Account Status, dated, February 16, 2019) He pays into the U.S. Social Security 
System and will receive benefits when appropriate. Applicant has no investments other 
than his U.S. investments; he has only votes in U.S. elections; and he has no 
citizenship affiliation except to the U.S. (Tr. 59-67; AE M, Social Security Statement, 
dated November 27, 2018) 
 
Applicant’s performance evaluations show that he is highly regarded by his 
employer. The reports show that he displays good technical knowledge, is willing to 
learn, and is eager, enthusiastic, and responsive. His supervisors stated that he 
displays the company’s core values, and has good team building behavior. He was 
rated as honest, with ethical decision making. The reports show that he met his 
commitments and strives for excellence. Applicant was rated as exceeds requirements. 
He also received achievement rewards. (Case File, Response to SOR, Exhibits A and 
B) His supervisors and a friend who has worked with Applicant provided 
recommendations that he be granted eligibility for access to classified information. 
(Case File, Response to SOR, Exhibit D; AE L) 
 
The SOR lists, and credit reports (GE 2, dated September 21, 2015; GE 4, dated 
June 21, 2018; GE 5, dated November 6, 2018) confirm the following delinquent debts 
for Applicant: six delinquent student loan debts for $7,630 (SOR 1.a), $7,191 (SOR 1.b), 
$4,496 (SOR 1.c), $5,938 (SOR 1.d), $5,838 (SOR 1.e), and $1.684 (SOR 1.f); a 
telephone service account in collection for $771 (SOR 1.g); a utility debt in collection for 
  4 
 
$180 (SOR 1.h); an unknown collection account for $108 (SOR 1.i); a medical account 
in collection for $95 (SOR 1.j); and an unknown collection account for $94 (SOR 1.k). 
The amount of the student loan debt is approximately $32,000, and the amount of the 
other five debts is approximately $1,248 for a total debt of approximately $33,000.  
 
Applicant received six student loan disbursements from 2011 until 2013 totaling 
approximately $32,000 to subsidize his GI Bill benefits so he could attend school for his 
bachelor’s degree. (SOR 1.a to SOR 1.f) Immediately after receiving his bachelor’s 
degree, Applicant started working for his present defense contractor employer and 
traveled for the company on an orientation tour. He knew that there was a lag time from 
graduation until he received notice to commence paying back the loans. In January 
2014, he was assigned to and started living in the UAE. Prior to his move to the UAE, 
Applicant had not received any correspondence from a student loan service provider 
informing him of the procedures for paying the student loans. In the UAE, he did not 
have good access to the United States postal system and did not receive notice of the 
requirement to start repayment of his student loans. By the middle of 2014, Applicant 
determined that it was time for him to make payments on the student loans. He started 
making phone calls to determine what student loan service provider had his loans. The 
only information had had was the account number. On his September 2015 e-QIP, 
Applicant noted that he had student loan delinquencies because he was in the process 
of determining what loan service provider he needed to contact. After September 2015, 
Applicant continued to occasionally try to determine his student loan service provider. 
His attempts were infrequent since he was constrained by the demands of his work and 
the difficulty of communicating from the UAE. (Tr. 67-71) 
 
In January 2018, Applicant received notice from his employer that his wages 
would be garnished to start repayment of his student loans. He e-mailed his company 
for information on the garnishment, and learned the contact information for the student 
loan processing company. He immediately called the student loan processor, and 
learned the procedure to rehabilitating his student loans. He filed a request with the 
processor to have his loan rehabilitated. (Tr. 31-32, 71-72; Case File, Response to 
SOR, Exhibit E, dated January 15, 2018)  
 
Applicant made ten payments by automatic bank deduction of approximately 
$1,550 each to rehabilitate his student loans, and the student loans were rehabilitated 
by October 2018. Since the student loans have been rehabilitated, Applicant makes 
$221 monthly payments on the student loans by automatic deduction from his bank 
account. (AE F and H, Repayment Planner, dated November 2018) His student loans 
are now current with a balance of approximately $18,000. (Tr. 32-34; AE A, Letter, 
dated October 29, 2018; AE D, Account Status, dated February 16, 2019)  
 
Applicant learned of the telephone service debt and the utility debt when he 
received the SOR in January 2018. Applicant believed the telephone debt was for his 
father’s telephone service and not for his phone service. The utility debt was when he 
attending school and lived with a roommate. He believed the utility bill was paid when 
he and his roommate moved out of their apartment. Applicant believed it was easier and 
  5 
 
simpler to pay the debts rather than attempt to get information from his father and 
former roommate who were in the United States. Applicant paid both debts the day he 
received the SOR and the debts are resolved. (Tr. 40-42, 72-74; Case File, Response 
to SOR, Exhibits F and G)  
 
Applicant has no information on the debts listed at SOR 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k. He has 
no knowledge of the debts. He always had health insurance so he does not know why 
he would have a medical debt. He did not receive any bills that would pertain to these 
debts since he moved around and has been in the UAE with poor mail service since 
2013. There were no phone numbers or other identifiable information in the credit 
reports he reviewed or provided by the government. He is willing to pay the debts as 
soon as he learns the identity and contact information of the creditors. The sum total of 
the three debts is approximately $300 and he has the funds to immediately pay the 
debts. (Tr. 40-43, 74-75) 
 
Applicant has completed a financial management course (Case File, Response 
to SOR, Exhibit J). Applicant also took a self-study financial recovery program. (Tr. 34-
35) Applicant and his wife have established procedures for paying their bills when they 
are received. All of their recurring bills are paid from their bank account by automatic 
deduction. Applicant ensures that his bank account has sufficient funds to pay any 
debts or bills when received. With this system, Applicant does not believe he will have 
any delinquent debts in the future. Since he married, it is important for him to have good 
credit and good credit scores. He wants to be financially “squared away” like he was on 
active duty in the Navy. (Tr. 44-46) 
 
Applicant met his wife in the UAE in March 2016. She is 26 years old and a 
citizen of the Philippines. She came to the UAE and worked in human resources for a 
non-U.S. company. They dated for a while and married in May 2018. Applicant reported 
his marriage to his security officer in early June 2018, and complied with all reporting 
requirements. His wife was born and raised in the mountainous areas of northern 
Philippines and completed all of her schooling in the Philippines. There are no terrorist 
activities in the area where her family is located. Terrorist activities are in the southern 
area of the Philippines.  
 
Applicant’s wife had a son before coming to the UAE who was cared for in the 
Philippines by her mother. Applicant and his wife traveled to the Philippines in 
September 2018 to bring her son to live with them in the UAE. They now have a 
daughter who was born in December 2018, and is a United States citizen. His wife does 
not work outside of the home. She stays home to care for their two young children. His 
wife and stepson are citizens of the Philippines but reside in the UAE. His wife wants to 
and is working on becoming a United States citizen. It is a desire of most people from 
the Philippines to become United States citizens. Applicant wants to raise his family in 
the United States, and provide his children with the benefits of education in the United 
States. (Tr. 46-48, 81-82; AE I, J, K, Birth Certificate and Residency Documents) 
 
  6 
 
Applicant’s wife does not ask him nor do they discuss his work. She only knows 
that he is an electrical engineer for a U.S. contractor supporting the UAE military.  
 
Applicant’s wife’s parents are citizens and residents of the Philippines. 
Applicant’s hardly has a relationship with his wife’s family in the Philippines. His wife’s 
mother is a homemaker and her father a civil engineer. They can speak some English 
but they mostly converse in the native language of their region of the Philippines. They 
are not fluent in English since it is their third or fourth language. Applicant only met his 
wife’s family once when they spent six days in the Philippines in September 2018 to 
meet her son and bring him to live with them in the UAE. Applicant only spent six hours 
with them. His wife occasionally talks to her parents by phone but he does not talk to 
them because of the language difficulties. His wife has no property or funds in the 
Philippines and is not in a position to inherit any property. Applicant stated he has little if 
any loyalty to his in-laws in the Philippines because he has had only limited contact with 
them. He has loyalty to his extended family who are citizens and residents of the United 
States and that he has known all of his life. (Tr. 82-87) 
 
The Philippines is a multiparty, constitutional republic with a bicameral 
legislature. In 2016, the country conducted nationwide elections for the presidency, both 
houses of the legislature, provincial governors, and local government officials. An 
international group of observers determined that the elections were generally free and 
fair but vote buying was widespread. The dynastic political families continued to 
monopolize elective office.  
 
The United States recognized the Philippines as an independent state in 1946 
and established diplomatic relationships. The U.S. has since designated the Philippines 
as a Major Non-NATO ally. The U.S. and the Philippines maintain a close relationship 
and they have a bilateral security alliance bound by the Mutual Defense treaty of 1951. 
The U.S. relationship with the Philippines is based on strong historical and culture links 
and a shared commitment to democracy and human rights. The countries have 
common strategic and economic interests. 
 
President Obama visited the Philippines in 2014 and reaffirmed the United 
States’ commitment to the security alliance. He noted that the two nations have strong 
people-to-people ties; a commitment to peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region; 
and a commitment to build prosperity for their people and the global economy.  
 
Even though the U.S. closed its military bases in the Philippines in 1992, the two 
nations have maintained security cooperation. The Manila Agreement of 2011, 
maintains the 1951 Mutual Defense as the foundation for a robust, balanced, and 
responsive security partnership. In 2012, the Philippines played a key role in the U.S. 
efforts to rebalance its foreign policy priorities for Asia. In 2014, the two countries 
confirmed a defense cooperation agreement that will continue to promote peace and 
stability, and underpins Asia’s remarkable economic growth. The agreement allows for 
the increased presence of U.S. military forces in the Philippines, as well as cooperative 
joint military exercises.  
  7 
 
 
In the past decade, the Philippines has been the largest recipient of U.S. foreign 
military assistance in south east Asia. The U.S. and the Philippines have a strong trade 
and investment relationship. The U.S. is the Philippines’ third–largest trade partner. The 
two countries made enormous strides to deepen the economic linkage between them.  
 
The Philippines and the U.S. share extensive people-to-people ties. Over 
350,000 American’s reside in the Philippines and over 600,000 U.S. citizens visit the 
Philippines each year. Over forty million people of Philippine descent reside in the 
United States. The Philippines have the oldest continuous operating Fulbright Education 
Program established in 1948, and has hosted a large U.S. Peace Corps program for 
over 50 years. 
 
There are human rights issues in the Philippines, to include killings by security 
forces, vigilantes, insurgents; torture and abuse of prisoners and detainees by security 
forces; harsh and life-threatening prison conditions, warrantless arrests; public 
corruption and abuse of power; threats of violence against human rights activists, 
violence against women; and forced labor. Extrajudicial killings have been a major 
human rights concern for many years. Conflicts continue between the government and 
Muslim separatists, communist insurgents, and terrorist groups. Most of the conflict 
takes place in the south islands of the Philippines far from where Applicant’s in-laws 
live. The U.S. Department of State advises all U.S. citizens to exercise increased 
caution in the southern islands and regions due to crime, terrorism, and civil unrest. 
(Hearing Exhibit II; AE B and C) 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
  8 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) The 
financial security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might 
knowingly compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security 
clearance adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
Credit reports and Applicant’s admissions reveal that Applicant has delinquent 
student loans and consumer debts. The evidence in the credit reports and Applicant’s 
admissions are sufficient to raise the following security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
  9 
 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Since the Government has established adverse financial issues, the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the financial issues. 
  
I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20 (a) and (b) do not apply. Applicant’s debts are 
numerous and not all of the debts have been resolved so they are current. The student 
loans were incurred voluntarily and willingly by Applicant to finance his college degree. 
Applicant did not provide any information to suggest that his other debts were not 
incurred in the normal course of activities and by condition beyond his control. It is 
noted that Applicant has acted responsibly under the circumstances by addressing and 
resolving most of his debts.  
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20 (c) applies. Applicant took two different financial 
planning and management courses. It is clear that his financial problems are being 
resolved or are under control.  
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20 (d) applies. Applicant acted in good faith towards his 
debts. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. Applicant is not required to be debt-free. 
All that is required is that Applicant act responsibly given his circumstances. Applicant 
must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve financial problems, and that he 
has taken significant action to implement that plan. Applicant’s plan must show a 
systematic method of handling debts, and Applicant must establish a meaningful track 
  10 
 
record of debt payment. A meaningful track record of debt payment can be established 
by evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. His 
plan does not require paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. A promise to 
pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely 
manner and acting in a financially responsible manner.  
 
Applicant’s wages were garnished to commence paying his student loans. In 
spite of the garnishment, Applicant presented sufficient information to establish that he 
started to address his student loans before the garnishment and before he received the 
SOR listing delinquent student loans. When he believed that he should have received 
information how to repay his student loans, he contacted the student loan program to 
determine the student loan service provider managing his loans. He learned that the six 
loans he received were consolidated into one service provider so that he was able to 
make a plan to have the loans rehabilitated and considered in good standing. Applicant 
was able to make ten large monthly payments on the loans as requested by the loan 
service provided and the loans are now in a normal payment plan. He continues to 
make regular monthly payments and has reduced his student loan debt by almost half.  
 
Applicant also presented sufficient information that he previously paid in full and 
resolved two of his SOR debts (SOR 1.g and 1.h). He was unable to identify and locate 
the creditors for the remaining three SOR debts. The information in the credit reports 
was not sufficient to identify the creditors. The three debts are small and Applicant has 
sufficient funds to pay the debts when the creditors are identified.  
 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances, and he provided adequate 
information on his plans to pay and resolve his delinquent debts. Applicant is current 
with payment arrangements he entered to pay the student loans at SOR 1.a to 1. f. 
Applicant provided significant documents to establish he paid the debts at SOR 1.g and 
1.h. Applicant provided sufficient information that he plans to and has sufficient funds to 
pay the three debts at SOR 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k when the creditors are identified.   
 
Applicant has shown sufficient action to resolve his delinquent debts. Applicant 
provided enough details and sufficient documentation to show proof of payments, 
correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact, evidence 
of attempts to negotiate payment plans, or other evidence of progress or resolution. 
There is sufficient evidence to establish why Applicant was able to make great progress 
addressing or resolving all of his debts. There is sufficient assurance that his financial 
problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. He has 
shown a good-faith effort to resolve these debts. His reasonable and responsible 
actions towards his finances is a strong indication that he will protect and safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. Under all these circumstances, Applicant mitigated 
financial security concerns.  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  11 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, financial, 
and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in divided 
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create circumstances in 
which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interests is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associate 
with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
Applicant’s wife and his stepson are citizens of the Philippines but reside with 
Applicant in the UAE. Since his wife and stepson no longer reside in the Philippines, 
there is no heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, 
or coercion, and therefore no foreign influence security concern.  
 
Applicant’s wife’s parents are citizens and residents of the Philippines. 
Applicant’s contact with his in-laws is minimal. He only met them once for a few hours 
on a visit he made to the Philippines to get his stepson. Applicant has little if any 
communication with his in-laws because of language issues. As to the in-laws, I 
considered the following Foreign Influence Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 7 (a) (contact, 
regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion).  
 
The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. The nature of Applicant’s contacts and relationships 
must be examined to determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. “Heightened” is a relative 
term denoting increased risk compared to some normally existing risk that can be 
inherent anytime there are foreign contacts and relationships. The totality of an 
applicant’s ties to a foreign country as well as to each individual family tie must be 
considered. The foreign influence security concern is not limited to countries hostile to 
the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States. Even friendly nations can 
have profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as 
important to their vital interests or national security. Friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the U. S., especially in economic, scientific, and technical fields. The 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant is at risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress. 
 
  12 
 
Applicant has just a little more than six hours of face-to-face contact with his 
wife’s parents. Applicant does not communicate with them because of language 
difficulties. The in-laws reside in a part of the Philippines that only has normal and not 
excessive or abundant terrorist or criminal activities. These factors do not place a 
heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion on 
Applicant. Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 7(a) does not apply. 
 
I also considered disqualifying condition AG ¶7 (b) (connections to a foreign 
person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or 
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology). The disqualifying condition does not apply. 
There is no information to establish that Applicant’s in-laws, wife, or Applicant have any 
connection to a foreign group, person, or government in the Philippines that they have a 
need, requirement, or desire to help. 
 
Even though there is not a heightened risk, I also considered Foreign Influence 
Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for or 
obligation to immediate family members. Applicant’s contact with his wife’s parents is so 
casual and infrequent that they have only met face-to-face for six hours. Applicant does 
not communicate with them because of language difficulties. These facts do not 
establish a close and continuing relationship between Applicant and his wife’s parents in 
the Philippines. His level of contact is at best only casual and infrequent, and does not 
establish that Applicant’s sense of loyalty to his wife’s family members is significant.  
 
  13 
 
Applicant’s ties and sense of loyalty to the United States are extensive. He is a 
native-born United States citizen, raised and educated in the United States. He served 
in the United States Navy for over four years, and now works for a U.S. defense 
contractor supporting programs sponsored by the United States. Applicant has been 
eligible for access to classified information for over 13 years with no blemishes on his 
security record. His immediately family members are all United States residents and 
citizens. All of his finances are in the United States.  
 
 If Applicant’s in-laws in the Philippines caused him to be placed him in a position 
to have to choose between the interests of the in-laws and the interests of the United 
States, his connection to and loyalty for the United States is so deep and longstanding 
that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of U. S. interests. 
Accordingly, based on all of the factors in this case, Applicant has met his heavy burden 
to show that his relationships with his wife’s in-laws in the Philippines is not a security 
concern. I conclude Appellant has mitigated security concerns for foreign influence. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant to reach a determination 
concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. I considered that 
Applicant served on active duty in the United States Navy for four years, and has 
worked and is working as a civilian employee of a defense contractor for over four 
years. He has been eligible for access to classified information over 13 years with no 
reported security issues.  
 
  14 
 
Under the facts of this case, the Philippine citizenship of Applicant’s wife and 
stepson, and his wife’s immediate family members being citizens and residents of the 
Philippines does not creates a heightened risk of foreign influence leading to the 
potential for vulnerability, pressure, or coercion on Applicant. Applicant has shown his 
overwhelming connections and ties to the United States by his years of service to the 
U.S. military. Applicant’s years of service increase the probability that Applicant will 
recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or 
insurgent group to coerce or exploit his wife and her family’s citizenship in the 
Philippines. The many years of honorable service weighs heavily towards approval of 
his security clearance. In addition, Applicant’s entire immediate family members are 
citizens and residents of the United States, and Applicant has extensive loyalty to the 
United States. . 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. For all 
these reasons, the facts of this case leave me without questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to classified information. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has established his suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial situation and foreign influence. Access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
  15 
 
Administrative Judge 
