1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-04130 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leon J. Schachter, Esq. 
__________ 
Decision 
__________ 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not deliberately falsify the hours he worked. He was sloppy in his 
timekeeping practices and he has acknowledged his mistakes. He has taken corrective 
action, and credibly promised to properly report his work hours. He has established a 
strong professional reputation that weighs in his favor. He was candid and forthcoming 
during the clearance process. Clearance is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
October 10, 2016, seeking to continue the clearance he has held since about 2001. 
After reviewing the information gathered during the background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on December 
21, 2017, alleging security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct) and 
Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the SOR on January 22, 
2018, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
DOHA assigned the case to me on July 20, 2018, and issued a notice of hearing 
on November 5, 2018, setting the hearing for December 13, 2018. At the hearing, the 
03/07/2019
 
2 
 
 
Government offered three exhibits (GE 1 through 3). Applicant testified, presented the 
testimony of two witnesses, and submitted three exhibits (AE 1 through 3). AE 1 is 
comprised of ten documents. All exhibits were admitted without objection, except for GE 
2. Applicant objected to me considering GE 2 (another federal agency’s clearance 
decision statement). Consistent with Appeal Board precedent, I overruled his objection. 
(See, ISCR Case No. 08-06997 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2011) (marked and admitted as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1). DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 2, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant denied that he deliberately falsified the number of hours 
he worked. Both SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.b alleged the same facts under the personal conduct 
guideline (¶ 1.a), and under the financial considerations guideline (¶ 2.a cross-alleged ¶ 
1.a). After a thorough review of the record evidence, including his testimony and 
demeanor while testifying, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old information technology auditor working with a federal 
contractor. He received a bachelor’s degree in 2000 and a master’s degree in 2001, 
both in accounting and information systems. He married his spouse in 2004, and they 
have three children, ages 11, 9, and 6.  
 
Applicant started working for federal contractors immediately after receiving his 
bachelor’s degree. He worked for his first employer between 2001 and February 2016. 
He has held a top-secret clearance continuously since 2003. In February 2016, 
Applicant’s current employer, a federal contractor, hired him. There is no evidence of 
any security violations, except for the two SOR allegations. 
 
In his October 2016 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he was denied eligibility for 
access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) by another federal agency 
(Agency) in December 2015. Applicant’s background investigation addressed the denial 
of his SCI eligibility that is documented in the Agency’s Clearance Decision Statement 
(CDS; GE 2). 
 
The CDS was based on statements made by Applicant during a polygraph 
assisted interview in June 2015. In its pertinent parts, the summary of the interview 
prepared by the Agency interviewer states: 
 
Applicant stated that he does not document his [work] time in an accurate 
manner. He rounds off time because he is “so busy,” and he felt like he 
never has the time to accurately document the amount of time he works 
on each contract since he began his employment . . . I just don’t have the 
time to do that [accurately document time]. I just don’t care, and should I 
be more accurate . . . yeah, probably. 
 
For example, he might work 30 minutes on a contract and document that 
he worked one hour. He stated that he has worked one hour and 
 
3 
 
 
documented two-and-a-half hours because his expertise oftentimes allows 
to complete a task much more quickly than someone else would have 
been able to do the same thing. [Applicant] has also documented time 
worked when he is taking a lunch break . . . . approximately once or twice 
per week, with the last time being the Monday prior to his interview . . . . 
He stated he attempts to document his hours more carefully if he is 
working on time and materials contracts . . . . because the government 
would be billed according to the amount of hours worked; however, he is 
more “verbose,” or less careful with the fixed-price contracts because he is 
judged by customers based on his outcome, and is awarded contracts 
based on his numbers. He is only benefiting internally because his hours 
are collected for internal reporting matrices only . . . . 
 
Applicant repeatedly denied that he deliberately cheated on his time cards or that 
he deliberately falsified the number of hours he worked. He believes that he reported his 
hours in good faith and in accordance with government and his company’s standards. 
He averred that his statements to the Agency investigator were reported out of context. 
He attributed his sloppy timekeeping to his very busy schedule and not having the right 
tools to do the timekeeping. 
 
The chief operating officer (COO) for Applicant’s current company testified on his 
behalf. The COO is the person who recruited and hired Applicant in 2016. He was 
recruited because of his outstanding reputation. Applicant is now a partner in the 
company. In the COO’s opinion, Applicant has an impeccable record and a great 
reputation for his trustworthiness, honesty, and reliability. Applicant’s reputation stands 
by itself within the marketplace; he is considered to be an honorable and dependable 
man. Since he was hired in 2016, Applicant’s performance has been stellar and superb. 
He follows the letter of the law and provides leadership and oversight to a diverse team 
of employees. Applicant made the COO aware of the SOR and its allegations. The COO 
believes that the concerns are the result of miscommunications and that the allegations 
do not reflect on Applicant’s integrity. He strongly recommends the continuation of his 
clearance. Applicant is a great father and is involved in his children’s sporting events. 
(Tr. 30-33, AE B) 
 
Two executive vice presidents, a vice president, and a senior partner of 
Applicant’s company all echoed the above glowing remarks about Applicant’s character, 
performance, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. They strongly 
recommend the continuation of his clearance. 
 
According to Applicant’s second witness (P), Applicant’s prior employer (at the 
time of the allegations) conducted annual training to teach employees how to record 
time worked. The time was supposed to be charged on a daily basis, but never later 
than by mid-day the next working day. There was no time punching, and it was up to the 
individuals to have their own time tracking mechanisms. All time sheets were approved 
by the individual’s supervisors. In the case of time and materials contracts with the 
government, the time sheets were also reviewed by government officials. P has never 
 
4 
 
 
had a reason to question Applicant’s honesty, integrity, ethics, or trustworthiness. P was 
in charge of monitoring the time charged to clients in different projects. During the four 
years that he monitored Applicant’s time sheets, he never noticed any issues or 
discrepancies with the time he charged to government clients. 
 
A third reference noted that he was in charge of reviewing all charged hours and 
budgets that Applicant had documented for his clients during the period between 2012 
and 2016. He reviewed the charged hours for appropriateness and could not identify 
any instances where Applicant falsified any hours he worked. The reference considers 
Applicant to be the perfect example of a true professional, always leading by example, 
and well-liked by peers and clients alike. He considers Applicant to be trustworthy, 
honest, reliable, and a law-abiding person who follows rules and regulations. He 
endorsed Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. 
 
Applicant’s first employer is a well-known large accounting firm. Because of his 
good performance, between 2001 and 2016, Applicant was promoted quickly and 
achieved a managing director position before he was recruited by his current employer. 
The time worked was reported in 15 minute increments, wherein any work less than 15 
minutes was reported as 15 minutes of work. 
 
Applicant claimed that he did not have a tool to help him remember the time he 
worked in a particular contract during the day, and his time reporting was complicated 
because he would have six or more clients he would work with during any particular 
day. He would use his email, calendar, meeting requests, and other documents to 
recreate his time reporting. Applicant admitted that he sometimes would round up his 
hours or sometimes he would guess the time worked on a client because of his poor 
time keeping habits. 
 
A supervisor always had to review and approve Applicant’s time sheets. He was 
more careful when dealing in time and materials contracts because there was an 
additional level of review by a government agent that would review and approve the 
invoices submitted. He denied ever rounding up or guessing any work-time for time and 
materials contracts because he was more careful recording his time with those 
contracts. 
 
Applicant did not recall telling the Agency interviewer that he did not care about 
accurately keeping his time. He admitted that he told the interviewer that he was much 
more careful recording his time for time and materials contracts because they directly 
impacted the government billings. Applicant admitted to documenting time work during a 
lunch break once or twice a week. He explained that it was regular practice to have 
working lunches to discuss client related issues, training, new business opportunities, or 
to answer a client’s call. He claimed he only billed for that part of his lunch time where 
he was working. 
 
Applicant also denied telling the interviewer that he would work only 30 minutes 
and round up his time to charge one full hour on a particular contract. He claimed he 
 
5 
 
 
was talking to the interviewer about charging for training time or other administrative 
functions, but not contracts. He explained that if he was able to complete the training in 
two hours because of his experience, but the average employee would take three hours 
to complete the training, he would also charge the three hours.  
 
Applicant noted that his timekeeping practices, time sheets, or invoices had 
never been challenged or questioned by any of his supervisors, customers, or clients 
throughout his career. After the Agency interviews in 2015, he completely changed his 
practice of documenting his time - he stopped rounding off worked hours and he 
stopped guessing the hours worked. In 2018, Applicant took a one-day government 
timekeeping class at a university to ensure his timekeeping practices were according to 
government standards. Since implementing his new practices, he believes he is now 
more meticulous and accurate in his time keeping. 
 
Applicant believes that he has learned a difficult lesson as a result of the Agency 
interviews and the concerns raised by his past timekeeping practices. He credibly stated 
that he takes these concerns very seriously because this is his career. Applicant noted 
that even after the Agency’s interviews, there was never an investigation opened 
against him concerning his timekeeping practices by any of his employers, nor were 
there any complaints filed by his customers, or by the government. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the  Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AG), implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 sets forth the security concern as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information . . . .  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified the number of hours he 
worked between 2001 and 2015. Applicant admitted that he sometimes rounded off the 
hours he worked and that sometimes he guessed the time he charged any particular 
client. However, he repeatedly denied that he deliberately falsified or misrepresented 
the number of hours he worked. 
 
 If true, Applicant’s behavior would raise the following disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness 
to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating 
 
7 
 
 
that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach 
of client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or 
government protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; deliberately providing false 
or misleading information; or concealing or omitting 
information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental 
health professional involved in making a recommendation 
relevant to a national security eligibility determination, or 
other official government representative; 
 
 The record does not establish the above disqualifying condition. But even if it did, 
I would consider it mitigated under the following mitigating conditions set forth by AG ¶ 
17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated of from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant repeatedly denied that he deliberately falsified or misrepresented the 
hours he worked. He admitted that he sometimes rounded off his hours, and that 
sometimes he guessed the time he charged to any particular client or contract. He 
attributed his sloppy timekeeping to his very busy schedule and not having the right 
tools to do the timekeeping. Applicant credibly testified that most of his negligent 
timekeeping was done while working on fixed-price contracts or reporting training or 
 
8 
 
 
other administrative functions. He specifically noted that he was more careful with his 
timekeeping while working on time and materials contracts because he did not want to 
overcharge the client, and he knew there was more timekeeping oversight by his 
employer and the government on those contracts.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant did not deliberately 
falsify the number of hours he worked. His actions were more likely the result of 
negligent or sloppy timekeeping practices. I do not find that he had the deliberate intent 
to deceive or misrepresent information to the government or his employer. Applicant 
has consistently received positive performance feedback. Since 2001, he has built a 
strong professional reputation. He is generally known by his coworkers, supervisors, 
and clients for his professional skills, dedication, honesty, reliability, and dependability. I 
note that even after concerns were raised about his timekeeping practices, there were 
no investigations, complaints, or disciplinary actions taken against Applicant or his then 
employer for improper timekeeping practices in government contracts.  
 
 Applicant has held a clearance since about 2001, with no issues or security 
concerns, except for the current SOR allegations. He has been forthcoming during the 
security clearance process. He disclosed the Agency’s denial of his SCI eligibility in his 
2016 SCA, and he was candid and forthcoming at his hearing. Applicant acknowledged 
his timekeeping mistakes and credibly promised not to repeat his questionable 
behavior. He participated in a government timekeeping class, and seems to be 
genuinely remorseful for his past negligent practices. I find that Applicant is unlikely to 
continue his negligent or sloppy timekeeping practices. It has been over three years 
since Applicant was confronted with his poor timekeeping practices during the Agency 
interviews. There is no evidence of any additional questionable behavior or timekeeping 
practices. Applicant’s past timekeeping practice do not cast doubt in his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
 Under Guideline F, the SOR cross-alleges in ¶ 2.a the same factual concerns 
alleged in ¶ 1.a. Because those concerns were fully addressed under Guideline E, for 
 
9 
 
 
the sake of brevity my findings, analysis, and conclusions under those guidelines will be 
incorporated herein without repeating them. 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified the number of hours he 
worked between 2001 and 2015. Applicant admitted that he sometimes rounded off the 
hours he worked and that sometimes he guessed the time he charged any particular 
client or contract. He denied that he deliberately falsified or misrepresented the number 
of hours he worked. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides a disqualifying condition that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as 
embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements and other intentional breaches of trust.”  
 
Consistent with my findings and conclusion under Guideline E, incorporated 
herein, I find that the record does not establish the above disqualifying condition. Even if 
the above disqualifying condition was raised by the facts of the case, I find it mitigated 
under the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control. 
 
 I find that Applicant is unlikely to continue his negligent or sloppy timekeeping 
practices. It has been over three years since Applicant was confronted with his poor 
timekeeping practices during the Agency interviews. There is no evidence of any 
additional questionable behavior of security concerns, or of continuing bad timekeeping 
practices. Applicant’s past timekeeping practices do not cast doubt in his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
10 
 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
federal contractors since 2001, and has held a clearance during employment without 
any issues or concerns, except for SOR current allegations.  
 
Applicant has established a strong professional reputation. He is generally known 
by his coworkers, supervisors, and clients for his professional skills, dedication, 
honesty, reliability, and dependability. His excellent reputation weights in his favor. 
Applicant is fully aware of the security concerns raised by his negligent or poor 
timekeeping practices. He credibly promised to maintain proper timekeeping practices 
to avoid any future concerns. The personal conduct and financial considerations 
security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant  
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline F:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest of the United States to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
