1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-04051 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Brittany White, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant incurred 
delinquent debt during a prolonged separation from his ex-wife, and a period of 
unemployment after he separated from the military. Since returning to work in June 
2017, Applicant has resolved $12,000 in delinquent accounts, establishing a record of 
debt repayment. Applicant’s access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On December 20, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement Of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to deny his security clearance.  
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on June 8, 2017.   
03/27/2019
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on September 26, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, without objection. After the hearing, 
Applicant timely submitted AE F through K, which were also admitted without objection.2 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 4, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 41, has worked as an operations analyst for a federal contracting 
company since June 2017. He previously served in the U.S. Army from May 2002 to 
November 2016, achieving the rank of major (O-4). He was initially granted access to 
classified information in 1996 during his service in the Army Reserve Officer Training 
Corps (ROTC). He completed his most recent security clearance application in May 
2017, disclosing outstanding federal and state income taxes and other delinquent 
accounts. Based on Applicant’s disclosures and information developed during his 
background investigation, the SOR alleges that Applicant owes $65,000 in delinquent 
debt. Most of the alleged debt is for the $26,900 past-due balance on a mortgage 
account.3  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in approximately 2008, when he received 
orders for his new duty station. His wife wanted to remain in State 1 in the family home 
with the couple’s two minor children. Applicant agreed and moved to his new duty 
station unaccompanied. His wife did not work outside the home, so Applicant fully 
supported the household in addition to paying his separate living expenses. Applicant 
and his wife separated in 2010. They did not have a formal separation agreement, but 
Applicant agreed to continue the support arrangement, which cost him approximately 
$2,000 per month. In addition, he also paid $452 in child support for his daughter from 
another relationship.4 
 
 Applicant maintained this arrangement for eight years. The couple agreed to 
continue the support arrangement in their 2016 divorce decree. Applicant struggled 
financially and began to accumulate delinquent debt. He incurred a 2012 state income 
tax balance after his tax preparer erroneously applied a tax credit that Applicant was not 
entitled to receive. Although he filed his 2015 federal income returns as required, he 
could not afford to pay his additional tax obligation. He also began falling behind on the 
mortgage of the family home in early 2016 and ultimately lost the house to foreclosure 
in October 2016. After separating from the Army in November 2016, Applicant was 
unemployed for seven months until he began his current position. While unemployed, 
he received $116 per week in unemployment compensation.5  
 
                                                          
2 HE III. 
 
3 Tr. 17-19; GE 1 – 3. 
 
4 Tr. 17, 20-22, 25, 30. 
 
5 Tr. 22-32, 38; AE H.  
 
3 
 
 When Applicant retuned to work in June 2017, he began earning $70,000 
annually. He has since earned a raise to $84,000. He began repaying his delinquent 
debt. To date, he resolved the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($6,619), 1.f ($3,701), 
1.h ($60), 1.j ($37), 1.k ($36), and 1.l ($32). He paid the outstanding state income taxes 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m ($2,300) in October 2017. He claims to have entered into 
payment plans to resolve the student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($3,761) and 1.g 
($559) and the federal income taxes alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n ($5,312) since May 2017, 
paying $175 each month. However, he did not provide evidence of a payment history for 
the accounts. Applicant’s home, which was secured by a loan from the Department of 
Veterans Affairs, was sold at a foreclosure sale. He does not know how much the home 
sold for and claims that the VA advised him that he does not owe a deficiency balance 
on the loan. The record is unclear about the status of the mortgage loan alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.a. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($9,542) and 1.d ($6,351) remain unresolved.6  
 
 Applicant lives with his girlfriend and their infant daughter. He pays $1,100 in 
child support for his two minor children and provides his oldest son approximately $400 
each month to help with his college expenses.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
6 Tr. 32, 34-37, 40-50; AE A-F, I-J.  
 
7 Tr. 16, 26, 39, 50, 58-59; AE G.  
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.8 The SOR 
alleged that Applicant owed approximately $65,000 in delinquent debt. The record 
establishes that he has a history of not meeting his financial obligations and inability to 
do so. He also failed to pay his federal and state income taxes as required.9  
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by events beyond his control, his 
separation from his wife between 2009 and their divorce in 2016, and a seven-month 
period of unemployment after he separated from the military in November 2016. During 
that time, Applicant expended approximately $2,500 each month to support his ex-wife 
and their two children, his third child from another relationship, as well as his own living 
expenses. He acted responsibly under the circumstances by resolving his delinquent 
debt when he returned to full employment. Since June 2017, he has resolved $12,800 in 
delinquent accounts. Although Applicant paid five of the six accounts after he received 
the SOR, this is reasonable given that he returned to work less than six months before 
receiving the SOR. In addition, the amount of support he provides to his ex-wife and 
children decreased substantially, giving him more disposable income to resolve his 
delinquent accounts.  
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 18. 
 
9 AG ¶ 19 (a), (c), and (f). 
 
 
5 
 
“An applicant is not required to be debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all 
debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, 
accompanied by concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent 
to effectuate the plan.10 Although a number of delinquent accounts remain unresolved, 
Applicant has demonstrated a sufficient record of debt repayment to mitigate the 
concerns raised by his finances.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ongoing security 
worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person factors 
at AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant has held a security clearance without incident for over 20 years. 
The purpose of a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts. Rather the 
purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an 
affirmative determination that the personal is an acceptable security risk.”11 Here, 
Applicant’s financial problems do not raise any behavior that indicates poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or an unwillingness to follow rules and regulations that may hinder his 
ability to properly handle or safeguard classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009). 
 
11 AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
