1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 17-04141 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On January 31, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence).1 In a notarized response dated February 28, 2018, Applicant admitted all 
allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned this case on July 20, 2018. On 
August 8, 2018, a notice was issued setting the hearing for September 26, 2018. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled.  
The Government offered two documents, which were accepted into the record 
without objection as Government exhibits (Exs.) 1-2. Applicant gave testimony and 
offered five documents, which were accepted into the record without objection as Exs. 
A-E. A transcript (Tr.) of the proceedings was received on October 4, 2018, and the
record was closed. After my review of the record as a whole, I find that Applicant
mitigated foreign influence security concerns.
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.  
03/28/2019
  2 
 
  Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about the Philippines. The request was offered as Government Ex. 2. 
Applicant did not object. I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the 
request that are supported by source documents from official U.S. Government 
publications, and from other recent DOHA decisions. The facts considered include, but 
are not limited to, the following: 
 
• The Philippines is a multi-party, constitutional republic with a bicameral 
legislature. The United States recognized the Philippines as an independent state and 
established diplomatic relations in 1946. The United States has designated the 
Philippines as a major non-NATO ally, and there are close and abiding security ties 
between the two nations, based on strong historical and cultural links and a shared 
commitment to democracy and human rights. The Manila Declaration of 2011 reaffirmed 
the 1951 U.S.-Philippines Mutual Defense Treaty as the foundation for a robust, 
balanced, and responsive security partnership.  
 
• The United States is among the Philippines’ top trading partners, and it 
traditionally has been the Philippines’ largest foreign investor. The United States and 
the Philippines have a bilateral trade and investment framework and a tax treaty. 
Philippine imports from the United States include raw and semi-processed materials for 
the manufacture of semiconductors, electronics and electrical machinery, transport 
equipment, cereals, and cereal preparations. 
 
• Philippine national elections have been generally free and fair, but independent 
observers have noted widespread vote buying. In addition, dynastic political families 
have monopolized elective offices at the national and local level.  
 
• The most significant human rights problems are extrajudicial killings, enforced 
disappearances undertaken by security forces and vigilante groups, a weak and 
overburdened criminal justice system, widespread official corruption and abuse of 
power, and impunity from prosecution for human rights abuses.  
 
• Other human rights problems include prisoner and detainee torture and abuse 
by security forces, violence and harassment against human rights activists by security 
forces, warrantless arrests, lengthy pretrial detentions, poor prison conditions, violence 
against women, abuse and sexual exploitation of children, and trafficking in persons.  
 
• Muslim separatists, communist insurgencies, and terrorist organizations are 
active in the Philippines, and they have killed Philippine security forces, local 
government officials, and other civilians. Through joint U.S. - Philippine cooperation, the 
ability of these various groups to operate in the Philippines has been heavily 
constrained, but not eliminated. In 2014, there were numerous attacks with small arms 
and improvised explosive devices, kidnappings for ransom, and extortion efforts by 
suspected terrorist groups. Gangs of kidnappers have targeted tourists and foreigners, 
including Filipino-Americans. The U.S. State Department has recommended that all 
U.S. citizens defer non-essential travel to the Sulu Archipelago due to the high threat of 
  3 
 
kidnapping in that area. The State Department also has warned U.S. citizens to 
exercise extreme caution if traveling to the island of Mindanao due to violent activities of 
terrorist and insurgent groups.  
 
• The Philippine government has recognized the potential threat posed by 
radicalized citizens supporting e Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). In July 
2014, the Philippine president’s anti-terrorism council convened an ad hoc emergency 
technical working group focusing on persons of interest. The working group has 
tightened passport issuance, increased immigration screening, and increased 
monitoring of ISIL-related activity. 
 
 • The source documents submitted do not establish that the Philippines engages 
in economic or military intelligence activity against the United States. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old architect who has worked for the same employer, a 
defense contractor, for about two years. He specializes in architecture and urban 
planning. He has earned two bachelor’s degrees and a master’s degree. Born in the 
United States, he is married and has two minor children.  
 
 In 2010, Applicant’s father, a naturalized U.S. citizen, moved back to the 
Philippines to care for his ailing mother, Applicant’s grandmother. Applicant’s father 
bought a condominium in the Philippines after the move, and also had his name put on 
property owned by his own parents before they died. (Tr. 18)  He did so to facilitate its 
transfer upon the death of Applicant’s grandparents. More recently, Applicant’s father 
has decided to retire primarily in the Philippines in order to be close to family.2 (Tr. 20) 
Applicant testified that his father subsequently decided to have Applicant put his name 
on the properties because: 
 
In the Philippines, if you try to inherit property . . . it’s darn near 
impossible. Pretty much the government will take most if not all of it 
through inheritance. The typical way people go and inherit property is by 
transfer and/or by putting a second name on the deed title. And the only 
way you’re allowed to have our [sic] name on a deed title in the Philippines 
is if you were also a Filipino citizen. The Philippines does not allow foreign 
nationals to go and own property in the Philippines . . . .  (Tr. 19) 
 
First, however, Applicant had to become a citizen of the Philippines.  
 
Applicant learned that as a child of two native-born Philippine citizens, he could 
apply for retroactive recognition of Philippine citizenship, which in his case would mean 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s father derives no medical, health, or retirement benefits from the Philippines. (Tr. 29) He 
does, however, receive a retirement pension and Social Security from the United States to supplement 
his income in retirement. Applicant does not provide him with any financial assistance. 
 
  4 
 
recognized dual-citizenship with the U.S. and the Philippines.3 He pursued this avenue 
despite having “no interest . . . I’m doing this out of an abundance of respect for my 
father. I see him very infrequently . . . maybe once a year. I might correspond with him 
via email or a version of text message maybe a handful of times.” (Tr. 20) Applicant’s 
intention is to sell the property when his father passes away as he has no need for the 
property or its financial benefits. He noted, “if I don’t get a dime it will not bother me in 
the slightest. . . . Whether I get any money for it doesn’t matter to me.” (Tr. 20-21, 40)  
 
In contrast to his potential future interest in the Philippines, Applicant was born, 
raised, and educated in the United States. He and his wife have built their home and are 
raising their family within their community, where they are highly involved in a variety of 
capacities. (Tr. 23) The family is very involved with their church and its various 
committees. Currently a homemaker, Applicant’s wife, a former professor, is an active 
volunteer.4 She plans to continue in that capacity until her children are a little older. 
Applicant maintains close contact with his divorced mother and his in-laws, all of whom 
live in the same region. He has worked for his current employer and several state and 
local governments over his career, earning him a solid professional reputation. The 
family is “more than comfortable without any other financial assistance.” (Tr. 21)  
 
Applicant maintains his checking, savings, and retirement accounts in the United 
States. His personal retirement account amounts to about $200,000, he keeps about 
$10,000 in liquid assets, and their home is worth about $350,000. Both his children are 
enjoying the local public schools, where Applicant and his wife are active. The children 
are busy with multiple extracurricular and community activities. Applicant does not have 
a valid Philippine passport, nor does he speak the Tagalog language. (Tr. 21, 41)   
 
At issue are three properties in the Philippines, noted in the SOR at 1.b-1.d The 
property at 1.b, in which Applicant’s father resides, is jointly owned by Applicant’s father, 
half-sister, and Applicant.5 Technically, the father is the primary owner with Applicant 
and his half-sister listed as secondary interests on the deed. Located in the vicinity of 
Metro Manila, this condominium is currently worth about $100,000.6 (Tr. 34) A parking 
space for that unit is valued at about $7,000.  
 
The property at 1.c, which is located in the same region, is a condominium 
currently under construction. This smaller property, valued as potentially worth about 
$40,000, is similarly co-owned by Applicant’s father, half-sister, and Applicant. An 
associated parking place is valued at approximately $5,800. This property was 
                                                          
3 Because the application for retroactive citizenship does not actually seek Philippine citizenship, but only 
the acknowledgment that Applicant automatically became a Philippine citizen upon birth to two native 
Philippine citizens, it does not constitute an application to become a Philippine citizen. (Tr. 31-32) 
 
4 No evidence was offered regarding Applicant’s wife’s finances, savings, future interests, etc. 
 
5 Applicant’s half-sister also has no interest in the properties at issue or relocating from the United States 
to the Philippines. Here, she has a family, children, and career. (Tr. 40) Should she later take an interest 
in one or more of the properties, Applicant will sign over his interests to her.  
 
6 The Manila region is distant from the Sulu Archipelago and Mindanao, areas in which the U.S. State 
Department advises U.S. citizens to use particular caution. 
  5 
 
purchased during the pre-construction stage. Applicant’s father intends to eventually sell 
his current condominium and downsize into this property.   
 
The property at 1.d is a new residential apartment building consisting of 26 units 
and valued at about $400,000. The building is currently jointly owned in the same 
manner as the other properties, with Applicant’s father as primary owner. In about 2015, 
Applicant’s grandparent’s home and office was razed in order to build this structure. 
Units are currently available for rent. (Tr. 39)  
 
In addition, Applicant is a signatory on his father’s various savings accounts in 
the Philippines. (Tr. 45) He was put on to these accounts to facilitate in their liquidation 
upon the father’s death. (Tr. 42, 45-46) They make up his father’s “play money,” cash 
the father uses to make investments on the stock market. (Tr. 42) Applicant believes it 
amounts to about $50,000. These are distinctly different balances from the money 
Applicant’s father maintains in U.S. banking institutions in this country. Applicant is not 
fully aware of his father’s financial holdings in the United States. His father is 70 years 
old, a diabetic smoker with serious spinal issues.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s adjudicative goal is 
a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under the AG, the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount 
consideration. Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence that transcends beyond 
normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in 
those to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may fail to safeguard such information.  
 
  6 
 
Analysis 
 
 Under the AG, foreign contact and interests, including, but not limited to, 
business, financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U. S. interests or 
otherwise be made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Assessment of foreign contact and interests should consider the country (Philippines) in 
which the foreign contact or interest is included.  
 
 The AG lists nine available disqualifying conditions. Given that Applicant has a 
father who is a dual-citizen of the U.S. and the Philippines who resides in the 
Philippines most of the year, and because Applicant is a co-owner of properties and 
bank accounts held by his father in the Philippines, I find the following apply:  
 
¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country, if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;   
 
¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
¶ 7(f): substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest.   
 
Under ¶ 8, three mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
  
¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
 
  7 
 
¶ 8(f): the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual.   
 
 As a threshold issue, I note the information regarding the Philippines 
incorporated into this analysis above. Here, the Government is concerned with whether 
there is a risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion related to 
Applicant’s father and the Philippine properties. (Tr. 47) Applicant’s closeness to his 
father is demonstrated by his going through the process to permit his name to be on the 
property deeds and bank accounts, something he did “out of an abundance of respect” 
for his father. As a result, he and his half-sister have the potential of splitting about 
$552,000, or receiving about $276,000 each. In addition, should the funds and 
investments not be depleted, Applicant has the potential of inheriting about $50,000 in 
Philippine held “fun money.” Consequently, Applicant clearly has a notable ($326,000) 
financial interest in the Philippines.   
 
 The reason Applicant has gone through certain legal machinations in order to 
have his name added to his father’s properties and banks is related to problems 
concerning inheritance in the Philippines. Applicant’s testimony reflects that 
extraordinary efforts are taken in the law to keep such interests from being passed 
down to one’s heirs. Taken in conjunction with the country’s reputation for vigorous 
tactics and circumventing due process, there is the potential concern as to how far it 
would go to gain something it wants. Similarly, there are third-party forces and terrorist 
groups within the Philippines known to kill and kidnap foreigners, a significant problem 
recognized by the Philippine government as well. 
 
 Facts exist, however, tending to mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant 
was born and raised in the United States. Here, he was educated, met his wife, and 
married. They have built their own home, had children, and become heavily involved 
with their community, church, and school system. He considers the United States to be 
his only home and he has no desire to move to the Philippines, where he does not 
speak the language. Applicant has excelled in his profession within his region. He 
maintains a close relationship with his mother and with his in-law here, as well. He has 
personally made no financial investments abroad. Rather, in the United States, he has 
retirement savings of about $200,000, about $10,000 in liquid assets, and their home is 
valued at about $350,000. Combined, this represents about $560,000 in current worth 
for a man in his early 40s with considerable earning potential in his future, and with a 
wife who will inevitably return to the workforce. Applicant was credible in his 
declarations that he has no need for the potential inheritances at issue, and will liquidate 
any such inheritance received. I find ¶ 8(a)-(b) and ¶ 8(f) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. The ultimate determination of whether 
  8 
 
to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors related to the 
whole person concept have already been discussed, but some warrant emphasis. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old architect who has worked for the same employer for 
about two years. He has made a successful career in his region working with 
governments and communities with regard to architecture and urban planning. He was 
born, raised, and educated in this country. He and his wife have two children who are 
likewise being raised and educated in the local schools. The family is enmeshed in their 
community, busy with volunteerism, the schools, and church. Applicant’s wife, a former 
professor, is a homemaker and volunteer at present, taking time from work until the 
children are a little older. They are happy and successful living their American dream.  
 
Applicant’s father has returned to his birthplace, the Philippines, as a part-time 
resident. Because of restrictive and somewhat dubious inheritance laws, he had 
Applicant have his dual-nationality (U.S.-Philippines) recognized so he could have 
Applicant’s name added to property titles along with his half-sister. Applicant has no 
interest in either the properties or living in the Philippines. He went through these 
machinations out of respect to his father, not for economic gain. Should he come into 
his share of this property-based inheritance, he will either cash out of the investment or 
give his half-sister his interest. He considers his father’s “fun money” to be 
comparatively de minimis. Applicant is a highly successful professional with markedly 
more financial holdings in the United States. Taken together, Applicant’s potential 
inheritance is unlikely to result in a conflict or be used effectively to influence, 
manipulate, or pressure him, just as his longstanding loyalties to the United States 
outweigh his interests abroad. Therefore, I find Applicant has mitigated foreign influence 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                            
          
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
