KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline C; Guideline E
DIGEST: We agree the Judge erred in failing to analyze Applicant’s contention that he did not
understand the question when he submitted his SCA and, on the same day, disclosed his
marijuana use during his counterintelligence screening.  However, this error was harmless
because, given Applicant’s other questionable conduct, it did not likely affect the outcome of the
case. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-03978.a1
DATE: 03/06/2019
DATE: March 6, 2019
In Re:
--------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-03978
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 15, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Guideline B (Foreign
Influence), and Guideline C (Foreign Preference) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan.
2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  Prior to the hearing, Department
Counsel withdrew the Guideline B and C allegations.  On November 30, 2018, after the hearing,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28
and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He has earned a bachelor’s
degree and is enrolled in a master’s degree program.  A professor and master’s program director
praised Applicant’s performance as a student. 
Applicant admitted he received multiple traffic citations for speeding, uninspected vehicle,
and failing to comply with traffic signals from 2004 to 2016.  He attributed his receipt of the
citations to working as a driver, although many were received before that employment.  He also
admitted to receiving two additional traffic citations in 2018.
Applicant admitted he used marijuana in 2015.  He testified that he used marijuana six to
eight times at parties and claimed he had not used it since 2015.  Two drug tests he took in 2018
were negative.  He signed a statement of intent in which he pledged to abstain from further use of
illegal substances.
Applicant admitted he was arrested for felony embezzlement in 2007.  He was found guilty
of a reduced charge, given a suspended sentence, and was required to pay restitution and perform
community service.  While working as a store clerk, he scanned store merchandise as if he was
returning previously purchased goods and issued himself a refund that was deposited directly in his
bank account.  He indicated he did not understand his action were illegal.  He was terminated from
that employment.
Applicant admitted he was arrested for forging public records in 2007.  He admitting forging
a date on a court document related to the above arrest to account for his absence from high school. 
This charge was dismissed.  
Applicant admitted that he falsified his 2017 security clearance application (SCA) when he
denied drug use in the past seven years.  During a background interview, he claimed he did not list
his marijuana use on that document because he did not think experimental use had to be disclosed. 
2
He testified that he omitted that information because he did not understand the question and wanted
to know more about it. 
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant deliberately omitted his marijuana use from his SCA.   He has an extended history
of questionable conduct.  “He incurred numerous traffic citations; used marijuana in violation of
federal criminal laws; lied about that marijuana use on his [SCA]; embezzled from his employer;
and forged court documents submitted to his school.”  Decision at 5.  None of the mitigating
conditions fully apply.  His two traffic citations in 2018 demonstrate he had not yet learned to
comply with traffic rules.  He has not demonstrated sufficient rehabilitation to show similar behavior
is unlikely to recur.   
Discussion
Applicant contends that he answered the SCA incorrectly because he did not fully understand
the drug-use question and subsequently corrected himself in the follow-up interview after obtaining
clarification of the question.  He argues that the Judge erred in disregarding “the fact he did not fully
understand the question and without a full understanding, [an] individual cannot deliberately act.” 
Appeal Brief at 9.  In his SOR Response, Applicant’s answered the falsification allegation (SOR ¶
1.e) stating:  
I admit.   I falsified the answer because I was not sure if the question applied to me. 
Also, I was waiting to be screened and discussed the question with my screener.  I
answered correctly after I got clarification from the screener on the spot.  
On July 24, 2017, Applicant submitted his SCA in which he answered “No” to the question that
asked whether he illegally used any drugs or controlled substance in the past seven years. 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1.  On the same day that he submitted his SCA, he also underwent a
counterintelligence screening.  GE 5.  The report of that screening reflects the following:
43.  Describe your current and past drug usage.  Amount/frequency.
 CANDIDATE Response:  “I experimented with marijuana a couple of times.  The
last time was in 2015.”
Interviewer Note:  CANDIDATE stated HE “puffed” on a joint of marijuana “10
times” in the course of two months in 2015.
3
This information was not in HIS SF86.  HE stated HE did not think experimental use
had to be input in the SF86.  CANDIDATE later stated that HE wanted to talk and
[sic] about it during the interview and see if the experimenting needed to be added.1
We agree the Judge erred in failing to analyze Applicant’s contention that he did not understand the
question when he submitted his SCA and, on the same day, disclosed his marijuana use during his
counterintelligence screening.  However, this error was harmless because, given Applicant’s other
questionable conduct, it did not likely affect the outcome of the case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-
15184 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2013).   
Applicant also contends that the Judge did not consider or properly weigh all relevant
evidence.  For example, he argues he has learned from his past mistakes and claims the Judge did
not consider the passage of time that has occurred since his marijuana use or his “severe criminal
conduct.”  Appeal Brief at 10.  His arguments, however,  are neither enough to rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the record evidence nor sufficient to show that the
Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 17-02488 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 30, 2018).   We give due consideration to the Hearing
Office cases that Applicant’s Counsel has cited, but they are neither binding precedent on the Appeal
Board nor sufficient to undermine the Judge’s decision.  Id. at 3-4.  We further conclude the Judge
considered the totality of the evidence in compliance with the whole-person analysis requirements. 
See Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(d). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor  of the national security.”
1  GE 5 at 13-14.  
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
