KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline K
DIGEST: Applicant testified that he had never worn his invalid classified badge at site 1.  This is
not consistent with statements that he made during the inquiry.  This badge allowed him access
to classified areas, and he would wear it over his unclassified badge to give the impression that
he had an active clearance.  “He did this fourteen times between October 10 and October 29,
2013.  While in the secret-closed area, Applicant logged onto a classified network system eleven
times between October 18 and October 29, 2013, logging 499 minutes.”  Decision at 4. 
Applicant did not advise his supervisor where his classified badge came from, and he did not
seek clarification of the status of his clearance. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-04251.a1
DATE: 03/01/2019
DATE: March 1, 2019
In Re:
----------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-04251
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 22, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline K (Handling Protected Information) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On November 9, 2018, after the hearing,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Caroline E. Heintzelman
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings contained
errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is 55 years old.  He held a DoD security clearance from about 1985 until 2013. 
He has a master’s degree.  In late 2013, Applicant was debriefed from his TS/SCI clearance and
downgraded to unclassified access.  This was based upon a pending incident report concerning an
allegation of domestic assault.1  He was told that he could not perform classified work and had to
be debriefed from any special access programs.  Before this debriefing, Applicant had worked at
three different sites.  One of the sites was the clearance authority for all three, and employees were
issued a single badge to be used at all sites.  In addition, Applicant had a classified badge from a
previous job that he had not turned in before moving to another state.  This badge was not valid at
the sites at issue in this case.
As stated above, Applicant was debriefed on a special program upon which he was working. 
This occurred at site 1.  He then went to site 2 and met with the Facility Security Officer (FSO), who
told him that there was still jurisdiction for his clearance and that he would not be debriefed from
a program that he was working on there.  However, later that day, he was advised by an FSO at site
1 that he was in a “no determination” status and that he had to re-sign the debriefing documents. 
It was not clear to Applicant whether he had a clearance or not.
Even later the same day, Applicant attended a meeting at site 1.  At this meeting, the other
persons in attendance discussed classified matters in Applicant’s presence.  Applicant did not report
this to the appropriate FSO, nor did he advise other people at the meeting that there were possible
problems with his clearance.  Applicant testified that he had been told that his clearance was in a “no
determination” status prior to attending this meeting. 
The next day, Applicant re-signed the debriefing documents.  The documents stated, in
pertinent part, the following:
1This case was eventually closed after Applicant agreed to attend family counseling.  Decision at 2.
2
This debriefing is executed because you no longer have a continuing need for access
to classified information at [company] and does not reflect a negative security
profile.  Document Control has checked your accountability for classified holdings
and by execution of this debriefing you certify that you do not have any non-
accountable classified material in your possession.  Once you sign this debriefing,
your access to classified information will terminate.  Decision at 3-4.
Applicant was issued a non-classified badge.  He did not turn in the invalid classified badge
that he had retained from his previous employment.  He did not advise security officials at each of
the three sites where he worked that he had received conflicting information about the status of his
clearance.  Moreover, he did not include this matter in the statements that he made during a
subsequent inquiry concerning his alleged security violations.
After his second debriefing, Applicant continued to work at both classified and unclassified
tasks and attended multiple meetings in which participants discussed classified information.  He
wore the invalid classified badge at these meetings in order to avoid questions about the status of
his clearance.  He stated that he did not want to have to explain to his colleagues why he had only
an unclassified badge.
Applicant testified that he had never worn his invalid classified badge at site 1.  This is not
consistent with statements that he made during the inquiry.  This badge allowed him access to
classified areas, and he would wear it over his unclassified badge to give the impression that he had
an active clearance.  “He did this fourteen times between October 10 and October 29, 2013.  While
in the secret-closed area, Applicant logged onto a classified network system eleven times between
October 18 and October 29, 2013, logging 499 minutes.”  Decision at 4.  Applicant did not advise
his supervisor where his classified badge came from, and he did not seek clarification of the status
of his clearance.
Eventually his FSO advised him that he did not have access to classified information.  He
felt remorse for his conduct and advised officials to pull his name from the program access list.  By
this time his domestic assault charge had been dropped, and Applicant believed that his clearance
would soon be restored.  In addition to his inconsistent statements, during his clearance interview
in December 2013, he said nothing about his purported confusion as to the status of his clearance
due to conflicting guidance.  During the inquiry that his company conducted in connection with
Applicant’s conduct, he provided several explanations: he was afraid of losing his job, the stigma
of not having a clearance, and to escape personal issues outside the company.
Before the matters at issue here, Applicant had committed no security infractions or
violations, and he had received regular security training.  He testified that he should not have done
what he did and that it was a mistake.
The Judge’s Analysis
3
The Judge noted that Applicant’s last incident was nearly five years in the past.  However,
she concluded that, given the seriousness of the misconduct, it still raised questions about his
reliability, trustworthiness, and reliability.  She cited to evidence of Applicant’s age at the time of
his offenses and to his having held a clearance for many years.  She stated that Applicant had not
mentioned any confusion as to the status of his clearance during his December 2013 interview and
that there is no evidence that he brought this issue to the attention of his employer during the
inquiry.  She found that Applicant’s disclosures of his misconduct were not prompt.  In evaluating
Guideline E, the Judge characterized Applicant’s excuses as those of “someone who places his own
ego over the well-being of the national interest.”  Decision at 10.  She stated that he minimized his
errors and has taken no positive steps to reduce his vulnerability to manipulation or duress.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s findings about the extent to which he knew, or should have
known, that he did not have access to classified information during the course of his misconduct. 
He contends that the Judge did not consider, or that she mis-weighed, evidence that he had received
conflicting guidance about his access to classified information.  We have examined the Decision in
light of the entirety of the record.  The Judge made findings about Applicant’s claim, and she
discussed these findings in the Analysis.  That Applicant knew, or reasonably should have known,
that he did not have access to classified information is born out by the content of the inquiry report,
among other things.2  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of
the evidence in the record.  Neither has he shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner
that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-04198 at 2 (App. Bd.
Jan. 15, 2019).  We conclude that the Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported
by “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion
in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
Applicant has cited to a Hearing Office case that he believes supports his effort to obtain a
favorable result.  We give due consideration to this case.  However, each case must be decided on
its own merits.  Hearing Office decisions are binding neither on other Hearing Office Judges or on
the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-01077 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 25, 2018).  There are
significant differences between the cited case and the one at issue here, including the multiple nature
of Applicant’s misconduct and an absence of reasonable mistake.  Applicant challenges the Judge’s
conclusion that he lacked credibility.  We give deference to a Judge’s credibility determinations. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  In the case before us, the Judge’s findings about Applicant’s inconsistent
statements undermine Applicant’s claim that he was honestly confused about the status of his
clearance and support her adverse credibility determination.  We find no reason to disturb the
Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s presentation lacked credibility.  Id.
2“[Applicant] admitted holding onto an old Top Secret [employer] badge and using that badge to give the
appearance he was still cleared Top Secret when meeting with [colleague] . . . [Applicant] stated that a good portion of
the conversation with [colleague] on 13 January 2014 was classified.”  Government Exhibit 2, Inquiry Report, at 2-3. 
4
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  Once it is established that an applicant has committed a security violation, he or she has
a “very heavy burden” of persuasion as to mitigation.  Such violations “strike at the heart of the
industrial security program.”  Id.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard
is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl.
2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility
will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                   
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
