1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 17-03651 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
   For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 For Applicant: Stephen C. Glassman, Esquire 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On February 2, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 
On April 19, 2018, Applicant timely submitted a response in which he requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on September 12, 2018. The Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 17, 2018, 
setting the hearing for December 6, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
The Government offered eight documents, accepted without objection as exhibits 
(Exs.) A-H. Applicant offered testimony and four documents, accepted without objection 
as Exs. 12-15, and appended with exhibits (pre-marked by Applicant as Exs. 1-11) 
previously submitted with the SOR Response. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.  
03/28/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
December 13, 2018, and the record was closed. Based on the exhibits, testimony, and 
record as a whole, I find Applicant mitigated all security concerns.   
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old male with medical training received in the military. He 
is currently unemployed with a job offer pending from a defense contractor. Applicant 
honorably served in the United States military for over 24 years, mostly spent as a 
special forces medic with a top secret security clearance. He has taken a number of 
college-level courses and completed a medical certification program. He is currently 
separated from his third spouse. 
 
 In January 2004, when he was serving in the military, Applicant and colleagues 
were celebrating the completion of a three-year course. Driving in his new Mustang after 
leaving a bar, he was caught driving 90 miles per hour in a 50 miles-per-hour-speed-
limit. He did not realize how fast he was going. His blood alcohol concentration (BAC) 
level measured at 0.18. and he was arrested for driving while impaired (DWI). He was 
reprimanded through the military with a general officer memorandum. He was neither 
ordered to seek, nor sought, treatment or counseling after the incident. 
 
 In 2014, around the time he was honorably discharged from the military, 
Applicant and his now-estranged wife prepared to move to a new state so he could 
apply to a particular academic program. His wife’s ex-husband objected to her taking 
their children out of state, and a court order made her return them so the ex-husband 
could continue visitation rights until a hearing could be held. The wife and children 
returned, but the hearing was postponed. Meanwhile, Applicant remained in the new 
state until the court finally convened and declared the family could not move the 
children away. Once reunited, Applicant found it difficult to find a job, although his wife 
had found work relatively quickly. Having to be at the dictates of his wife’s “terrible” ex-
husband “broke her spirit. . . . she’s never been the same, still now. And she started 
isolating herself. [She and Applicant] weren’t communicating.” (Tr. 23) Applicant was 
unsure what was happening to them and he began drinking alcohol more often.  
 
In January 2016, Applicant went to the basement to remind his 17-year-old 
stepson not to be “vaping” in the house, and to focus more on his studies than on sitting 
around playing Internet games with his friends. The stepson ignored Applicant, but 
continued chatting with his friends. Applicant unplugged the television set the boy was 
watching. The stepson, a wrestler, jumped on Applicant and the two wrestled. This led 
to the teen suffering an injury to his lip, which bled. Applicant’s wife broke up the fracas. 
Applicant ultimately left the room, at which point the teenager called the police. 
Applicant was eventually arrested and charged with assault. Two hours later, he 
returned home.  Considering this to be an internal, domestic issue between stepfather 
and teen, Applicant wanted to contain or avoid the problem, and pled guilty to simple 
assault in March 2017. He was sentenced to 45 days in confinement (suspended 12 
months), 12 months probation (unsupervised), $100 fine, and required to complete an 
 
 
 
 
3 
anger management class.2 He also completed two months of substance abuse 
counseling. (Tr. 48-50) 
 
 Applicant’s effort, however, did not help his eroding relationship with the teen’s 
mother. Applicant and his now-estranged wife separated a week or so later. Living apart 
and bored from not working, Applicant began to drink more. Then, one night in February 
2016, Applicant was bored, alone, and having alcoholic beverages by himself when his 
spouse asked him to come over. Hopeful at this development, he prepared to go. 
 
Despite the fact he had been imbibing and knew he “wasn’t really in a good 
condition to drive,” Applicant got into his car. (Tr. 29) On his way, he was pulled over by 
police on his way to see her. Applicant was charged with driving while impaired (DWI) 
with a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level measured at 0.17. He pled guilty to the 
charge in March 2017.  
 
 Since that time, Applicant does not consider alcohol to be a factor in his life, 
although he continues to consume alcohol. (Tr. 40) He completed counseling in March 
2018, where it was recommended he attend a minimum of two Alcoholics Anonymous 
(AA) meetings a week in addition to group counseling. He attended “a few” meetings, 
but “it’s difficult to find one that you actually like just because of the people that are in 
there, so I tried a couple of different ones, recorded it, and that was it.” (Tr. 42)  He’s 
replaced boredom in his life with enjoying the nature abundant in his current region and 
in getting to know his biological family, whom he discovered a year ago in the same 
area in which he now lives. (Tr. 41) These finds have brought joy to his life and have 
alleviated his boredom. Now, he generally only drinks while watching sports games on 
television with his brother. He is mindful not to drive after imbibing.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. They are applied in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to the AG, the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
2 The anger management component was satisfied by visiting a psychologist about multiple issues over a 
couple of months (March-May 2016), including anger, his marriage, and alcohol. (Tr. 49) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. The AG 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. In addition, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption 
 
The alcohol consumption guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21:  
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
Applicant’s alcohol-related DWIs in 2004 and in 2016, when he excessively 
consumed alcohol to the point of impaired judgment before driving a car, establish the 
following disqualifying conditions under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the 
individual's alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder; and  
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder.  
 
The security concerns raised under this guideline have been mitigated by the 
following applicable factors:  
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and  
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed a treatment 
program along with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear 
and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations.  
 
Applicant acknowledged that he exercised extremely poor judgment by driving a 
vehicle after having consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication in 2004 and 2016. He 
has twice experienced the time and expense of being subjected to charges related to 
drinking and driving. While he still consumes alcohol, he has learned to limit his 
imbibing to in-home activities where he does not drive after drinking. This drinking is at 
home watching sports with his new-found brother. He no longer drinks out of depression 
or boredom. He now fills his idle hours with visiting his newly discovered biological 
family members and enjoying nature. In short, he has demonstrated a pattern of 
responsible consumption of alcohol. In the past three years, he has demonstrated a 
sufficient pattern of modified behavior for me to conclude that the questionable 
judgment associated with his alcohol consumption and driving is behind him.  
 
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
 
 The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
Applicant’s 2016 assault conviction establishes the following disqualifying 
condition: 
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, 
an admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or 
convicted.  
 
The security concerns raised under this guideline have been mitigated by the following 
applicable factors: 
 
 
 
 
6 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
AG ¶ 32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not 
limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.  
 
Applicant no longer lives with the stepson with whom he wrestled in the January 
2016 fracas. They apparently resumed the not atypical, often fractious, teen vs. step-
parent relationship without further incident. Indeed, at present, their relationship is 
comparatively distant due to Applicant’s separation from the mother. Applicant 
completed the sentence imposed, and received psychological counseling that 
addressed a wide-ranging variety of issues, from anger management, family problems, 
and alcohol. Applicant has demonstrated a sufficient pattern of modified behavior for me 
to conclude that the criminal conduct and questionable judgment associated the assault 
at issue is a thing of the past.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Here, Applicant admits both  the 2004 and 2016 DWIs, and that he got 
into an argument with his stepson in 2016 that resulted in simple assault. This is 
sufficient to raise disqualifying condition: 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, or duress by a foreign 
intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct includes: (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s persona, 
professional, or community standing. . . .  
 
 This guideline provides seven potential mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17. Two 
are potentially applicable under these facts: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
 
 
 
 
7 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
 With regard to AG ¶ 17(c), Applicant has moderated his drinking since his 2016 
DWI. The same period has passed without a recurrence of any criminal activity similar 
to the 2016 simple assault that occurred with his stepson. Applicant acknowledges the 
facts and takes responsibility for his actions. He completed all aspects of his sentences, 
including psychological counseling that addressed several aspects of his then-present 
problems, such as anger, marital issues, and alcohol. Today, he maintains an even 
keel, no longer lives with the troublesome teen, monitors his alcohol use, and fills his 
empty hours with his family and nature. His drinking is now limited to sports time 
television in the company of his brother. I find AG ¶ 17(c) and AG ¶ 17(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.   
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under the three 
applicable guidelines in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s highly 
credible testimony, his past military service while maintaining a security clearance, 
behavioral changes, maturation, and marital separation. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude alcohol 
consumption, criminal conduct, and personal conduct security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
