 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02207  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
March 25, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
dated November 13, 2017.  On October 22, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline 
B.  The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 28, 2018.  He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.  On 
December 19, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on December 20, 2018, and received by him on January 11, 2019.  
The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.  Applicant did not respond to the FORM.  Applicant did not object to Items 1 
through 4, and they are admitted into evidence, hereinafter referenced as Government 
Exhibits 1 through 4.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, and exhibits, national 
security eligibility for a security clearance is denied.    
  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
the country of Iraq.  Department Counsel provided a nine page summary of the facts, 
supported by thirteen Government documents pertaining to Iraq, identified as HE 1.  
The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary.  Applicant had no 
objection.  I took administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government 
reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable 
dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR.  After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is 32 years old, and is not legally married, but has a cohabitant, and a 
daughter.  He has also completed some college, and is currently applying for a positon 
as a linguist.  A security clearance is required in connection with his employment with a 
defense contractor.    
  
 Applicant was born in Bagdad, Iraq in July 1986.  He grew up in Iraq and left in 
2005 to go to Syria, because it was safer for him.  He also had a job opportunity in Syria 
working for a construction company.  In November 2010, Applicant came to the United 
States as a refugee through the International Organization for Migration.  He traveled 
from Iraq to Jordan, New York and Phoenix.  As an Iraqi national translator working with 
the United States Army, his life was threatened, and he was given an opportunity to 
come to the United States.  On August 18, 2016, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen.  (Government Exhibit 3.) 
 
    Applicant’s mother and father are citizens and residents of Iraq.  His father is 
retired from the Iraqi Ministry of Water Resources.  He was a well driller.  His is no 
longer affiliated with the foreign government.  Applicant’s mother has never worked 
 
3 
 
outside of the home to his knowledge.  Applicant also has five brothers and one sister 
who are citizens and residents of Iraq.  Two of his brothers are employed by the Iraqi 
police.  One of his brothers is employed by the Iraqi Counter-Terrorism Service.  
Another brother is a self-employed electrician, and another brother is unemployed.  His 
sister is a school student.  From November 2010 to the present, Applicant maintains 
contact with is family in Iraq and speaks with them about once a month.  In 2013, he 
traveled to Iraq to visit them.  (Government Exhibit 3.) 
 
 Applicant’s spouse/cohabitant was also born in Bagdad, Iraq. She is a citizen of 
Iraq and a permanent resident of the United States.  She and Applicant were married in 
a Muslim ceremony in the United States.  Since their marriage is not legal in the United 
States, Applicant did not believe he had to list her on his security clearance application.  
(Government Exhibit 4.)   
 
 Applicant’s mother and father-in-law are citizens of Iraq and permanent residents 
of the United States.  Applicant maintains contact with his in-laws weekly by telephone 
or in person.  He also has other relatives in Iraq that he maintains weekly contact with 
including an aunt, a brother-in-law, and two sister-in-laws that were not listed on his 
security clearance application but developed during the security clearance investigation.     
(Government Exhibit 4.) 
 
 I have taken administrative notice of the information provided concerning the 
Federal Republic of Iraq.  Iraq is a federal parliamentary republic.  The President of Iraq 
is indirectly elected by a Council of Representatives to serve a 4-year term (eligible for a 
second).  Although Iraq is an ally of the United States, the U.S. Government considers 
the potential personal security threats to U.S. government personnel in Iraq to be 
serious enough to require them to live and work under strict security guidelines.  The 
U.S. State Departments warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq are at high risk of violence and 
kidnapping and advises U.S. citizens to not travel to Iraq.  The current travel advisory 
level is Level 4.  Do not travel.  Within areas under the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria 
(ISIS) control, the Iraqi government has little or no ability to exercise control and ensure 
public safety.  Arbitrary or unlawful killings are rampant.  People belonging to religious 
and ethnic minorities, and people who express support for the government of Iraq or 
Western institutions, are at grave risk in these areas and may face kidnapping, 
imprisonment or execution.  Terrorist groups continue to mount a large number of 
attacks throughout the country.  Iraq is likely to face a lengthy period of political turmoil 
and conflict as it struggles to rebuild, reconstitute the Iraqi state, maintain pressure on 
ISIS, and rein in the Iranian-backed Shia militias that pose an enduring threat to US 
personnel.  ISIS will remain a terrorist and insurgent threat and the group will seek to 
exploit Sunni discontent to conduct attacks and try to regain Iraqi territory.  Violence 
continues largely fueled by the actions of ISIS.  (HE 1).       
 
 A number of foreign contacts have been omitted from Applicant’s security 
clearance application because Applicant claims that he either overlooked the entry by 
mistake, he did not understand the question, or thought he did not have to list them.  
(Government Exhibit 4.)      
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant’s foreign family members include his mother and father, five brothers 
and a sister who are citizens and residents of Iraq.  Applicant’s answer to the SOR, 
which is the only evidence he presented, failed to appropriately mitigate the SOR 
allegations.  Based upon the evidence presented, his foreign family connections clearly 
raise serious security concerns and pose a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulations, pressure, or coercion.  Given the violatile nature of Iraq, 
and the employment of his brothers in such high-risk government positions, place 
Applicant in a particularly precarious position.  There could easily be a conflict of 
interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect classified or sensitive information and 
his desire to help his family by providing information.  Under the particular 
circumstances here, the risk-benefit analysis is applicable, and this contact as well as 
the nature of the relationships pose a significant security risk to the U.S. government 
that is not necessary.  Applicant has subjected himself to a heightened risk of foreign 
 
6 
 
influence or exploitation or personal conflict of interest from his ongoing connection with 
his family in Iraq.   
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant’s foreign family members and the nature of his relationships with his 
family clearly pose a security risk.  There is a great potential for a conflict of interest.  
Although Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen, his relationship with his family in Iraq is 
close and ongoing, and can possibly result in divided allegiance.  Insufficient mitigation 
under AG ¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c), has been established in regard to his family members.   
The relationship poses a heightened security risk particularly relevant to this 
proceeding.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  Applicant’s 
familial Iraqi connections pose a significant security risk to the U.S. government that 
was not mitigated under the particular facts presented in this case.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
