       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
     )      
 ---------------------------------         )       ISCR  Case No.  18-01692     
    )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel
      For Applicant: Pro se      
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant 
failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding her financial considerations. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of Case
On July 2, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why
DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), effective June 8, 2017.
03/15/2019
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 16, 2018, and elected to have her case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on August 28, 2018, interposed no objections to the materials in the
FORM, and did not supplement the FORM. The case was assigned to me on January 2,
2019. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accumulated six delinquent debts
exceeding $8,000 and (b) filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief in August 2016
(dismissed in February 2018) and March 2018 (disposition undetermined). Allegedly, the
debts owing have not been resolved and remain outstanding. 
                
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all but one of the allegations and
did so with explanations, denying only the allegations covered by SOR ¶ 1.h. She claimed
she stopped making payments on her 2016 Chapter 13 petition when she went on
medical leave, which resulted in a dismissal of her petition. She claimed she is currently
making payments on her 2018 Chapter 13 petition. And she claimed the 2015 judgment
(covered by SOR ¶ 1.h) has been satisfied. Applicant did not provide any documentation
to support any of her claims.
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old quality inspector for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married her first spouse in November 1991 and divorced in January
1995. (Item 3) She has one child and one stepchild from this marriage. (Items 3-4) She
remarried in June 1999 and has four children and one stepchild from this marriage. 
(Items 3-4) She earned a high school diploma in May 1990. (Item 4). She attended a local
community college between January 2007 and August 2009, but earned no degree or
diploma. (Items 3-4) Applicant reported no military service. She has been employed by
her current employer since October 1999 and has held a security clearance since April
2010. (Item 3) 
Applicant’s finances
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in 1999, 2003, 2016, and
2018. (Items Records confirm that her 1999 and 2003 petitions were discharged in
January 2000 and March 2009, respectively. (Items 9-10). Bankruptcy records confirm
that her 2016 petition was dismissed in February 2018 at Applicant’s request. (Item 8)
She cited medical leave as a consideration, but provided no documentation. (Item 2)
Applicant’s latest Chapter 13 petition remains pending without any reported status or
disposition. (Item 7)
2
Between March 2016 and June 2016, Applicant took out three loans with the same
lender, totaling in excess of $5,000. (Item 4) Two of the loans became over 120 days past
due in November 2016, and the third loan became more than 90 days past due in
November 2016. (Item 4) Other delinquent debts revealed in her credit reports are a
medical debt for $178 (SOR ¶ 1.e) and an entered judgment in 2015 for $1,261. (Items 4-
5) Whether Applicant included these debts in his 2018 Chapter 13 petition is unclear.
Without documented Chapter 13 schedules to review, answers cannot be learned. (Items
5-7) Applicant attributed her debt delinquencies to both her husband’s illness and loss of
employment and her own loss of earnings stemming from a lengthy medical leave. (Items
2 and 4) While her husband’s condition and circumstances, as well her own medical
issues, are potentially extenuating, they are not corroborated and substantiated by
documented support for her claims.
To date, Applicant has not provided any updates as to what steps she has taken to
resolve the delinquent debts covered in the SOR. Conceivably, these debts are
scheduled in her 2018 Chapter 13 petition and are being addressed. Without more
information from Applicant on debts included in her Chapter 13 petition and how they are
being administered in her Chapter 13 petition, no inferences can be drawn as to how she
is resolving these debts. (Items 4–6) 
Applicant provided no budgets or evidence of financial counseling. Nor did she
provide character references from colleagues at work and in her community who know
her well and can attest to her honesty, trustworthiness, and good judgment, or .personnel
evaluations.
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns. These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context
of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(d) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
3
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
4
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of multiple filings of Chapter
13 bankruptcy petitions seeking to address her finances (two discharged, one dismissed
at her request, and a fourth still pending) and more recently, accumulating delinquent
debts exceeding $8,000. Applicant’s recurrent Chapter 13 petitions and debt
delinquencies warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”; and 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
Applicant’s admitted delinquent debts and foreclosures negate the need for any
independent proof. See Directive 5220.6 at E3.1.14; McCormick on Evidence, § 262
(6th ed. 2006). Each of Applicant’s admitted state tax lien, home equity loan deficiency,
and two foreclosures are fully documented and create some judgment issues. See
ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving tax filing lapses
and debt delinquencies.  
Historically, the timing of addressing delinquent debts is critical to an assessment
of an applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following rules and
guidelines necessary for those seeking access to classified information or to holding a
sensitive position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR
Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s cited extenuating
circumstances (i.e., medical issues and associated unemployment of her husband and
her own medical issues that necessitated considerable medical leave) provide some
mitigation credit for her accumulating delinquent debt. The cited circumstances she
attributes to her debt delinquencies are enough to entitle her to some extenuating
5
benefits from MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” But her failure to provide documented
proof of her addressing her debts after she returned to full-time employment status
precludes her from taking advantage of the “acted responsibly” prong of MC ¶ 20(b)
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts, and implicitly where applicable, the timely resolution of
federal and state tax debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
In Applicant’s case, her failures to provide documented proof of her addressing her
delinquent debts in any probative way preludes favorable findings and conclusions with
respect to raised security concerns over the state of her finances. 
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. She has shown
insufficient  progress to date in addressing her delinquent debts to merit enough positive
overall credit to mitigate financial concerns. Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in
addressing her finances reflect too little evidence of restored financial responsibility and
judgment to overcome reasonable doubts about her trustworthiness, reliability, and
ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. Conclusions are warranted that her
finances are not sufficiently stabilized at this time to meet minimum eligibility
requirements for holding a security clearance.  Eligibility to hold a security clearance
under the facts and circumstances of this case is inconsistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:     Against Applicant
                
 Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
6
                                        
  
7
  
8
