 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01827 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 7, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 8, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 28, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on September 
21, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on September 24, 2018, scheduling the hearing for October 16, 2018. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 
5, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf. Applicant 
submitted no documentation at his hearing, however, the record was left open for three 
months, until January 16, 2019, for receipt of additional documentation. Applicant 
 
2 
 
submitted no documentation. However, he did submit a two sentence closing statement, 
dated January 10, 2019, which I have marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AppX) A. In it he 
avers, In part, the following: “we [he and his wife] are still working on this matter.” DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on October 25, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations of the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 7.) 
He has been employed with the defense contractor since September of 2017. (GX 1 at 
page 12.) He has held a security clearance since June of 2010. (GX 1 at page 57.) He 
is married, and has thirteen children, seven of whom are “adopted . . . grandchildren.’ 
(TR at page 11 line 12 to page 15 line 21.) Applicant attributes his past-due 
indebtedness to a five year period of unemployment, and to a “slip and fall” injury 
sustained at a grocery store. Applicant’s current salary is about “$120,000,” with 
“$45,000” in a checking account. (TR at page 39 line 7 to page 40 line 3.) 
 
 Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted a past-due medical bill in the 
amount of about $65,000. At his hearing Applicant appears to take issue with this debt. 
(TR at page 21 line 7 to page 31 line 8, and at page 33 lines 4~18.) However, this 
alleged past-due debt is supported the Government’s most recent July 2018 credit 
report. (GX 5 at page 1.) Furthermore, in his Answer, his hospital medical bill shows that 
his “copay deductible” has increased to $79,000. (Answer at page “52 of 213.”) I find 
that this substantial medical debt is still outstanding; and as such, this allegation is 
found against Applicant. 
 
 1.b. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant also admitted a past-due medical bill in 
the amount of about $871. At his hearing Applicant again appears to take issue with this 
debt. (TR at page 37 lines 9~14.) However, this alleged past-due debt is supported the 
Government’s November 2017 credit report. (GX 4 at page 8.) I find that this medical 
debt is still outstanding; and as such, this allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.c. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted a past-due medical bill in the 
amount of about $328. At his hearing Applicant appears to take issue with this debt. (TR 
at page 37 lines 16~21.) However, this alleged past-due debt is supported the 
Government’s November 2017 credit report. (GX 4 at page 8.) I find that this medical 
debt is still outstanding; and as such, this allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.d. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted a past-due medical bill in the 
amount of about $184. This alleged past-due debt is also supported the Government’s 
November 2017 credit report. (GX 4 at page 8.) I find that this medical debt is still 
outstanding; and as such, this allegation is found against Applicant. 
       
 
3 
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has significant past-due indebtedness. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. Although he can attribute much of his 
debt to an extensive period of unemployment, and to an unexpected medical 
emergency, Applicant has yet to address these debts. He has not demonstrated that 
future financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20 has not been 
established. Guideline F is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
