 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01247  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney Esq., The Edmunds Law Firm 
 
 
March 6, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On February 19, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On May 30, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective 
within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 19, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 5, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on November 15, 
2018, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 7, 2018. The 
Government offered three exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 3, 
 
2 
 
which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered twelve exhibits at the 
hearing, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through L, which were admitted without 
objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record remained open until close of 
business on December 31, 2018, to allow the Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional supporting documentation.  Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, 
referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit M, which was admitted without objection.  
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 11, 2018. 
  
  
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
the Peoples Republic of China (China) because it is inclusive of the territory of Hong 
Kong.  Department Counsel provided an 11 page summary of the facts, supported by 
14 Government documents pertaining to China.  The documents provide elaboration 
and context for the summary. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the 
U.S. Government reports. (HE I) They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not 
subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 56 years old. He is married with one son. He has a Bachelor’s 
degree in Engineering.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a Senior 
Manufacturing Engineer.  He is seeking to retain a security clearance in connection with 
his employment.    
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born in China in 1962.  He grew up and completed elementary 
school, before he and his family moved to Hong Kong in 1975.  He completed high 
school in Hong Kong, and in the summer of 1986, he came to the United States.  During 
his month long visit as a tourist, he was so impressed by the amicable people, the 
harmony of society, and the diversity of cultures, that he decided to pursue his college 
education here.  He applied and was admitted to a University in 1987.  He obtained his 
Bachelor’s of Science degree in Engineering in 1990.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  While in 
college here, Applicant met his wife, and got married in 1989.  They have one son who 
is 18 years old, currently attending college, and studying engineering.  Applicant 
became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1994.  (Tr. p. 22.)  Over the years, 
he has established wealth, purchased a house, and has a retirement account and a 
number of investments in the United States.  (Applicant’s Exhibits J and K.) 
 
Applicant has worked for a number of employers over the years.  In March 2006, 
he was offered a position with a defense contractor, and granted a security clearance in 
September 2006.  Applicant worked there for ten years while holding a security 
clearance without incident.  During that time, Applicant received foreign travel briefings 
and understands the responsibilities involved with possessing a security clearance.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit H.)  In January 2016, Applicant was highly recommended for a 
 
3 
 
position with another defense contractor by a longtime colleague of the company.  
Applicant was subsequently hired, and has been working for the new company for the 
past three years.   
 
Applicant has family that are citizens and residents of Hong Kong that include his 
mother, three brothers, and two sisters.  Applicant’s mother has always been a 
housewife.  She is not affiliated in any way with the Government of Hong Kong or the 
People’s Republic of China.  Applicant communicates with his mother about her heath 
and his son about once a month.  They usually speak about twenty minutes.  She 
knows that Applicant is an engineer, but nothing more.  Applicant’s mother last traveled 
to the United States to visit the Applicant in 2007.  (Tr. p. 26.)  Applicant last traveled to 
visit his mother in Hong Kong in 2013.  (Tr. p. 27.)  While traveling to Hong Kong, 
Applicant has always used his United States Passport.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C, and Tr. p. 
37.)  Applicant has no future intentions to travel to Hong Kong.       
 
Applicant has three brothers who are citizens of and residents of Hong Kong.  
One of Applicant’s brother’s is a citizen of Britain, and resides in Hong Kong.  He is self- 
employed as an interior designer.  (Tr. p. 29.)  He has never held a job or position with 
any foreign Government.  The other two brothers are citizens and residents of Hong 
Kong.  One of Applicant’s brothers is a banker, for a private bank.  The other brother is 
retired, and lives with their mother.  Prior to his retirement, he worked for a commercial 
trading company, and is not affiliated, nor has ever been affiliated, in any way with the 
any foreign Government.  Applicant communicates with each of his brothers not more 
than two to three times a year.   
 
Applicant also has two sisters who are citizens and residents of Hong Kong.  One 
is a travel agent, the other is retired.  They are both married.  One of his sister’s 
husbands is a retired shoe salesman, and the other sister’s husband is a private 
security guard.  Neither husband has ever had any affiliation with the Hong Kong or 
Chinese Government. 
 
Applicant’s father is an American citizen who resides in the United States.  He 
and Applicant’s mother are still married.  Applicant’s mother prefers to live with one of 
her sons in Hong Kong than with her husband in the United States.  (Tr. p. 43.)   
 
Applicant credibly testified that he cannot be coerced into divulging any national 
security secrets.   He also believes that his limited relationships with any his family 
members in Hong Kong cannot be used to threaten him to do anything against the 
interests of the United States.  (Tr. p. 38.)  Applicant has never been approached, 
confronted, or contacted by any foreign entity attempting to obtain protected 
information.  In the event that this ever occurs, Applicant stated that he will immediately 
contact the DoD security officer and report the incident.  (Tr. p. 46.)   
 
 Applicant prepared a notarized Statement of Intent dated October 1, 2018, which 
indicates that he will continue to have minimal or no foreign contacts outside of his 
official duties, and his family, and any conversations will remain strictly casual and 
 
4 
 
infrequent.  Any future communication with foreign contacts, (other than described 
above) is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.  (Government Exhibit E.) 
 
Performance evaluations of the Applicant during his prior employment and in his 
current positon reflect favorable ratings.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I.)  Applicant has received 
a number of Certificates and Awards for accomplishments.  (Applicant’s Exhibit L.) 
 
 Letters of recommendation from professional colleagues of the Applicant, 
including his direct supervisor, collectively attest to his dedication and commitment to 
the job, and he is described as one who excels in a fast paced potentially high stress, 
changing environment, with an excellent ability to interface with multiply stakeholders, 
works effectively in teams, and communicates with positive impact.  His excellent work 
product, reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment is recognized by many.  He is 
considered a role model for integrity and honesty and is highly recommended for a 
security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G.) 
 
 
Notice 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the following information concerning the 
People’s Republic of China (China).   Targeting and collection of US political, military, 
economic, and technical information by foreign intelligence services continues 
unabated.  China is one of the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information 
and technology.  China’s intelligence services, as well as private companies and other 
entities, frequently seek to exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China 
who can use their insider access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable 
media devices or e-mail.  Chinese actors are the world’s most active and persistent 
perpetrators of economic espionage.  Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological 
and economic information will continue at a high level and will represent a growing and 
persistent threat to U.S. economic security.   The nature of the cyber threat will evolve 
with continuing technological advances in the global information environment.  (HE I) 
 
I have also taken administrative notice of the following information concerning 
Hong Kong.  Hong Kong is a presidential limited democracy and special administrative 
region of the People’s Republic of China with a population of over 7 million people.  As 
a special administrative region, its foreign relations and defense are the responsibility of 
China.   However, Hong Kong is a customs territory and economic entity separate from 
China and is able to enter into international agreements on its own behalf in 
commercial, economic, and certain legal matters.  The United States and Hong Kong 
have enjoyed a robust relationship, as stated in the U.S. – Hong Kong Policy Act of 
1992 and grounded in the determination to promote Hong Kong’s prosperity, freedom 
and way of life.  The United States enjoys substantial economic ties with Hong Kong 
and U.S. companies generally have a favorable view of Hong Kong’s business 
environment.  Hong Kong is an independent body from China, participates as a full 
member of several international economic organizations such as The World Trade 
Organization, Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum and Financial Action Task 
Force.   The Government of Hong Kong generally respects human rights of residents 
 
5 
 
and the law and judiciary generally provide an effective means of dealing with individual 
instances of abuse.  The basic law in Hong Kong provides for the protection against 
human rights abuses.  There is freedom of speech, of the press, and of publication.  
Additionally, Hong Kong’s basic law protects the citizen’s freedom of expression, 
freedom of peaceful assembly, freedom of religion, and freedom of movement.  Hong 
Kong has also passed laws to combat discrimination and is clearly committed to liberty, 
justice, and fair treatment, of their citizens through an effective government framework. 
Hong Kong is a global partner to the United States and shares much of the same 
human rights and economic views.  There are more than 1,300 U.S. firms in Hong Kong 
and approximately 85,000 American residents in Hong Kong.   (Applicant’s Exhibit M.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
6 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant’s foreign family members are residents and citizens of Hong Kong.  
Applicant maintains some contact with his family there.  Applicant’s ties to his foreign 
family members in Hong Kong pose a heightened security risk for the United States 
Government.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
7 
 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 and two of them are applicable in this case.   
 
 (b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty 
or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, government or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
 (c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent 
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 Family ties in a foreign country raises a prima facie security concern that 
required the applicant to present evidence of rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation 
sufficient to meet the burden of persuasion that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a  security clearance for him.  Thus, Applicant bears the 
burden to establish that his relatives are not vulnerable to influence, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress.  In this case, Applicant carefully explained that his family in 
Hong Kong only knows that he is an engineer and nothing more about his job.  They 
don’t know where he works or what he does.  Their conversations are minimal, casual, 
and infrequent.  None of his foreign family members in Hong Kong are affiliated in any 
way with any foreign government.  It is recognized that Applicant is at a higher risk of 
being targeted for Chinese intelligence gathering since he works for a defense 
contractor.  However, Applicant has held a security clearance for ten years from 2006 to 
2016, and has incurred no security violations nor has he had any problems of any sort.  
Thus, it can be assumed that he will continue to place the interest of the U.S. 
paramount, and always protect the U.S. from any risk of terrorism, and/or any situation 
that could place the interests of the U.S. in jeopardy.  Under the circumstances, 
Applicant has met this burden and has established two mitigating conditions set forth 
above under Guideline B.      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a mature, intelligent man, who performs well at his job, and has the 
endorsement of his supervisor and professional colleagues.  It is noted that while he 
was born in China, he is an American by choice. With his wife and son as his closest 
family ties, he has established his own life here in the United States.  He has also 
acquired significant assets, including a house, a retirement account, and a number of 
investments in the United States.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
