KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline M
DIGEST: In deceiving IT personnel to capture the password and using it without authorization,
Applicant repeatedly violated IT security procedures.  This put his former employer’s IT systems
at risk.  While he contends he acted in the interest of organizational efficiency, he did so for his
own convenience. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 18-00827.a1
DATE: 03/12/2019
DATE: March 12, 2019
In Re:
-------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 18-00827
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
16, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline M (Use of Information Technology) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On November 15, 2018, after the hearing,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Eric H. Borgstrom denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28
and E3.1.30.
Applicant  raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He is married with two
children and has earned a doctorate degree.  
For over three years, Applicant worked in a laboratory.  To install hardware or software on
his lab computers, he was required to have IT personnel input a password in the computer, and he
found these procedure overly protracted.  In 2012, he acquired a key-logging device to capture the
password surreptitiously.  He did not scan the device for viruses or other corruption software.  He
later captured the password from an IT representative without his or her knowledge.  Applicant
subsequently used the stolen password on about 12 occasions to install hardware and software onto
the lab computer without authorization.      
Applicant explained that he circumvented the security procedures in the interest of
organizational efficiency.  He did not share the password with anyone or install any hardware or
software that would have been prohibited.  He never received any security training, although he was
aware of the procedures for installing hardware or software.  He never informed his employer of his
use of the key-logging device.  He disclosed its use on his 2012 security clearance application
(SCA).
Applicant is well regarded by his supervisors, coworkers, and friends.  He did not disclose
his misconduct to his former employer due to embarrassment.  He sincerely regrets his misconduct,
but characterizes it as minor.
 
In deceiving IT personnel to capture the password and using it without authorization,
Applicant repeatedly violated IT security procedures.  This put his former employer’s IT systems
at risk.  While he contends he acted in the interest of organizational efficiency, he did so for his own
convenience.  “If his actions were done in the name of organizational efficiency, he would not have
acted surreptitiously or felt the need to continue to conceal his past misconduct from his former and
current employer.  His ongoing concealment of his actions continues his former employer’s exposure
2
to malware, viruses, etc.  Applicant’s conduct constituted a serious breach of trust and reflected poor
judgment.”  Decision at 4-5. 
Discussion
In his appeal brief, Applicant argues the Judge did not fairly weigh the evidence.  For
example, he contends he had no security training at the time of the alleged conduct; he did not
knowingly or intentionally put the former employer’s IT system at risk; he engaged in the conduct
so that he could do his job more effectively and efficiently; his concealment of the conduct from his
former employer did not invalidate his motive; his conduct was minor and, to his knowledge, never
harmed the computer system; and he disclosed the conduct on his SCA.  He also contends the Judge
inadequately applied the whole-person concept by ignoring evidence of his good judgment and
character.  However, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to
make a favorable security clearance decision.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing
of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient
to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-08684 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 22, 2017).
Applicant has failed to establish the Judge committed any harmful error.  The Judge
examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale                 
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
