1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
)
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00344 
) 
In the matter of: 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
 For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
      For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On February 15, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In an undated 
response, Applicant answered the allegations and requested a hearing before a 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. I was assigned 
the case on September 12, 2018.  
A hearing originally scheduled for December 4, 2018, was cancelled to give 
Applicant more time to retain counsel. A November 29, 2018, notice setting the hearing 
for January 16, 2019, was subsequently issued. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled, during which time the Government offered four exhibits (Exs.), noted as Exs. 
1-4, and Applicant presented 23 exhibits, marked as Exs. A-W. With no objections, all
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
03/08/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
exhibits were accepted into the record. Applicant was granted through February 8, 
2019, to submit any additional materials.  
 
Four exhibits offered by Applicant on February 8, 2019, were admitted without 
objection as Exs. X-AA. A request for an additional two weeks to submit materials 
resulted in no further submissions. The record was closed on February 22, 2019. In the 
interim, the transcript (Tr.) was received on January 25, 2019. Based on the testimony, 
materials, and record as a whole, I find Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old divorcée with no children. She was married from 2008 
until 2015. Having earned a bachelor’s degree, completed some graduate study, and 
mastered three languages, she is presently an operations specialist. Successful at 
work, she was recently given a pay raise, increasing her annual salary to $59,000. 
Applicant has received credit counseling. 
 
 During her marriage, both Applicant and her husband worked. She does not 
recall his salary, but remembers their joint income supported their household, with her 
salary paying for the lion’s share. (Tr. 19) Applicant found herself in an unhappy marital 
situation. Her 2015 divorce left her with marital bills that were deemed her responsibility 
and which she could not pay. (Tr. 18) They subsequently became delinquent despite 
her efforts. Her salary as a single teacher earning a gross income of about $32,000 
could not cover both the delinquent bills and her current expenses, including rent, food, 
auto, and other day-to-day costs.  
 
 At issue in the SOR are the following delinquent debts: 
 
 1.a & 1.b – Student loan ($10,112) and Student loan ($5,993) – These two loans 
were combined in the debt rehabilitation process. (Tr. 31) During 2018, a payment of 
$78 was processed toward these debts. Processing for future payments on the plan 
was delayed because the lender needed tax return information from Applicant. Ex. W 
reflects a payment of $271 on the debts in January 2019. Ex. A is a statement showing 
a payment will be processed in the future. Ex. B is a schedule of payments to be made 
in the future. A second payment (pending) is reflected from February 2019 at Ex. Y. 
 
 1.c – Past due account with balance of $427 – Paid. (Ex. C; Tr. 23, 31-32) 
 
 1.d – Charged off account ($666) – Account satisfied and current. (Exs. D-E; Tr. 
23) 
 
 1.e Debts ($1,051 medical balance from August 2012); 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j ($1,051, 
$118, $118, $118, $86 (medical balances dating from 2014-2015. (Exs. F-J, Z-AA; Tr. 
23-25). 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 1.i – Student debt ($3,013 in collection since August 2014) – Applicant believes 
this was incorporated into the student debts since consolidated from 1.a and 1.b, but 
failed to provide documentary evidence to that effect. (Tr. 34)  
 
 Applicant is currently able to pay her day-to-day living expenses and make 
needed payments to her remaining delinquent debts. (Tr. 25) She now has a savings 
account. Combined, her checking and savings accounts have a current balance of over 
$5,500. (Tr. 26) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
necessarily include consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government offered documentary evidence reflecting that Applicant 
had numerous delinquent debts. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do so; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Four conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
There are multiple delinquent debts at issue, some dating back to her unhappy 
2008-2015 marriage, when Applicant’s modest teacher’s salary represented the larger 
share of the couple’s household income. The rest appear to have arisen after the 
divorce left her encumbered with sole responsibility for the marital debts based only on 
 
 
 
 
5 
her unsupplemented income. To meet the challenges posed by insufficient income, she 
tried to manage the debts, but was unsuccessful. This is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
Applicant has received financial counseling and made some headway in 
resolving her delinquent debts. Applicant provided persuasive documentation indicating 
the delinquent debts noted in the SOR at allegations 1.c-h and 1.j, amounting to 
approximately $2,584, have been addressed. Although equal documentation was 
lacking with regard to the student loan noted at 1.i for $3,013, and the student loans at 
1.a and 1.b, these efforts are  sufficient to raise AG ¶ 20(c) in very general terms.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of her conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those factors. I 
am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old divorcée with a bachelor’s degree and who speaks 
three languages. She was married from 2008 until 2015, during which time she was the 
primary earner, generating a teacher’s salary in the mid-$30,000s. She was given 
responsibility of the marital debts, which were beyond her means without some form of 
monetary supplementation. She is now a successful operations specialist whose salary 
was recently raised to about $59,000 a year. 
 
It is unclear exactly when Applicant first found herself financially able to address 
her delinquent debts. The record seems to indicate her first efforts were made in 2018, 
with a nominal payment on her student loans before a student loan repayment plan was 
devised. Applicant has received financial counseling and made more notable headway 
in resolving her other delinquent debts. Applicant provided persuasive documentation 
indicating the modest delinquent debts noted in the SOR at allegations 1.c-h and 1.j, 
amounting to approximately $2,584, have been addressed.  
 
Equal documentation, however, is lacking with regard to the far more significant 
debts at issue – specifically, the student loan noted at 1.i for $3,013, and the student 
loans at 1.a and 1.b. Together, these represent over $19,100 in delinquent debt. 
Applicant was unable to submit documentation indicating that the debt at 1.i was made 
part of the larger student loans. Moreover, those larger student loans only reflect 
payments amounting to less than $600, mostly made around the time of the hearing. A 
stronger record of regular and consistent payment is needed to demonstrate a 
meaningful record of debt repayment. In light of the above, I find that at this time, 
Applicant’s efforts and documentation fail to mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns.   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
           Subparagraphs 1.c-1.h:   For Applicant 
                      Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j:    For Applicant  
 
        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
