KEYWORD: Guideline D; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant cites to a statement by the Judge that Applicant had engaged the services of
prostitutes on six occasions, whereas the record only demonstrated five.  This comment is found
only in the Judge’s summary of the case, at the very beginning of the Decision.  His findings of
fact do not reference six offenses, nor does his analysis.  Indeed, the Judge’s findings are
consistent with the record that was before him.  To the extent that the challenged statement is an
error, it did not likely affect the outcome of the case.  Therefore, it is harmless.  Adverse decision
affirmed.  
CASENO: 18-00757.a1
DATE: 03/14/2019
DATE: March 14, 2019
In Re:
-----------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 18-00757
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 20, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a hearing.  On December 7, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Matthew E. Malone denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Defense contractor since late 2015.  He served on active duty in
the military from 1986 until 1999 and then entered the Reserves, from which he retired as an O-5. 
After leaving active duty he worked for Federal contractors.  He first received a security clearance
in 1991 while in the military and has held jobs requiring him to have access to sensitive
compartmented information (SCI).  
Applicant’s security-significant conduct involved him engaging the services of prostitutes
about five times–twice while in the military and three times thereafter.  The last incident occurred
in 2015.  Several of these incidents occurred while Applicant held a clearance.  During a 2015
polygraph administered by another Government agency in connection with renewal of his SCI
access, Applicant admitted that he had engaged the services of prostitutes.  As a consequence of
these admissions, the agency revoked Applicant’s SCI access.  Applicant reapplied for a clearance
in 2017.1  He had not previously disclosed his conduct with prostitutes because he had not
undergone a lifestyle polygraph and because the questions on his security clearance applications
inquired only about criminal conduct for which he was arrested or charged.  Although Applicant has
disclosed his conduct to his immediate family and to a close friend, he has not told his employer
about it because he is embarrassed.
Applicant attributed his early interactions with prostitutes to his being “young and stupid.” 
Decision at 3.  Regarding the later ones, he claimed that he had experienced periods of stress–the
death of his father, a failed romantic relationship, involuntary termination from a job–that affected
his judgment.  Applicant self-referred to counseling and was advised to attend Sex Addicts
Anonymous (SA), a twelve-step program analogous to Alcoholics Anonymous.  He initially attended
meetings three times a month but now does so by telephone twice a month.  He has a sponsor and
has served as a sponsor for others.  Applicant supplied no information about his counseling, nor did
he provide references from his SA sponsor or others with knowledge about his effort at recovery. 
He did submit information about his participation in a support group for soldiers dealing with post-
1In his 2017 SCA, Applicant disclosed that his SCI access had been revoked by another government agency
following a polygraph.  
2
traumatic stress disorder, but he has not been diagnosed with this condition, and it is not clear how
his involvement with this group affected his recovery.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted that three years had passed since Applicant’s last offense.  However, he
stated that even more years had intervened between some of his earlier incidents, thereby impairing
Applicant’s ability to show that his incidents were mitigated by the passage of time.  The Judge
concluded that the stressors that Applicant had undergone were not so unusual as to explain or
justify his security significant conduct.  He also noted a paucity of corroboration regarding
Applicant’s testimony about his counseling and SA attendance.
Discussion
Applicant’s brief includes matters from outside the record.  We are not permitted to consider
new evidence in resolving an appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant cites to a Hearing Office case
in his Appeal Brief that he believes supports his effort to get a clearance.  Each case must be decided
on its own merits.  Hearing Office decisions are not binding on other Hearing Office Judge’s or on
the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-03363 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2018).  Moreover,
the favorable decision that Applicant cites was reversed on appeal.  ISCR Case No. 16-03763 (App.
Bd. Nov. 20, 2018).  
Applicant cites to a statement by the Judge that Applicant had engaged the services of
prostitutes on six occasions, whereas the record only demonstrated five.  This comment is found
only in the Judge’s summary of the case, at the very beginning of the Decision.  His findings of fact
do not reference six offenses, nor does his analysis.  Indeed, the Judge’s findings are consistent with
the record that was before him.  To the extent that the challenged statement is an error, it did not
likely affect the outcome of the case.  Therefore, it is harmless.    See, e.g., ISCR Case No.17-01181
at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 30, 2018).
The balance of Applicant’s brief is, in essence, a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing
of the evidence.  However, an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence is not
enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.2    See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02463 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 10, 2018).
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
2Applicant states that he did not receive a copy of the transcript, “which may be a violation of due process.” 
Appeal Brief at 1.  He contends that he had to rely on memory in formulating some of his issues.  He does not state,
however, that he ever notified the Appeal Board or any other DOHA official about his failure to receive a transcript, and
there is nothing in the record to show that he had brought this to our attention prior to submitting his Appeal Brief.  As
a consequence, we conclude that Applicant has forfeited any due process issue that he is raising.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 12-01906 at 2, n.1 (App. Bd. Jan. 10, 2019).   
3
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” 
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶
2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
  
4
