       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
)
---------------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 18-02322
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and file exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated the security concerns regarding his alcohol consumption. Eligibility for access
to classified information is granted. 
History of Case
On December 8, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why the DoD could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865 (Exec. Or. 10865),
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
the Security Executive Agent, Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines
(SEAD 4), effective June 8, 2017.
03/29/2019
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 28, 2018, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on January 30, 2019, and scheduled for hearing
on February 14, 2019. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. At the hearing, the
Government’s case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4). Applicant relied on two
witnesses (including himself) and no exhibits. The Government’s exhibits were admitted
without objection.  The transcript was received on February 26, 2019.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with awards, decorations, and
endorsements and early release from probation.  For good cause shown, Applicant was
granted 45 days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded three
days to respond. Applicant did not supplement the record.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guidelines  G and J, Applicant allegedly was twice arrested and charged
with alcohol-related incidents: once in October 2011 for driving under the influence
(DUI), and again in March 2016, in which he pled guilty, was fined $1,500, and was
placed on probation until May 2019.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the two alcohol-related
allegations with explanations. He claimed the 2011 DUI arrest and charges were
reduced to a lesser offense of wet and reckless through plea bargaining because his
blood-alcohol content (BAC) was less than .08%. He claimed he has abided by all
requirements of the court set in connection with both his 2011 and 2016 charges.
Further, he claimed he has taken the two alcohol-related incidents very seriously and
will never drink again if he intends to drive. And, he claimed he seldom drinks anymore
unless it is a glass of wine with dinner, and will never drink during any work-related
activities.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 63-year-old program analyst for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                               
Applicant was born and raised on a farm in a Midwestern state and his agrarian
roots have helped to instill in him a strong work ethic. (Tr. 32-33, 40) Applicant married
in March 1980 and has three children from this marriage. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 30) He earned
an associate’s degree in May 1980. (GE 1; Tr. 42)  Applicant enlisted in the Marine
Corps in January 1974 after graduating from high school and served two years of active
2
duty. (GE 1-2; Tr. 40-41 He received an honorable discharge from the Marine Corps in
February 1976. (GE 1-2)
Since March 2018, Applicant has been employed by his current contractor as a
programmer. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 45) He has held a security clearance for over 34 years.
(GEs 1-2; Tr. 43) Previously, he worked for a defense contractor for over 33 years
before his retirement in March 2017. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 45) During his years of employment
with his previous employer, Applicant consistently received outstanding reviews. (Tr.
37) He enjoys his work and maintains his finances in stable order. (Tr. 38)
Alcohol-history
Between October 2011 and March 2016, Applicant was involved in two alcohol-
related incidents. His most recent incident occurred in March 2016. (GEs 1-4; Tr. 30) In
March 2016, he was arrested by county police after registering a .13 % BAC and
charged with DUI. (GEs 3-4; Tr. 55-56) In court, Applicant pled guilty to the charges,
was fined $3,500, jailed for four days, and placed on probation until March 2019. (GEs
1-5; Tr. 50-51, 55-56) Additionally, the court directed him to enroll in an 18-month
alcohol substance abuse program (ASAP) and complete the program. (GEs 2-4; Tr. 52-
53) Applicant is credited with successfully completing the program. Applicant’s
probation expired in March 2019 without any raised issues.
In October 2011, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI after returning
from a dinner party. (GEs 1-4; Tr. 30-33). Despite registering .08% in an administered
Breathalyzer, the court reduced the charges to a wet and reckless offense, fined him
$1,500, and placed him on probation for 36 months. (GEs 1-4; Tr. 54) Applicant
completed his probation without reported incidents.
Since his 2016 DUI incident, Applicant seldom drinks and never drinks when he
is planning to drive. (GE 2; Tr. 31) Applicant’s claims of light drinking are corroborated
by his wife. (Tr. 32-35)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is
to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
3
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(d)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made
about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(d) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
              Alcohol consumption 
The Concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
        Criminal Conduct
The Concern: criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.
       Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
4
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant incurred two alcohol-related incidents between 2011 and 2016.
Principal security issues raised in this case center on Applicant’s two alcohol-related
offenses covered by Guideline G and incorporated under Guideline J.
Alcohol consumption concerns
Applicant’s two alcohol-related incidents over a five-year period (2011-2016
raise concerns over his risk of future alcohol abuse. On the strength of the evidence
presented, two disqualifying conditions (DCs) of the AGs for alcohol consumption (AG
¶ 21) may be applied: DC ¶¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such
as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the
peace or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol abuse
disorder,” and 22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use
disorder.”
Based on the court findings relative to Applicant’s 2011 and 2016 alcohol-related
incidents and his proactive efforts since his March 2016 offense, he may take full
advantage of the following Guideline G mitigating conditions: MC ¶¶ 23(a), “so much
time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment,” and 32(d) “the individual has
successfully completed a treatment program along with required aftercare, and has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in
accordance with treatment recommendations.” 
Applicant’s circumstances and subsequent actions following his last alcohol-
related incident in March 2016 are sufficient to facilitate safe predictions that he will
avoid any abusive drinking in the foreseeable future. Besides his own commitments to
5
maintaining responsible drinking in the future, he benefits from a strong family network
of  support.  His wife has been very vocal about her own efforts to reinforce Applicant’s 
expressed commitments to avoid drinking when he thinks he will be driving.
Criminal conduct concerns
Security concerns are also raised with respect to Applicant’s alcohol-related
incidents under the overlapping coverage of Guideline J. Disqualifying conditions
applicable to Applicant’s alcohol-related offenses under Guideline J (criminal conduct)
are twofold: DC ¶¶ 31(a), “a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own
would be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness,” and
31(b), “evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an admission, and
matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the individual was
formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.” Each of these two cited DUI offenses are
cross-referenced under Guideline G and are considered to be alcohol-related for
purposes of Guideline J analysis.  
Applicable mitigating conditions covering Applicant’s alcohol-related offenses
under Guideline J are as follows:  MC ¶¶ 32(a), “”so much time has elapsed since the
criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and 32(d), “there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation; including, but not limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement.”  Passage of time since Applicant’s last alcohol-related offense in March
2016 exceeds two years and provides enough time to mitigate these alcohol-related
offenses under Guideline J as well.
Whole-person assessment
Applicant’s lengthy 35-year career of civilian service with DoD contractors,
following his honorable service with the Marine Corps, is much appreciated and
respected. His excellent performance reviews from his prior employer of 33 years
provide strong reinforcement of his claims of dedicated service with this prior employer.
Considering the record as a whole, safe predictions can be made at this time about
Applicant’s ability to avoid alcohol-related incidents in the foreseeable future. Alcohol
concerns are fully mitigated and enable favorable conclusions to be made in connection
with the allegations covered by Guidelines G and J.
                                               Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
6
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):   FOR APPLICANT
           
Subparagraphs 1.a -1.b:                      For Applicant
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT):            FOR APPLICANT
   Subparagraph 2.a :                                For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
8
