1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00614 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On April 26, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 22, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on December 5, 
2018. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
03/18/2019
 
2 
 
 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 7. Applicant submitted a timely response and 
his exhibit is marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. There were no objections by Applicant 
or Department Counsel and all Items and AE A are admitted into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on February 27, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except ¶ 1.b, which he believed was 
a duplicate with ¶ 1.c. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He holds an associate’s degree. He served in the Army 
and was honorably discharged. He married in 1984 and has four children, ages 33, 31, 
25, and 22. He has worked for his present employer, a federal contractor, since April 
2016.1 
 
Applicant disclosed on his August 2016 security clearance application (SCA) that 
he was unemployed December 2015 to January 2016; September 2013 to January 2014; 
and July 2009 to November 2009. He explained in his answer to the SOR that he worked 
as a independent contractor and could not control the duration of the contracts, 
unexpected cancelations, and whether the contract was renewed. When he was not 
working on a contract, it impacted his finances. He also explained that he earned more 
money when he worked as a independent contractor. He has decided to work in a job 
where he receives a regular salary, where he earns less money than when he worked 
independently, but he receives a consistent salary with benefits.2  
 
Applicant’s admissions and credit reports from September 2016 and February 
2018, corroborate the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR.3 
 
Applicant stated in his SOR answer and provided documents to show that in May 
2018, he sought financial assistance with a debt solution company. The company 
provided him a proposed plan to pay his delinquent debs. Not all of the SOR debts were 
included in the plan. There is no evidence that Applicant has implemented the plan and 
made any monthly payments towards resolution of the debts that are alleged in the SOR.4 
 
Applicant stated in his answer that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($15,464) is for a 
repossessed vehicle. He purchased the vehicle in March 2013, and he fell behind on his 
monthly payments in about September 2013, because he was in between contracts and 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 3, 4. 
 
3 Items 3, 5, 6, 7. 
 
4 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
unemployed. He attempted to catch up payments for the two delinquent months, but the 
creditor refused to accept his payments and repossessed the vehicle. Apparently, 
Applicant had an unpleasant encounter with the creditor. In his FORM response, he said 
he contacted the creditor and was told the account was past the time to collect, and he 
should leave it alone. It is unknown what this advice means, other than to wait until the 
statute of limitation runs. In his FORM response, he said that he received a letter 
indicating there was a lawsuit against this creditor for devious practices. No other 
information or documents were provided.5 This debt is not resolved.  
 
Applicant indicated that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,364) is a duplicate of ¶ 1.c 
($974). In the Government’s FORM, it advised Applicant that the two allegations were not 
the same debt and the credit reports reflect they are different accounts. Applicant 
indicated he was working with the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c. He did not provide documentation 
that he has a payment plan, has resolved either of these debts, or substantiated the debts 
are duplicates. These debts are not resolved.6  
 
 Applicant had a dispute with the merchant in SOR ¶ 1.d ($242). He felt he was 
treated badly when he tried to return merchandise. The debt was charged off in December 
2011. He stated that when he contacted the creditor that holds the account, he was 
advised the account is past the statute of limitation. The debt is unresolved.7  
 
 Applicant was told that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($2,140), which was a consumer 
account, is past the statute of limitations, and he was advised to leave it alone. It is 
unresolved.8 
 
 Applicant’s response to SOR ¶ 1.f ($1,230) does not articulate whether he has 
resolved the account. He wrote “settlement $1,230,” but failed to provide information that 
shows he has paid the debt or reached a settlement agreement that he has paid. It is 
unresolved.9 
 
 Applicant indicated that with the help of his credit counselor, he is still working to 
resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($384), a cell phone account. He did not provide any other 
information or documentary evidence. It is unresolved.10  
 
                                                          
5 Items 3, 5: AE A. 
 
6 Items 3, 6, 7. 
 
7 Items 3, 5, 6, 7. 
 
8 Items 3, 5, 6, 7. 
 
9 Item 3.  
 
10 Items 3, 5, 6, 7. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR that he paid the medical debt in SOR ¶ 
1.h ($160) that was in collection. He did not provide documentary evidence to show it is 
paid. It is unresolved.11  
 
Applicant said that he attempted to speak to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.i ($57). He 
said the creditor told him it did not have his social security number showing he had a debt. 
Applicant did not provide documentary evidence to show he has disputed the debt. It is 
not resolved.12  
 
 In Applicant’s FORM response he provided a document to show he paid a medical 
collection account in January 2019. It appears this debt was not alleged in the SOR. 
Applicant stated that he is not irresponsible or in financial “bad shape.” He provided 
financial documents to corroborate his statement. He said and the documents support 
that as of January 2019, he had approximately $18,657 in one of his bank accounts; 
$5,723 in another account; approximately $30,000 in a 401k pension plan; and about 
$32,290 in stock options that will vest in about a year. Applicant further stated that he 
owns a home and has a second investment home.13  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
11 Items 3, 5, 6, 7. 
 
12 Items 3, 5, 6, 7. 
 
13 AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 
6 
 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts dating back to approximately 2011 that 
are unresolved. He provided evidence that he has the financial means to resolve at least 
some of the debts, but did not provide evidence that he has done so. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant has not paid or provided evidence that he has resolved any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. His delinquent debts are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to periods of unemployment and to the 
unreliability of working on government contracts. The unemployment periods were 
somewhat beyond his control. Applicant was aware of the positive aspect of working as 
an independent contractor, which is higher pay, and the negative aspect, which is 
unreliability. Choosing to work as an independent contractor was within his control 
because he could have better planned for periods he was unemployed and not being 
 
7 
 
 
paid, while waiting for a new contract. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant 
must have acted responsibly. Applicant did not provided sufficient evidence to show he 
has acted responsibly under the circumstances. He failed to provide documentary 
evidence to support that he has resolved any of his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) has 
partial application.  
 
 There is evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. He did not provide 
evidence that his financial problems are under control. There is no evidence he is making 
good-faith efforts to pay the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 
20(d) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant disputed some debts, but did not provide documentary evidence of the 
legitimacy of his disputes or evidence of actions he has taken to resolve them. AG ¶ 20(e) 
does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 59 years old. He has worked as a government contractor, which due 
to the nature of business, he was unemployed in between contracts. He contracted with 
a debt solution company in May 2018, but failed to provide evidence that he has made 
monthly payments into the plan to resolve some of his debts. Not all of his delinquent 
debts were included in the plan. Regarding some of his delinquent debts, it appears he is 
relying on the statute of limitations to resolve them. The Appeal Board has held that debts 
 
8 
 
 
beyond the statute of limitation for collections cannot be mitigated solely because they 
are not collectable.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board reinforced its position on statutes of limitations not 
mitigating financial considerations concerns stating: 
 
In this case, the Judge noted that Applicant explained that he did not owe 
any of the alleged debts because they had either been deleted from his 
credit report or soon would be deleted, and he also relied on a state statute 
of limitations to absolve himself of debts. The Appeal Board has long 
recognized that debts remain relevant for security clearance purposes even 
if they are no longer enforceable due to the running of the statute of 
limitations or cannot be legally listed on a credit report due to the passage 
of time. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-04779 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 20, 2005) 
and ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 6 (App. Bd. Oct 26, 2006). We also have 
held that reliance on a state’s statute of limitations does not constitute a 
good-faith effort to resolve financial difficulties and is of limited mitigative 
value. ADP Case No. 06-18900 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 03-04779 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 20, 2005) and ISCR Case No. 01-
09691 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003)).14 
 
 Applicant provided evidence that he has the financial resources to resolve his 
delinquent debts, but failed to provide documentary evidence that he has done so. He 
has not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2016). 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
