1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
[Redacted] ) ISCR Case No. 18-01837 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 11, 2015. On 
July 20, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016). 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 4, 2018, and requested a decision on 
the written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on October 24, 2018. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
03/15/2019
 
2 
 
(FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on December 1, 2018, and did not respond. The case was assigned 
to me on March 1, 2019.  
 
 The FORM included a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) conducted 
on April 23, 2018 (FORM Item 4). The PSI summary was not authenticated as required 
by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to 
comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, additions, 
deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI summary on the ground that it 
was not authenticated. I conclude that Applicant waived any objections to the PSI 
summary by failing to respond to the FORM. “Although pro se applicants are not 
expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to 
protect their rights under the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 
2016). 
  
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since February 2018. (FORM Item 4.) When he submitted his 
SCA, he had been employed by various federal contractors, with short periods of 
unemployment between contracts, since at least October 2003. He was deployed 
overseas for most of the time. He was laid off in December 2016 and unemployed until 
May 2017. He worked for other federal contractors from May 2017 until he was hired by 
his current employer. His SCA reflects that he has never had a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Army from September 1984 to 
February 1989 and received an honorable discharge. He married in March 1985. He 
has three adult children. 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent credit-card accounts reflected in credit reports 
from October 2015 (FORM Item 5) and April 2018 (FORM Item 6) and totaling about 
$41,440. During the April 2018 PSI, Applicant told an investigator that he had 26 credit 
cards and became financially overextended because of his son’s health problems, 
several deaths in the family, and periods of unemployment. In his answer to the SOR, 
he stated that he had closed all his credit-card accounts except the six alleged in the 
SOR. (FORM Item 4 at 3.) The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the SOR is 
summarized below. 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (FORM Item 3) 
unless otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c: three credit-card accounts issued by the same bank placed 
for collection of $14,280; $4,755; and $2,550. In the April 2018 PSI, Applicant stated 
that these accounts were paid in full. (FORM Item 4 at 3.) The April 2018 credit report 
reflects that all three were charged off in June and July 2017. (FORM Item 6 at 10.) 
When he answered the SOR in October 2018, he stated that he intended to repay these 
debts, but he provided no evidence of payments, payment agreements, or other 
resolution of the debts. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: credit-card account placed for collection of $5,258. In his answer 
to the SOR, Applicant stated that he was making payments on this debt. He provided no 
evidence of payments, payment agreements, or other resolution of this debt.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: credit-card account charged off for $11,954. This account was 
charged off in October 2015. (FORM Item 5 at 5.) In the PSI, Applicant stated that this 
debt was paid in full in 2016 or 2017. (FORM Item 4 at 3.) In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant promised to pay this debt. He provided no evidence of payments, payment 
agreements, or other resolution of this debt.  
 
 SOR¶ 1.f: credit-card account charged off for $2,643. The April 2018 credit 
report reflects the account as charged off in April 2014. (FORM Item 6 at 11.) In the PSI 
and his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that had paid this debt in full in 2018. 
(FORM Item 4 at 4.) He did not submit any evidence of payments, payment 
agreements, or other resolution of this debt.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
 
4 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 
5 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish 
two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions are potentially relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. 
 
 AG¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s periods of unemployment were 
conditions largely beyond his control and were reflected in his SCA and verified in the 
PSI. However, he has provided no details and no documentation of the financial impact 
of his son’s illness or the deaths in the family. He also failed to establish that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. He provided no information about his income and 
expenses. He provided no documentary evidence of payments, payment agreements, 
 
6 
 
contacts with creditors, negotiations, or other efforts to resolve the debts alleged in the 
SOR. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(e) are not established. Applicant submitted no evidence of 
counseling, and he has not disputed any of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Applicant stated his intent to pay all the debts 
alleged in the SOR, but promises to pay delinquent debts are not a substitute for a track 
record of paying debts in a timely manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 
19, 2008). He claimed that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f were paid, but he 
provided no documentary evidence to support his claim. When applicants claim that 
debts have been resolved, they are expected to present documentary evidence to 
support their claims. See ISCR Case No. 15-03363 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2016). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Because Applicant requested 
a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his 
credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent 
debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    Against Applicant 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
