 1
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE      
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-02072 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant exercised financial irresponsibility when he made a strategic decision 
to default on his home mortgage in 2011. Resulting security concerns were not 
mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings, and exhibits, national security 
eligibility is denied. 
History of Case 
On August 20, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(December 10, 2016), implemented June 8, 2017.  
03/04/2019
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR, denying the sole allegation, on 
September 11, 2018, and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu 
of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) on 
October 24, 2018. Applicant received it on November 6, 2018. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 7. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant submitted an email with an 
attached credit report dated November 27, 2018, as his response to the FORM 
(Response). Items 1 through 7 and the Response are admitted into the record. The 
case was assigned to me on February 11, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 66-year-old naturalized U.S. citizen. He is married and has two 
children. He has worked for a government contractor since February 2011. He served 
on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 1984 to 2007, when he retired honorably. He 
denied the delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Answer; Item 4.)  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant was indebted to a mortgage holder in the 
amount of $296,546. This debt was reflected on his May 2017 and July 2018 credit 
reports as a charged-off account. (Item 5; Item 6.) Records reflect Applicant purchased 
a condominium in 2005 for $379,000, for his daughter to reside in while Applicant was 
stationed overseas. He financed the purchase with a $303,192 fixed-rate loan from 
lender 1 and a flexible-rate loan of $75,798 from lender 2. Lender 1 apparently sold the 
debt for collection (or transferred the mortgage) to the creditor identified in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
In July 2011, Applicant purchased his current residence for approximately $369,900 
financed through a different lender. He then decided he wanted to sell the condominium 
he bought for his daughter to reside in. He explained in his Answer: 
 
During the real estate down market in 2011, with the assistance of a Real 
Estate Agent, I attempted to sell my condominium located at [address 
omitted]. However, the bank refused to settle and instead foreclosed the 
property and sold it to the highest bidder. (Answer.) 
 
 He attached a property profile for the condominium, which showed that the 
property was sold through foreclosure in November 2012 for $180,000. (Answer.) The 
record does not allege or reflect the status of the home loan made by lender 2. 
 
 In his Response, Applicant attached a recent credit report, which shows he has 
an excellent credit rating. He indicated “the foreclosure, which will not happen again, 
occurred a long time ago (seven (7) years to be exact) due to the real estate down 
market.” (Response.) 
 
 
 
 
 
3
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each 
guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which 
are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
4
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes one condition that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so. 
 
As alleged in the SOR, Applicant’s mortgage account was charged off by the 
creditor in the approximate amount of $296,546. His decision to purchase another 
property and let this property fall into foreclosure was a strategic decision and reflected 
an unwillingness to abide by his financial obligation to the creditor. These facts establish 
prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying condition, and shift the burden to 
Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s admitted financial difficulties:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
 
 
 
5
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose as a result of a strategic default on his 
mortgage. While the decline of his home value may have initially caused difficulties 
selling the property, he did not present evidence that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. While he attempted to sell his condominium, he also purchased another 
home just prior to his choice to default on his condominium mortgage. Applicant’s 
default on his mortgage loan shows financial irresponsibility. While he has an excellent 
credit score, he has done little to show that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to 
occur. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶¶ 20(a) or 20(b). 
 
Applicant offered no evidence of financial counseling, or budget information. 
Although his 2018 credit report indicates he is responsibly paying his current debts, 
which is evidence of partial mitigation, he failed to overcome his past questionable 
decision to strategically default on his condominium mortgage. Accordingly, Applicant 
established limited mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of AG 
¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices to incur substantial debt and not repay it. He is 
credited with his military service. However, he has not demonstrated responsible action 
 
 
 
 
6
under the circumstances, and he has not documented a good-faith effort to resolve his 
mortgage debt. His foreclosure dates back seven years, but a determination cannot be 
made that similar circumstances are unlikely to recur. His charged-off mortgage 
continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Financial concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation demonstrated in his 
good credit rating and military service. Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as 
to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to 
meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                        
         
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
