1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00864 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Kelly M. Folks, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Troy L. Nussbaum, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On April 23, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant responded to the SOR on June 28, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  
The case was assigned to me on January 9, 2019. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 18, 2019, 
scheduling the hearing for March 7, 2019. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
03/28/2019
 
2 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. The objections to GE 5 and 8 are sustained. See Directive, Additional 
Procedural Guidance, ¶ E.3.1.20; ISCR Case No. 02-12199 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 2004); 
and ISCR Case No. 02-12199 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2005). The objections to GE 6 and 7 
are overruled and the exhibits are admitted. See Directive, Additional Procedural 
Guidance, ¶ E.3.1.22; Federal Rule of Evidence 803(8); ISCR Case No. 02-12199 (App. 
Bd. Aug. 8, 2005); and ISCR Case No. 10-08390 (App. Bd. Mar. 30, 2012). 
 
Applicant testified, called six witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 
A through C and AA through CC. AE A through C and AA through BB were admitted 
without objection. AE CC was admitted over Department Counsel’s objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2016. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 2002 
until he was honorably discharged in 2011. He seeks to retain a security clearance, 
which he has held since he was in the military. He has a bachelor’s degree, awarded in 
2016, and he attended graduate school in pursuit of a master’s degree. He has never 
married, but he and his fiancé have cohabitated since about 2008. He does not have 
children.1 
 
 Applicant had a difficult childhood. His father was not in his life, but he was raised 
by his mother and stepfather, who he refers to as his father. His parents smoked 
marijuana. His stepfather sold marijuana and occasionally cocaine. Applicant started 
smoking marijuana when he was about 12 or 13 years old. He started smoking 
marijuana with his mother when he was about 16 years old. He completed one year of 
college after high school. He worked and occasionally sold marijuana. He came home 
one day and found that his home had been burglarized and ransacked. He decided he 
needed a change in his life and joined the U.S. military in 2002 at the age of 22.2 
 
 Applicant was stationed overseas from 2003 through 2006. He deployed to Iraq 
from October 2003 to July 2004 and from September 2007 to January 2008. In about 
December 2004, Applicant was home visiting his mother and stepfather. His stepfather 
had been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease and dementia. His stepfather smoked 
marijuana to help manage his pain. He asked Applicant to smoke marijuana with him, 
which Applicant did on one occasion. Applicant again smoked marijuana with some 
friends about a day later. He held a top secret security clearance with access to 
sensitive compartmented information (SCI) at the time. His marijuana use was not 
detected by the military.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 31, 38, 43-45, 102-103; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE AA. 
 
2 Tr. at 32-38, 79-80; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 40-41, 46-47, 54, 80-81; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE AA. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant was coming to terms with his sexuality when he had his first 
homosexual relationship with a foreign national in about 2004.4 The foreign national was 
emotionally and physically abusive to Applicant. The foreign national pushed Applicant 
to use cocaine, which he did on about five to six occasions in 2005. He held a top secret 
security clearance with access to SCI at the time. These were the only occasions 
Applicant ever used any illegal drugs other than marijuana. His cocaine use went 
undetected by the military.5 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
August 2009, while he was still in the military. He did not report any illegal drug use in 
the previous seven years, and he did not report his marijuana and cocaine use while 
holding a security clearance.6 
 
Applicant submitted another SF 86 in November 2014. He answered “no” to the 
question that asked if he had ever illegally used a drug while possessing a security 
clearance.7  
 
Applicant submitted a third SF 86 in February 2015. He answered “yes” to the 
question that asked if he had ever illegally used a drug while possessing a security 
clearance. He reported marijuana use in May 2005. He wrote that he “[s]moke[d] 
marijuana once with [his] friends after coming back from deployment . . . .” He did not 
report that he used cocaine in 2005 while he held a security clearance.8   
 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to SCI was denied by a government agency in 
May 2016. He submitted a fourth SF 86 in July 2017. He reported his marijuana and 
cocaine use in 2004 to 2005.9 He wrote: 
 
There will be a discrepancy in this answer on my last SF86 and it is 
because I did not notice the question was asking for “EVER” instead of a 
time period. I had also forgotten about the incidents because they are over 
12 years old and it wasn’t until I was undergoing a full scope polygraph 
that I started to remember the incidents.10 
                                                          
4 The adjudicative guidelines specifically state that “[n]o adverse inference concerning the standards in 
this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.” AG ¶ 12. 
Applicant’s sexual orientation is not relevant to a determination of his security worthiness. It is discussed 
here solely because Applicant specifically addressed it as part of the reason he “buried” his illegal drug 
use and did not remember it when he completed Questionnaires for National Security Positions. 
 
5 Tr. at 36-37, 47-54, 81-82, 180. 
 
6 GE 3. 
 
7 GE 2. 
 
8 GE 4. 
 
9 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 6, 7. 
 
10 GE 1. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant denied intentionally providing false information on any of the SF 86s. 
He stated that he did not remember the drug use when he filled out the questionnaires. 
He stated that he buried the incident with his stepfather “because of what it meant and 
how much it hurt to come back after being gone a year.” He stated that he also forgot 
about smoking marijuana with his friends because it all happened on the same 
weekend, and he “looked at it as one situation.” He also buried the cocaine use 
because it was associated with an abusive relationship.11  
 
 Applicant’s stepfather passed away in 2010. At some point after his stepfather 
passed away, Applicant told his fiancé that he smoked marijuana with his stepfather. 
Applicant’s fiancé helped him fill out the 2015 SF 86. Applicant stated that he had 
forgotten about his marijuana use in 2004. It was his fiancé who reminded him that he 
smoked marijuana with his stepfather. He stated that he did not report the cocaine use 
on that questionnaire because he did not remember it.12    
 
Applicant’s fiancé’s testimony was consistent with Applicant’s testimony. He 
helped Applicant fill out the 2015 SF 86. He testified that Applicant looked confused like 
he did not remember when he reminded Applicant of his marijuana use with his 
stepfather. He believes Applicant is an honest and truthful person. He completely 
believes Applicant’s testimony that he did not report his drug use because he forgot 
about it.13   
 
 Applicant stated that he only remembered the cocaine use when he was being 
questioned about his foreign contacts in a pre-polygraph interview for the government 
agency. While discussing his foreign boyfriend, the interviewer asked him if they ever 
used drugs, which triggered his memory that they used cocaine, and he divulged that 
information to the interviewer.14 
 
Applicant spent two years in Afghanistan working for a defense contractor in 
support of the U.S. forces. He regularly volunteers in his community. He submitted 
documents and letters, and he called six witnesses who attested to his excellent job 
performance in the military and in his current job. He is praised for his trustworthiness, 
technical expertise, honesty, reliability, moral character, patriotism, work ethic, 
dedication, judgment, maturity, professionalism, leadership, loyalty, and integrity. His 
witnesses are all aware of the allegations in the SOR. They completely believe 
Applicant’s statements and testimony that he did not report his marijuana and cocaine 
use because he forgot about it. They recommend that he retain his security clearance.15 
 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 62-67, 75-76, 84-90; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
12 Tr. at 60, 65, 68, 72-75, 92-94; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE C. 
 
13 Tr. at 104-121; AE C. 
 
14 Tr. at 67, 75-78, 90-92; Applicant’s response to SOR.  
 
15 Tr. at 123-176; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE C, BB. 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant used marijuana and cocaine in 2004 and 2005 while he was in the 
military and holding a security clearance. That conduct reflects questionable judgment 
and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It also created vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are applicable.  
 
 Applicant did not report his drug use on SF 86s submitted in 2009 and 2014, and 
he did not report the full extent of his drug use on a 2015 SF 86. He denied intentionally 
providing false information on the SF 86s. He asserted that he did not remember his 
drug use when he filled out the questionnaires.  
 
7 
 
I have considered all the evidence, including Applicant’s and his fiancé’s 
testimony, his strong character evidence, and his witnesses’ belief that he told the truth. 
I also considered his motive to falsify, particularly in 2009, while he was still in the 
military; the two explanations given in the 2017 SF 86 (“I did not notice the question was 
asking for ‘EVER’ instead of a time period [and] I had also forgotten about the 
incidents”); and the inherent improbability that he would forget these significant events.  
 
I did not find Applicant’s explanation to be credible. I do not believe that 
Applicant’s marijuana use while in the military blended in with his extensive marijuana 
use before he joined the military. Illegal drug use is a significant event in the military, 
and not one that is quickly forgotten. Additionally, Applicant never used cocaine except 
while he was in the military. Again, that is an event not likely to be forgotten. Applicant 
asserted that he used marijuana and cocaine in 2004 to 2005; forgot about it when he 
submitted his 2009 SF 86, while he was still in the military; remembered his marijuana 
use and told his fiancé at some point after his stepfather passed away in 2010; forgot 
about it again until he was reminded of his marijuana use by his fiancé in 2015; and only 
remembered the cocaine use when he was being questioned about his foreign contacts 
in a pre-polygraph interview for the government agency. I am convinced by substantial 
evidence16 that Applicant intentionally provided false information about the extent of his 
illegal drug use on the three SF 86s. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable. 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
                                                          
16 Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
17-04166 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2019) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the 
weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence 
does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal 
Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than 
a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994); ISCR 
Case No. 04-07187 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2006). 
 
8 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant’s illegal drug use is mitigated by time and the absence of any additional 
drug use. SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Applicant has consistently denied that he lied on the SF 86s. Having determined 
that he intentionally omitted information in an attempt to mislead the government, I have 
also determined that his explanations that the omissions were unintentional were also 
false. It would be inconsistent to find his conduct mitigated.17   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                          
17 See ISCR Case 03-22819 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2006), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant Applicant’s security clearance: 
 
Once the Administrative Judge found that Applicant deliberately falsified a security 
clearance application in September 2002, the Judge could not render a favorable security 
clearance decision without articulating a rational basis for why it would be clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant 
despite the falsification. Here, the Judge gives reasons as to why he considers the 
falsification mitigated under a “whole person” analysis, namely that Applicant has 
matured, has held a position of responsibility, recognizes how important it is to be candid 
in relation to matters relating to her security clearance, and has changed her behavior so 
that there is little likelihood of recurrence. However, the Judge’s conclusion runs contrary 
to the Judge’s rejection of Applicant’s explanations for the security clearance application 
falsification. At the hearing (after earlier admitting the falsification in her March 2003 
written statement to a security investigator), Applicant testified that she had not 
intentionally falsified her application. Given the Judge’s rejection of this explanation as 
not being credible, it follows that the Judge could not have concluded Applicant now 
recognizes the importance of candor and has changed her behavior. 
 
9 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I also considered Applicant’s honorable military service, particularly his 
deployments, and his excellent character evidence. I can see why he has such strong 
support from those around him, both professionally and personally. I believe Applicant is 
an otherwise honest person who felt he had to lie in 2009 while he was still in the 
military. He was then stuck with the lie, was unable to extricate himself from it, and felt 
he had to propagate it. Unfortunately, at this time, he cannot be trusted to tell the truth.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.f:   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
