1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-02119 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On September 28, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on October 19, 2018, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 11, 
2019.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 24, 2019, scheduling the hearing for March 6, 2019. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through T, which were admitted without objection.  
03/29/2019
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
various defense contractors since about 2011. He seeks to retain a security clearance, 
which he has held since about 2011. He attended college for a period without earning a 
degree, and he has a number of information technology (IT) certifications. He is married 
with a 14-year-old daughter and three stepchildren.1 
 
 Applicant’s daughter was born prematurely, and she has had significant medical 
problems since birth, resulting in multiple surgeries, including eight surgeries on her 
legs alone. Her last surgery was in about December 2017. She had to be 
homeschooled at one point. Applicant’s wife missed worked while she stayed home to 
care for their daughter, and his wife eventually had to go to part-time employment. 
Applicant’s wife also has had persistent medical problems. Their finances were 
adversely affected by her time off work, as well as expensive copayments and incidental 
costs that were not covered by insurance.2 
 
 Applicant’s wife handled the family’s finances, including filing their income tax 
returns. Applicant did not file his federal income tax returns when they were due for tax 
years 2012 through 2016, and he did not file his state income tax returns when they 
were due for tax years 2013 through 2016. He also had delinquent debts that he 
resolved before the SOR was issued.3 
 
 Applicant filed his 2012 federal income tax return in June 2013. He owed $4,091 
in taxes, and $3,929 was withheld from his paychecks. In April 2017, $244 was withheld 
from his refund for tax year 2016 and applied to the balance owed for 2012, satisfying 
the taxes owed for that year. He filed his 2013 and 2014 federal income tax returns in 
June 2018 and July 2018. As of February 24, 2019, he owed the IRS $1,512 for 2013 
and $1,069 for 2014.4  
 
 Applicant filed his 2015 and 2016 federal income tax returns in December 2017. 
He filed his 2017 federal income tax return in July 2018. As of February 24, 2019, he 
owed the IRS $4,289 for 2015 and $2,725 for 2017. He received a refund for tax year 
2016.5   
 
 Applicant filed his late state income tax returns in July 2018. He does not owe 
any additional state taxes.6 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 25-26, 51-52; GE 1, 2; AE D, E. 
 
2 Tr. at 26-29, 36-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE C, F, Q, R. 
 
3 Tr. at 30-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 30-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4; AE A, O. 
 
5 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3; AE O. 
 
6 Tr. at 35; GE 4; AE B, N. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant established an installment agreement with the IRS in July 2018. The 
agreement called for payments of $125 per month for tax years 2013, 2014, and 2015, 
starting on September 28, 2018. He made the first $125 payment in September 2018. 
He established another installment agreement with the IRS in October 2018, which 
added in the taxes owed for tax year 2017. The agreement calls for payments of $150 
per month starting on November 28, 2018. He established that he made the four 
monthly payments that were required as of the hearing date. As of February 24, 2019, 
he owed the IRS $9,598 for tax years 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2017.7  
 
 Applicant has received financial counseling. He has worked two jobs to better 
provide for his family and pay his debts. He has an offer of employment with another 
defense contractor that will pay him an annual base salary of $85,000, contingent upon 
the successful retention of his security clearance. His daughter’s health is better; she is 
in high school; and Applicant’s wife returned to full-time employment in January 2019. 
They have a budget that enables them to pay their bills and their back taxes. Applicant 
and his wife credibly testified that they are committed to their installment agreement with 
the IRS and that all future income tax returns will be filed when required.8 
 
Applicant submitted documents and letters, and he called three witnesses who 
attested to his excellent job performance. He is praised for his trustworthiness, honesty, 
reliability, dependability, professionalism, work ethic, dedication, and integrity.9 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 32-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4; AE P, S, T. 
 
8 Tr. at 31-39, 42-52; AE J-M. 
 
9 Tr. at 13-23; AE G-I. 
 
4 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant did not file his federal income tax returns when they were due for tax 
years 2012 through 2016, and he did not file his state income tax returns when they 
were due for tax years 2013 through 2016. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying condition.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s daughter has had significant medical problems since birth, resulting 
in multiple surgeries and periods where she could not physically go to school. She had 
to be homeschooled at one point. His wife missed worked while she stayed home to 
care for their daughter, and his wife also has had persistent medical problems. 
 
 Applicant let his finances and taxes languish while he and his wife cared for their 
daughter. Applicant’s failure to file his tax returns and pay his taxes when required 
raises some questions about his judgment. However, he filed all the tax returns before 
the SOR was issued. He owes the IRS, but he has an installment agreement with the 
IRS, and he is in compliance with that agreement. His daughter’s health is better; she is 
in high school; and Applicant’s wife returned to full-time employment in January 2019. 
Applicant and his wife credibly testified that they are committed to their installment 
 
6 
 
agreement with the IRS and that all future income tax returns will be filed when 
required. 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties were the result of conditions that were beyond his 
control. He has a plan to resolve his financial problems, and he took significant actions 
to implement that plan. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(g) are applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) 
are partially applicable. Security concerns about Applicant’s finances are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. I also considered Applicant’s excellent character evidence. He is a hard-
working man who was overwhelmed by his daughter’s medical problems. She is doing 
better, and his finances are back on track. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
