1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted]  ) ISCR Case No. 18-01697 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant used marijuana from approximately July 2000 to at least February 2018. 
He denies any intention to use marijuana in the future, although as recently as December 
2017, he was unable to commit to abstention. More time is needed for Applicant to 
establish that his drug involvement and substance misuse will not reoccur. Clearance is 
denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On August 31, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H, drug involvement and substance misuse. The SOR explained why the 
DOD CAF was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
03/29/2019
2 
 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG) effective within the DOD on June 
8, 2017. 
 
On September 26, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested 
a decision based on the written record by an administrative judge from the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On December 20, 2018, Department Counsel for the 
Government prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), consisting of four exhibits 
(Items 1-4). DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant on December 21, 2018, 
and instructed him to file any objections to the information or to supply additional 
information in response to the FORM within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the 
FORM on January 7, 2019. No response was received by the February 6, 2019 due date. 
On March 12, 2019, the case was assigned to me to determine whether it is clearly 
consistent with national security to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. I 
received the case assignment on March 14, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
  The SOR alleges under Guideline H that Applicant used marijuana with varying  
frequency from July 2000 to at least February 2018 (SOR ¶ 1.a), and that he indicated 
during a December 20, 2017 interview with an authorized investigator for the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) that there was a likelihood that his illegal drug use would 
reoccur (SOR ¶ 1.b). (Item 1.) In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he had 
used marijuana from 2000 to 2018, but he had “no intent to repeat [his] transgressions.” He 
explained that his marijuana use ceased in February 2018, and that he wants to be a good 
role model for his son born in August 2018. Applicant also admitted that he had indicated in 
December 2017 that his drug use was likely to reoccur, but he reiterated that he would not 
use any illegal drugs. (Item 2.) 
 
After considering the FORM, which includes Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (Item 2), 
I make the following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old high school graduate with two semesters of college. He 
attended college from September 2005 to January 2006 and from September 2008 to 
January 2009. He has yet to earn a degree. He has worked for his defense-contractor 
employer since September 2008. In April 2014, Applicant began cohabiting with his spouse 
in her home. They married in June 2015, and they had a son in August 2018. (Items 2-3.)  
 
On August 9, 2017, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86.) In response to an inquiry concerning 
the illegal use of a drug or controlled substance in the last seven years, Applicant indicated 
that he used marijuana for the first time in college in September 2005. He gave an 
estimated date of July 2017 for his most recent use and explained that he had attended a 
comedy show with his family and his cousin gave him “infused drinks.” Applicant denied 
any intention of future illegal drug use, and added, “I plan on starting a family with my wife. 
My kid needs the best of me.” Applicant denied any involvement in other illegal drug activity 
in the last seven years, including any purchase. (Item 3.) 
3 
 
On December 20, 2017, Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator, in part 
about his drug use. He described himself as a social smoker. He reportedly indicated that 
he first used marijuana at age “10” and most recently in July 2017 at the comedy show, 
when he had drinks infused with marijuana. He explained that he used marijuana once to 
twice year except when he was in college, when he used marijuana twice a month at 
fraternity events. He denied ever purchasing marijuana. He admitted that there was a 
likelihood that he would use marijuana in the future. Applicant volunteered that he had 
received an email two months before his interview in which he was informed of declination 
of an interim clearance for him. He indicated that he was given a list of possible reasons for 
the denial but not a specific reason. (Item 4.) 
 
Applicant was interviewed by another OPM investigator on February 14, 2018. He 
indicated that he was a former marijuana smoker. He denied any use of marijuana since 
May or June 2017 and any chance of future use. (Item 4.) 
 
DOHA sent Applicant interrogatories concerning his illegal drug use. In his response 
dated July 24, 2018, Applicant indicated that he used cannabis from July 2000 to February 
2018 once a year. He admitted that he had used marijuana after applying for a security 
clearance and stated, “The last big party before I have my son, wanted to go out for my last 
hooray before parenthood.” He cited the upcoming birth of his son in August 2018 as the 
precipitant in his decision to stop using marijuana because he needs to set an example for 
his son. Applicant explained that his wife could verify his abstention. In the interrogatories, 
Applicant was given an opportunity to review the summary of his December 20, 2017 
interview. He adopted it without any changes. (Item 4.) It is unclear whether his use of 
marijuana in February 2018 occurred before his February 14, 2018 interview. 
 
When he responded to the SOR on September 26, 2018, Applicant indicated that 
his son was born in mid-August 2018. He denied any use of marijuana since February 
2018 and asserted that raising his son has become his “number one goal.” (Item 2.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
4 
 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concerns about drug involvement and substance misuse are set 
forth in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled 
substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. 
Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above. 
  
There is conflicting evidence about when he used marijuana. He told an OPM 
investigator that he first used marijuana at age 10. In response to DOHA interrogatories, he 
indicated that he used marijuana starting in July 2000. He would have been 13 years old at 
5 
 
that time. The evidence establishes that he used marijuana for at least 18 years before 
stopping in 2018. He used the drug socially, once or twice a year except for a two-year time 
span starting in September 2005, when he used marijuana twice a month. Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any substance misuse,” applies. AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession of a 
controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” applies only in that Applicant had 
physical possession of the drug on the occasions that he used it. There is no evidence that 
he ever purchased marijuana or ever engaged in the other activities covered under AG ¶ 
25(c). AG ¶ 25(g), “expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse,” is established 
because Applicant stated during his December 2017 subject interview that there was a 
likelihood that his drug use would reoccur, and he used marijuana in at least February 
2018. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(a) provides for mitigation when the drug involvement and substance misuse 
“happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Excepting the two years in the mid-2000s, when his 
marijuana use increased to twice a month after he joined a fraternity, his drug use was 
infrequent; once or twice during the course of a year. However, given he used marijuana 
over some 18 years to as recently as February 2018, it cannot reasonably be said that his 
drug involvement happened so long ago or was “so infrequent” to trigger AG ¶ 26(a) in 
mitigation. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) has some applicability because Applicant acknowledges his drug 
involvement, and there is no evidence that he currently associates with drug-using 
associates and contacts. AG ¶ 26(b) provides: 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
 Applicant’s self-reporting of his marijuana involvement is some evidence of good 
character.  Even so, it does not entitle him to a favorable security determination or negate 
the security significance raised by his illegal use of marijuana, especially after he applied 
for a security clearance. Applicant told an OPM investigator in December 2017 that he 
would likely use marijuana in the future. He was interviewed by another OPM investigator 
on February 14, 2018. At that time, he denied any use of marijuana since May 2017 or 
6 
 
June 2017. He told the investigator that there was no chance of him using marijuana in the 
future. However, he used marijuana in February 2018 at a party. His explanation is that he 
“wanted to go out for [his] last hooray before parenthood.” That use of marijuana, after he 
had indicated that he would not use marijuana in the future, raises doubt about his ability to 
commit to his stated intention to abstain.1 Applicant’s present abstinence of one year as of 
the close of the evidentiary record is very short in comparison to the 18 years over which 
he used marijuana. Little is known about the circumstances of much of his marijuana use 
other than it was while socializing. He continued to use the drug after he was no longer in 
the college environment. He provided no corroborating evidence from others attesting to 
his change to a drug-free lifestyle after the birth of his son, which would include avoiding 
friends and social functions that might be conducive to marijuana use. Applicant has yet to 
establish a sufficient pattern of abstinence to mitigate the drug involvement and substance 
misuse security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept  
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).2 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(c), I have 
only the FORM, which shows Applicant cooperated with the investigation and adjudication 
process. While this is an important consideration, it is well settled that once a concern 
arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption 
against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 
1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). The Government must be able to rely on those persons seeking 
security clearance eligibility to comply with the Federal drug laws without regard to their 
personal interests. For the reasons discussed, Applicant has raised enough doubt in that 
regard to where I am unable to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for a security clearance. 
                                                 
1 It is unclear whether Applicant’s February 2018 marijuana use occurred before or after his February 14, 2018 
interview. If before, then he concealed that drug use during his interview because he told the OPM investigator 
that he had not used any marijuana since May or June 2017. 
 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows:  
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
