1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 18-01129 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
 For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
      For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On June 19, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).1 Applicant timely submitted an 
undated response in which he admitted all but two allegations and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). I was assigned the case on November 1, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 7, 2019, setting 
the hearing for January 24, 2019. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
The Government offered eight documents, accepted without objection as exhibits 
(Exs.) 1-8. Applicant offered testimony and 10 documents, accepted without objection 
as Exs. A-J. The transcript (Tr.) was received on February 7, 2019, and the record was 
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.  
03/15/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
closed. Based on the exhibits, testimony, and record as a whole, I find Applicant 
mitigated all security concerns.   
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 A 40-year-old chemist who has served in his current position for 13 years, 
Applicant has earned a bachelor’s degree. He is considered to be a “dedicated, 
hardworking, and trusted” member of his work team. (Ex. A) Applicant is married and 
has one preteen child.  
 
Applicant first began trying alcohol in about 1996 as a teen. Before his more 
recent incidents involving alcohol, Applicant’s only legal infractions took place while he 
was an undergraduate student: a 1999 arrest leading to the charges of possession of 
marijuana and possession of paraphernalia and a 2000 arrest for driving under the 
influence (DUI) that was reduced to reckless driving. Applicant has not used marijuana 
again since that time, nor does he socialize with those who use it. He has not consumed 
alcohol to excess since November 2016, and has not had alcohol since June or July 
2017.  
 
Many of Applicant’s troubles began in 2010. In that year, he and his family 
suffered multiple devastating tragedies, including the death of his infant daughter, then 
his mother passed away suddenly a few weeks later. His supervisor later noted that 
these events led to increased alcohol use and symptoms of depression. (Ex. C) During 
this time he was cited for driving while intoxicated (DUI), and he was given probation 
before judgment. He felt the court was too lenient and, on his own initiative, he started a 
12-week alcohol program as well as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) attendance. (Tr. 21) 
He was not entirely satisfied by either effort. While he continued to imbibe, however, his 
consumption of alcohol was reduced significantly. A period of leave from work lasting 
about three months, along with professional counseling, proved to be effective in 
helping Applicant refocus. (Ex. C)  
 
About two years later, Applicant and his wife had a child. He became protective 
of the new baby and mindful not to drink to excess. In about November 2016, Applicant 
drank alcoholic beverages at a friend’s home. Feeling intoxicated, he spent the night at 
the house. In the morning, he began driving home, but fell asleep at a lengthy red light. 
A concerned citizen saw him asleep and took control of his vehicle, pulling it into a fast 
food store’s parking lot.  
 
Concerned Applicant might have been experiencing some sort of diabetic 
condition, the citizen asked someone to call for an ambulance. When the police arrived, 
he was ultimately arrested and charged with driving while impaired by alcohol (DWI), 
DUI, negligent driving, reckless driving, and failure to obey properly placed traffic control 
instruments. At the time, Applicant was unaware he was legally impaired and thought he 
was only tired. He refused a breathalyzer test because it was his understanding that 
one should always do that. The arrest awakened him to the facts as they were, and he 
immediately repented his inattentiveness and failure to self-monitor.  
 
 
 
 
3 
On his own volition, Applicant put himself into a three-day inpatient “lockup” 
program where a patient is subjected to intensive counseling all day. The experience 
was eye-opening. After receiving a certificate for successfully completing that program, 
he entered a second program for three months at an outpatient center. There, he found 
much in terms of self-discovery through batteries of tests and introspection.2 (Tr. 25)  
 
During this time, Applicant also returned to AA. He learned that each meeting site 
had its own character. After checking several of them out, he found a group that was a 
good fit and where he learned from the stories of others. He started attending about 
three times a week minimum. He continues attending to date, visiting the site three to 
six times a week, “like a sponge, to try to get any information I can from them.” (Tr. 26) 
He attributes his nearly two years of sobriety to these meetings, citing it as one of his 
largest supports. (Tr. 26) He is also supported by his family, who is expecting a new 
baby within a couple of months. In addition, he has his own personal desire and 
conviction to be free from future trouble involving alcohol. Finally, Applicant and his 
family are becoming increasingly active with their church. Having had his probation 
abated early and with a support structure in place, he now feels he is on his way to 
starting over. (Ex. 7) 
 
Applicant told his supervisor in November 2016 that he had suffered a relapse 
and had actively resumed counseling. He has been open about his issues at work, 
where his career has been flourishing. With AA still an integral part of his life and while 
maintain healthy sobriety, Applicant finds he is much more productive at home. He 
noted that “everything with [his] wife and child has been a million times better.” (Tr. 35) 
Living without alcohol has brought him closer to his wife, now that time away from home 
at friends’ homes for barbeques or sports is now spent as a family unit.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. They are applied in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to the AG, the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. The AG 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
2 Applicant believed he was medically given the diagnosis of alcohol abuse, but does not dispute the 
SOR’s notation that he was found to be alcohol dependent. (Tr. 28-29) 
 
 
 
 
4 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. In addition, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption 
 
The Alcohol Consumption guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21:  
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
While Applicant had no atypical experimentation or trouble with alcohol in school, 
he had two serious alcohol-related incidents as an adult. In 2010, Applicant was cited 
for drinking and driving while grieving the recent loss of both his infant child and mother. 
The 2016 DUI-related incident was ironically the result of his poor assessment of his 
faculties after responsibly spending the night at a friend’s home following an evening of 
imbibing. Given these facts, the following Disqualifying Conditions are applicable under 
AG ¶ 22:  
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the 
individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially available under AG ¶ 23:  
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has established a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed a treatment 
program along with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear 
and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations.  
 
Applicant’s first arrest for DUI in 2010 came at a time of tremendous loss, 
understandable depression, and grief. While those conditions do not absolve Applicant 
of his conduct, they do help explain how a mature man might find his judgment lapsed 
and his control temporarily abandoned. When he was given a lighter sentence than he 
believed he deserved, he sought additional counseling, including some time with AA.  
 
A lapse in 2016 found Applicant harder on himself for his poor judgment than the 
judicial system. He knew he had failed to control his own actions. On his own volition, 
he self-admitted to a three-day “lockup” counseling facility, followed by an extended 
outpatient treatment facility, both of which he successfully completed. It was at this time 
he returned to AA. This time, however, he actively searched for a meeting site with 
which he felt more comfortable.  
 
Once found, Applicant thrived in what he considers to be a learning environment 
where he learns from the stories of others. Today, he continues with AA meetings three 
or more times a week, finds solace in church attendance, and support at home and 
work. Today, he relishes his life as a family man and looks forward to the upcoming 
birth of another child. He has not consumed alcohol to excess since the November 2016 
incident, and, with the on-going support of AA, has successfully maintained sobriety 
since the summer of 2017. Consequently, I find AG ¶ 23(b) and AG ¶ 23(d) apply. 
 
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
 
 The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 Applicant admits he was arrested in college for possession of marijuana and 
possession of paraphernalia. He also admits that in college he was also arrested for 
DUI, an arrest that resulted in a conviction for reckless driving. Since his youth, he was 
arrested and charged with DUI in 2010 and for DWI, DUI, negligent driving, reckless 
 
 
 
 
6 
driving, and failure to properly obey placed traffic control device in 2016. Probation for 
the latter incident has been curtailed. Such facts raise disqualifying condition:  
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, 
an admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or 
convicted.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant:   
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment, and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.   
 
 Applicant has not used marijuana again since he was an undergraduate student 
in the 1990s. He does not associate with those who do use the drug. As noted in the 
preceding section, he is no longer suffering from an alcohol disorder, having grown to 
cut alcohol from his life with reliance on an extensive support network. Meanwhile, his 
home life has improved and his professional work has shown growth. Therefore, I find 
AG ¶ 32(d) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to Applicant’s past alcohol issues and criminal 
conduct I considered his present life, candor at the hearing, and credible explanations. 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old chemist who has earned a bachelor’s degree. He has 
worked for the same employer for 13 years. He is highly regarded at work by his 
superiors and peers, as well as within his community. He is married, has a preteen 
child, and is expecting a baby shortly. He first used alcohol as a teen. In college, he was 
arrested for possession of marijuana and possession of paraphernalia, and charged 
 
 
 
 
7 
with DUI, although he was found guilty of a lesser offense. He has not used marijuana 
since that time. Issues with alcohol, however, have recurred.  
 
In 2010, Applicant was in grief over the loss of his infant child and mother, and 
suffered from related periods of depression. He imbibed, drove, and was charged with 
DUI. Given probation before judgment and what he considered to be light treatment, he 
sought additional treatment and attended AA. Neither effort, however, seemed 
adequate. In 2016, he responsibly spent the night at a friend’s house after imbibing. He 
misjudged his condition in the morning, however, and was again arrested for and 
charged with DUI, DWI, and related charges while driving home.  
 
Taking full responsibility for his poor judgment and failure to better self-monitor, 
Applicant sought out, attended, and completed a more satisfactory substance abuse 
program. More importantly, he took the time to find an AA site where he could truly 
benefit. He found a good fit and has continued to attend three or more meetings a week, 
and transitioned from being a cautious imbiber to alcohol-free. Today, AA and his 
church are cornerstones of his sobriety network, enhanced by the support of his family 
and colleagues. In anticipation of a new addition to their family, he looks forward to 
devoting time to his family, rather than drinking with friends during his free time.   
 
Applicant’s testimony and demeanor was highly credible. This is especially true 
with regard to his description off AA, the importance of finding a meeting site or sites 
that are a good fit for the individual, and is recommitment to his faith. He takes full 
responsibility for his past poor judgment. He has both the motivation and the support 
network to maintain his current caution with regard to alcohol. I have no genuine 
concerns Applicant will fail to continue on his current path. I find Applicant mitigated 
security concerns under Guideline G and Guideline J. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1e:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
