1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-01363 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
continuation of a security clearance to work as a linguist in the defense industry. 
Applicant, a native of Afghanistan, mitigated the foreign influence concerns raised by his 
relationships with his family and wife’s family who had connections with Afghanistan, 
Turkey, and Iran. A naturalized U.S. citizen since 1992, Applicant mitigated the foreign 
influence concerns. Clearance is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On June 18, 2018, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the foreign influence guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable 
to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security 
clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to deny his security clearance.  
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on June 8, 2017.   
03/19/2019
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested his case be decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file 
of relevant material (FORM) on November 5, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on  
November 26, 2018. The Government submitted 15 Items, which were entered into the 
record without objection. Applicant responded to the FORM, which was marked as AE A 
and entered into the record without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
February 14, 2019. Based on my review of the documentary evidence, I find that 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Turkey, Afghanistan and Iran. Without objection from Applicant, I approved the 
request. The relevant facts are highlighted in the Findings of Fact section, below.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 59, has worked as a linguist since January 2010 supporting the U.S. 
Government. He completed   security clearance applications in June 2017 and October 
2011, and during his counterintelligence (CI) screening in 2012, he disclosed his 
relatives, and their connections to Turkey and Afghanistan. The SOR (1.a to 1.d) 
alleges that his brother and wife’s family are citizens of Afghanistan and reside in Iran. 
Applicant, in his answer, denied that his relatives live in Iran. He explained that his 
brother and one sister-in-law are refugees in Turkey; and that his mother-in-law and 
other sister-in-law are U.S. residents living in the United States. The earlier connection 
to Iran is described below.3 He was granted a security clearance in approximately 2009. 
He was given a warning about financial issues in 2012. (Items 7, 8) 
 
  Applicant was born in Afghanistan and entered the United States in March 1986. 
He was sponsored by his brother who was under special U.S. immigrant status due to 
work for the U.S. Embassy in Afghanistan. Applicant reports no foreign military 
experience. He earned his undergraduate degree in 1983 from a university in 
Afghanistan. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in October 1992.  In 1993, he 
married a woman from Afghanistan who was born in Iran.4 His wife is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen and as a result of the marriage, Applicant has two children who are U.S. citizens. 
Applicant’s parents are now deceased, but Applicant has two brothers who reside in the 
U.S. and at least one is a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Items 3, 4) 
                                                          
2 The Government’s administrative notice summary and attached documents are admitted to the record 
as Items 13, 14, and 15. 
  
3 In the past Applicant and his wife travelled to Iran when her family was there. They 
attended her father’s funeral who was a U.S. resident. Applicant has no intention of 
returning to Iran. 
 
4 Her family lived in Iran, but fled to Afghanistan. Applicant’s wife has one brother in Iran who 
she is sponsoring to come to the United States. 
 
3 
 
 
 As to SOR, 1.a, which alleges that Applicant’s bother is a citizen of Afghanistan 
and resides in Iran, Applicant denied the statement. His answer and response to FORM 
state that his brother is an Afghan citizen who resides in Turkey as a refugee. He lived 
in Iran for a period of time as reported by Applicant. (Item 4) He moved to Turkey so 
that his children could receive an education in a country not at war. Applicant speaks to 
his brother about three times per year. Applicant does not help his brother financially. 
(AE A) 
 
  As to SOR 1.b, which alleges that Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen of 
Afghanistan, Applicant admitted, but noted in his Response to FORM that his mother-in-
law is a U.S. resident and lives in the United States with his family. She is a widow. She 
is not affiliated with the Afghan government and does not know the nature of Applicant’s 
work. His mother-in-law also has two sisters who live in the United States. (Item 11) 
 
 As to SOR allegation 1.c, Applicant denied that his sister-in-law is a citizen and 
resident of Afghanistan. His wife’s sister is a U.S. resident and lives with Applicant and 
his family. She works and Applicant does not support her. She does not know the 
nature of Applicant’s work. (AE A) 
 
 As to SOR allegation 1.d, Applicant denied that his sister-in-law resides in Iran. 
She is married to his brother is an Afghan citizen who is living in Turkey as a refugee. 
He has limited contact with her and perhaps speaks on special holidays. She does not 
know the nature of Applicant’s work. (AE A) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan is currently under a U.S. Department of 
State Travel Advisory due to crime, terrorism, civil unrest, and armed conflict. Attacks 
have targeted official Afghan and U.S. Government convoys and facilities, foreign 
embassies, military installations, commercial entities, non-governmental (NGO) offices, 
hospitals, residential compounds, places of worship, restaurants, hotels, airports, and 
schools. 
 
 Terror attacks have continued into 2018, including an April 30, 2018, attack in 
Kabul that killed 29 people and wounded dozens more, and a series of September 11, 
2018, attacks in Nangarhar Province that took the lives of many Afghans, including 
children. There are significant human rights issues including disappearances, torture, 
arbitrary arrests, and violence against journalists. Afghanistan cooperates with the 
United States in a bilateral counterterrorism effort as part of Operation Freedom’s 
Sentinel (OFS), the U.S. operation in Afghanistan. Afghanistan is a member of the 
Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS. 
 
 The Republic of Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliamentary 
system and a president. The U.S.-Turkey friendship dates to 1831. Turkey is an 
important U.S. security partner and has been a valued North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) ally since 1952. Turkey is a leader in the Alliance’s Resolute 
 
4 
 
Support Mission in Afghanistan and is also a vital member of the Counter-ISIL Coalition.  
Turkey continues to face a significant terrorist threat from both external and home-
grown sources. The current U.S. State Department travel warning for Turkey reflects an 
increased risk from terrorist groups and the potential for violence against U.S. citizens 
due to an increase in anti-American rhetoric. The U.S. State Department has also 
reported a number of significant human rights problems in Turkey, including inconsistent 
access to due process following the July 15, 2016 coup attempt.5  
 
The U. S. Government states Iran is the most prominent State sponsor of 
terrorism in the world. The United States has no diplomatic or consular relations with 
Iran, and the United States warns citizens not to travel to Iran, due to the high risk of 
arbitrary arrests and imprisonment of U.S. citizens. 
  
 Applicant works as a linguist, embedded with a military unit. He serves as a 
liaison between his unit and the Afghan military. He also serves as a cultural guide 
when needed. Given the daily contact with his unit, Applicant has come to see the 
military members he supports as his family. He considers it a vital part of his job to help 
keep them all safe. Applicant and his family are proud citizens of the United States. He 
has his immediate family in the United States. He has no financial interests in 
Afghanistan or Turkey. 
 
 Applicant is held in high esteem by the U.S. military. The record contains six 
certificates of appreciation and awards for his work since 2010. A letter of 
recommendation touts Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability while working in a 
challenging and ever-changing environment. The letter also discusses the invaluable 
nature of Applicant’s translation skills and cultural knowledge, especially with locals in 
challenging situations. (AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
5 Item 13 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
  Foreign Influence 
 
 “[F]oreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”6 Although Turkey has 
historically been an ally of the United States, the recent political instability in the country 
and region has become a potential threat to U.S. interests operating there. Accordingly, 
Applicant’s relationships with his brother and sister-in-law who are refugees in Turkey  
create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.7  
 
 While Applicant’s interactions with his family members in Turkey and 
Afghanistan may be infrequent, the relationships cannot be considered casual. 
                                                          
6 AG ¶ 6.  
 
7 AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
 
6 
 
However, given the position and activities of Applicant’s relatives in Turkey, it is unlikely 
that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the foreign 
interests and those of the United States.8  The other relatives mentioned in the SOR are 
living in the United States, but some are Afghan citizens and U.S. citizens. Furthermore, 
these relationships do not present a conflict of interest because the ties that Applicant 
has developed in his current position are so deeply intertwined with his own safety and 
self-interest, it is likely that Applicant will resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor 
of U.S. interests.9  
 
 Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect and 
handle classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). For the past years, Applicant has been embedded 
with a military unit. He has supported the U.S. mission at his own peril. He has 
demonstrated that he takes his responsibilities very seriously, as echoed by the many 
character letters he received in support of his application for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s work and conduct in his position as a linguist for the past nine 
years is direct evidence of his ability to operate in a sensitive environment with direct 
national security implications.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1 Foreign Influence:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d    For Applicant   
 
 
        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 8(a).  
 
9 AG ¶ (b).  
