 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  18-00766 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew C. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 6, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 11, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline K. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 29, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on September 5, 
2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on November 15, 2018, scheduling the hearing for December 4, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits Government Exhibits 1 
through 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf 
and presented five documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits A through E. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on December 13, 2018. 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in the SOR under this guideline.  After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 36 years old.  He is married, and has one minor son.  He has a 
Master’s degree in Systems Engineering.  He holds the position of System Test 
Engineer for a defense contractor.    
 
 Applicant was born in Vietnam in 1981.  He immigrated to the United States in 
1995 with his father and younger brother.  Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in 2003.  (Tr. p. 22.)  He graduated from college with his bachelor’s degree in 2006, and 
received his Master’s degree in 2012.  He has been employed with his current 
employer, a defense contractor, since 2008 and has held a security clearance since 
then.  Applicant testified that since obtaining his security clearance, he has received 
annual security briefings from his employer as a refresher.  (Tr. p. 23.)       
 
 While working for his current employer, since 2008, Applicant has committed 
three security violations and/or infractions occurring in 2014, 2016, and 2017.  The first 
one occurred in September 2014.  On this occasion, Applicant left classified information 
unattended in violation of his company’s security regulations.  Applicant explained that 
he had been working late, writing what he calls a test procedure, in a classified room 
within a safe lab, known as a secret area, when he wrote several numbers down on a 
piece of paper.  (Tr. p. 24-25.)  He left the piece of paper on the table.  Another 
individual came in the following morning and found the piece of paper with the numbers 
on it and reported it to company security department.  While conducting their 
investigation, they determined that no one had accessed the area since Applicant left.  
(Tr. p. 26.)  Following this security infraction, Applicant was interviewed by the security 
department and he was required to provide a written statement about the incident and 
received a security infraction that was placed in his company personnel file.  He was 
also required to take and complete the annual security training immediately after the 
incident.  (Tr. p 27.)      
 
 The second security violation occurred in November 2016.  Applicant stated that 
he was the response engineer for a test procedure in an unclassified program 
document.  He had been working on the document for some time and had made several 
revisions, updates to the procedures, and put numbers to the procedure.  At some point, 
it was discovered by the customer that Applicant had included classified information in 
the document.  (Tr. p. 29.)  The customer sent it to their security department, and it was 
determined to be a Code Blue, where there was a mass data containment effort.  
Industrial security investigators later confirmed that the classified information in the 
program document was compromised.  Following this security violation, Applicant was 
interviewed by the security department and was required to provide a written statement 
about the incident, and he received a security violation that was placed his company’s 
personnel file.   Once again, he was required to take and complete the annual security 
training.  
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s third security violation occurred in or about April 2017.  This time, 
Applicant did not properly check to ensure that the classified safe was properly closed.  
Applicant explained that he signed an acknowledgment form attesting to the fact that he 
witnessed his supervisor properly secure a safe holding classified documents.  The 
company security department conducted a daily scan and discovered that they were 
able to open the safe, and that it had not been properly secured in violation of company 
security regulations.  Applicant later realized that he had not pulled down the handle to 
ensure that it could was properly secured.  Following this security violation, Applicant 
was interviewed by the security department and was required to provide a written 
statement about the incident.  He received a security violation that was placed his 
company’s personnel file.   Once again, he was required to take and complete the 
annual security training.  
    
 Applicant states that he was never disciplined for any of the three security 
infractions/violations.  He believes that the first two incidents occurred because he did 
not understand the information enough to know that it was considered classified.  The 
third violation he admits occurred because he simply missed it and made a mistake.  
(Tr. p. 40.) 
 
 Performance evaluations of the Applicant for 2015, 2016, and 2017, are 
favorable and reflect that he is a “Top Performer.”  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
 
 Five letters of recommendation from fellow colleagues and upper management 
who know and work with the Applicant, namely a Senior Computer Engineer and 
coworker, a Program Director, an Engineering fellow, and Applicant’s current 
supervisor, each reflect that they believe Applicant is a dedicated individual who 
demonstrates a high level of technical capability, integrity, honesty and trustworthiness.  
Applicant is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibits B, C, D, and 
E.)   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
 
Guideline K - Handling Protected Information 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Handling Protected Information is set 
out in AG ¶ 33:  
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other 
sensitive government information, and proprietary information-raises doubt 
about an individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness 
and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security 
concern. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes nine conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 34. Five are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of protected information to 
unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, personal or business 
contacts, the media, or persons present at seminars, meetings, or 
conferences; 
 
(b) collecting or storing protected information in any unauthorized location; 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or 
sensitive information; 
 
(h) negligence or lax security practices that persist despite counseling by 
management; and  
 
(i) failure to comply with rules or regulations that results in damage to the 
national security, regardless of whether it was deliberate or negligent. 
 
 AG ¶ 35 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 35 including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training 
and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security 
responsibilities; 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training or unclear 
instructions; and 
 
(d) the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there is no evidence of 
compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  As a holder of a security 
clearance and entrusted with working with the Government’s classified information, 
Applicant had a duty to be responsible, careful, and vigilant while protecting classified 
information.  In this situation, clearly he was not.  Applicant states that he was not clear 
regarding certain rules and regulations that pertain to classified information.  So 
although he did not deliberately intend to commit two of the three security 
infractions/violations, he was negligent and careless.  He did not go to his company for   
clarification of the rules, nor did he seek out any other assistance before committing the 
security violations.  This does not show good judgment.    
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline K, in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  It is noted 
that Applicant has received favorable evaluations on the job, and is respected by his 
colleagues.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Handling Protected Information security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
