1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No: 18-00044 
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has a history of financial problems, including a bankruptcy, unpaid 
Federal and state income taxes, and an automobile repossession. He did not disclose 
required financial information in his security clearance application. He failed to mitigate 
the resulting financial and personal conduct security concerns. National security eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On January 22, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
03/11/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 1, 2018, and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing 
(Answer). On June 21, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, 
was mailed to Applicant and received by him on July 8, 2018. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit 
any additional information, refutation, or objections to the Government’s evidence. Items 
1 through 8 are admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on February 14, 
2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the four financial allegations contained in the SOR. He denied 
the personal conduct allegation. He provided some explanations. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old, married, and has three children, ages 22, 19, and 1 . He 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 1996. In July 2016, he began a position with a defense 
contractor and works overseas. Prior to this position, he owned a martial arts business 
for many years and periodically worked for other companies. (Item 3) 
 
 In February 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
Under Section 26: Financial Record, which inquired into his financial history, he did not 
disclose any financial delinquencies, tax liens, or automobile repossessions. (Item 3) 
During an October 2017 background interview with a government investigator, he was 
confronted with information about two tax liens, an automobile repossession, and a 2008 
bankruptcy. Applicant stated that he failed to list the 2014 tax lien due to an oversight. He 
told the investigator he did not intend to mislead the Government about the information. 
He said his wife, a lawyer, manages their finances, implying that he is not involved in 
them. He said he was not required to disclose the 2008 bankruptcy because it was outside 
the time limit of the question. Although the automobile repossession account was not 
charged off until May 2016, which was after he submitted his SCA, the related delinquent 
loan payments and resulting deficiency debt occurred earlier. He did not disclose the 
repossession or the underlying debt on his SCA, or assert that it first arose after February 
2016. He acknowledged to the investigator that he did not disclose this repossession. In 
his Answer, he said he did disclose it because he did not know that he owed any money 
on the automobile after the car was returned. (Items 1, 2, 8)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from December 2017 and May 2016, public 
records, Applicant’s 2008 bankruptcy documents, and his admissions, the SOR alleged 
four financial security concerns. The status of each allegation is as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 (SOR ¶ 1.a) In 2013, Applicant entered into a car lease. Toward the end of 2015 
he stopped making payments on the lease and it was repossessed. This $8,716 
automobile repossession debt was charged off in May 2016. Applicant stated he was 
trying to negotiate a settlement. (Items 2, 4, 8) It is unresolved. 
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.b) In 2014, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a $29,236 income 
tax lien against Applicant for unpaid taxes related to a business he owned.1 He said his 
wife secured payment of this debt with the IRS through a home equity loan. It will be paid 
by the future sale of the house, unless he and his wife pay it sooner. He did not explain 
or justify his failure to timely pay the taxes involved, or submit any documentation from 
the IRS corroborating the status of this debt or the settlement agreement. (Item 2) It is 
unresolved. 
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.c) In November 2017, Applicant’s home state filed an income tax lien 
against him for $3,629. Applicant said his wife negotiated the same settlement noted 
above with the state taxing agency. He did not submit documentation from the state 
corroborating his assertion, or explain why he failed to pay the taxes when due. (Items 2, 
6) It is unresolved. 
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.d) In March 2008, Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
The bankruptcy petition listed outstanding income taxes owed to the IRS for years 2004, 
2005, and 2006, and state income taxes owed for those years. It also listed outstanding 
student loans. The total liability owed for unpaid state and Federal taxes, and student 
loans was listed as $194,206. Their unsecured nonpriority claims totaled $127,857, and 
included numerous medical debts, personal loans, credit cards, and professional fees. 
Their personal and real assets totaled $577,031; and their liabilities totaled $893,643. The 
bankruptcy was discharged in June 2008. The final amount of debt discharged is unclear, 
but delinquent tax and student loan debts are not usually eligible. (Item 7) 
 
 The SOR alleged in ¶ 2.a that Applicant deliberately falsified information in his SCA 
because he failed to disclose the charged-off automobile repossession debt and the 
unpaid Federal tax lien filed in 2014. As noted above, Applicant said the 2014 tax 
omission was an oversight and not intentional. He said he did not report this repossession 
because he was unaware that he owed money on the lease.  
 
 In his Answer, Applicant said his finances are more stable now and he continues 
to pay down his remaining debts. He said the monthly family income now exceeds their 
monthly expenses. He stated that 10 years ago, he experienced financial difficulties 
because of the real estate market downturn and he was a sole business owner, raising 
three young children. (Item 2) 
 
 
 
                                            
1 The tax years are not in the record; however, Applicant listed his self-employment from 2010 to 2015 in 
his SCA. (Item 3) 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which 
are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that an adverse decision shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused by or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 sets out disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns. Four are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has a long history of not meeting financial obligations, as confirmed by 
a 2008 Chapter 7 bankruptcy in which he included a significant amount of debt. Since the 
discharge of debt in 2008, he has continued to accumulate more debt as documented by 
subsequent outstanding Federal and state income taxes and an automobile 
repossession. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of the disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets out five conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial security concerns in this case: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
 
 
6 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems that is ongoing and casts doubt on 
his reliability and good judgement. His indebtedness is unresolved. There is insufficient 
evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant did not provide a credible 
explanation for failing to pay outstanding taxes or resolve the repossession debt. While 
his wife may manage their finances, he remains responsible for the alleged SOR debts. 
He failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b), as there is insufficient proof that the 
SOR-alleged debts arose from circumstances beyond his control or that he acted 
responsibly in addressing them. In fact, the evidence is to the contrary, as the IRS and 
state filed liens in order to obtain payments. There is no evidence that Applicant received 
credit counseling, or that his finances are under control. He did not submit evidence that 
he initiated a good-faith effort to resolve the automobile repossession or document that 
he has settlement arrangements with the IRS and state revenue agency. He did not 
establish mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20 (c), (d), or (g).  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. One may be potentially disqualifying: 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
The evidence established insecurity concerns under AG ¶ 16(a). Applicant failed 
to disclose required financial information. He provided no persuasive explanation or 
evidence for his failure to disclose the 2014 Federal tax lien and the vehicle loan 
delinquency/repossession, in his February 2016 SCA. Considering his past financial 
problems and the large amount of debt he accumulated since the 2008 bankruptcy, it is 
not credible that he failed to disclose any derogatory information due to oversight or 
because he did not think he was required to report the repossession, on the basis he did 
not know he owed money on the broken lease. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Five are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that would support mitigation under any of the 
foregoing conditions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) 
the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  AG ¶ 2(c) requires the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old man who has worked for a defense contractor since July 
2016. According to a 2008 Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition, his financial delinquencies date 
back to 2004, when he did not timely pay Federal and state income taxes. In 2008, he 
discharged a large amount of debt. Nonetheless, his financial delinquencies continued 
accumulating into 2017, when his home state filed a tax lien. He has not established a 
track record of responsibly managing his finances, given his long history of non-
compliance with fundamental legal obligations to pay taxes and resolve other debts. The 
record evidence leaves me with serious doubts about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
             Paragraph 2, Guideline E:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:        Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
