       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of:      )
     )
----------------------------------         )      ISCR Case No. 18-01630
 )
 )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel,  Esq., Department Counsel
      For Applicant: Pro se.      
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns covering personal conduct allegations of
falsification of his security clearance application and personal subject interview (PSI).
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On July 13, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons under the
personal conduct guideline why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative
determination of eligibility for a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.)
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended. DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive), and the Security Executive
Agent, Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (SEAD 4), effective June 8,
2017.
03/25/2019
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 26, 2018, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to  me on January 9. 2019, and  scheduled for hearing on February
13, 2019. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny,
or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. 
At the hearing, the Government’s case consisted of three exhibits (GEs 1-3).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and one exhibit (AE A). Both the Government’s
exhibits and Applicant’s exhibit were admitted without objection. The transcript was
received on February 26, 2019.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E. Applicant allegedly (a) falsified his electronic questionnaires
for electronic processing (e-QIP) of October 2017 by misrepresenting the circumstances
of his leaving his employment (i.e., by mutual agreement) and failing to acknowledge he
was fired in May 2015 due to having an inappropriate relationship with a subordinate, in
violation of company policy; (b) falsified his e-QIP of October 2017 by omitting his use of
marijuana in October 2010 and in December 2013; and (c) falsified his personal subject
interview (PSI) with an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) by
failing to disclose his firing in May 2015 due to an inappropriate relationship with a
coworker, in violation of company policy and his illegal marijuana use in October 2010
and December 2013.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations with
explanations. He claimed to have attached a termination letter from his former employer,
but no attachments were in the file. Whether the attachment was administratively 
removed in preparation for the hearing is unclear.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 31-year-old information technology (IT) consultant for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings
follow.
Background
Applicant never married and has no children. (GE 1) He attended college classes
in the Ukraine between August 2010 and June 2014 and earned a bachelor’s degree in
June 2014 in computer engineering. (GE 1) He immigrated to the United States in 2005
and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in March 2012. (GEs 1-3) Applicant reported no
military service. 
Since April 2012, Applicant has been self-employed as an IT consultant. (GE 1)
Contemporaneously with his self-employment as an IT consultant (since September
2017), he has worked as a Russian interpreter for a Russian linguist firm. (GE 1)
2
Between October 2011 and August 2013, he worked as an IT team lead for an IT firm.
(GE 1) He reported self-employment as an IT consultant between April 2007 and April
2010. (GEs 1-3)
Employment termination
Records confirm that Applicant was terminated from his employment with a
defense contractor (Company A) in May 2015 on the stated grounds that he had an
inappropriate relationship with a subordinate, in violation of company policy. (AE A; Tr.
25-26) His termination and reasons are summarized in an email forwarded to him in May
2015 by his manager. (AE A) as follows: (a) Applicant was found to have engaged in a
“significant personal relationship with another employee, resulting in a conflict of
interest,” and (b) he failed to notify his human resource office or his manager about the
existence of the conflict of interest. (AE A; Tr. 26-27)  
Applicant never denied the cited bases of his termination. Applicant worked for
Company A between June 2013 and May 2015, and was fired over his engaging in a
personal romantic relationship with a coworker. (GEs 1 and 3 and AE A; Tr. 25-26)
Drug use
Applicant admitted, and records confirmed that he used marijuana in October
2011 and in December 2013. (GE 3) He self-reported in his PSI that he used medically
prescribed cannabis oil in 2017 on 10 to 15 occasions. (GEs 2-3) There is no evidence in
the record to indicate he used marijuana on any other occasions.
E-QIP omissions
Asked to complete an e-QIP in October 2017, Applicant falsified the form by
omitting his termination from his employment with Company A in May 2015. (GE 1) In
answering questions posed in section 13A of his 2017 e-QIP, Applicant answered “Left
by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct” and explained the
misconduct charges to mean engaging in a personal relationship resulting in a conflict of
interest. (GE 1) At no point in the e-QIP Applicant completed in 2017 did he
acknowledge his being fired or terminated from Company A in May 2015 as the result in
his engaging in an inappropriate relationship with a coworker. (GEs 1 and 3 and AE A;
Tr. 30-33)
In the same October 2017 e-QIP, Applicant omitted his prior drug use in October
2010 and again in December 2013, when responding to questions posed in section 23
about illegal use of drugs or controlled substances. (GE 1) Asked about past use of
illegal drugs, Applicant disclosed his being examined by a medical provider for help with
his sleep and being furnished a medical marijuana card, which he used to purchase
marijuana around 10-15 times in August 2017. (GE 1) He provided no further information
about his past marijuana use in 2010 and 2013, either in section 23 or in the additional
comment section of the e-QIP. (GE 1)
3
In a follow-up PSI conducted by an investigator from OPM in November 2017,
Applicant failed again to disclose both his firing due to his having an inappropriate
relationship with another employee and his past use of marijuana in October 2010 and
December 2013. (GE 2) In his PSI, he acknowledged only that he told the OPM
investigator that he (a) resigned in lieu of being fired and (b) he used prescribed
marijuana in 2017 as a sleep aid on 10 to 15 occasions. (GE 2; Tr. 32-33, 40) 
Nowhere in Applicant’s 2017 OPM interview did he disclose his being fired from
Company A due to his having a personal relationship with another employee without
reporting it to his human resources department or manager, or that he used marijuana in
2010 and 2013. (GE 3 and AE A) Basically, he stuck to the same story he furnished in
his earlier 2017 e-QIP. (GEs 1-2)
In December 2017, Applicant completed a counterintelligence security screening
questionnaire. (GE 2) In this questionnaire, Applicant admitted his firing from a previous
employer for having an inappropriate relationship with another employee. 
Under questioning by the screening investigator, Applicant admitted to not
disclosing in his e-QIP his being fired from Company A for engaging in an inappropriate
relationship with a coworker, in violation of company policy. (GE 2 and AE A) Applicant
attributed his disclosure failures to his believing that leaving his Company A employment
by mutual agreement sounded better than being fired. (GE 2 and AE A; Tr. 41-42). 
Still, Applicant’s explanations for his omissions of his being fired instead of leaving
by mutual agreement and his understating his marijuana use, both individually and
collectively, reflect a lack of candor. His explanations, while they reflected his reasoning
at the time behind his employment termination omissions, document and confirm his
knowing and wilful omissions of material information needed to develop background
information pertinent to a determination of his eligibility to hold a security clearance. 
On the strength of the evidence developed in the record, inferences are warranted
that Applicant’s omissions and understatements about the circumstances of his
departure from Company A and the extent of his past marijuana use in 2010 and 2013
when completing his 2017 e-QIP were both knowing and wilful, and were left uncorrected
in his ensuing PSI. Considering all of the circumstances surrounding his omissions and
understatements, inferences are warranted of a material lack of candor by Appellant in
his omitting and misstating the circumstances surrounding his Company A termination
and the dates of his use of marijuana in 2010 and 2013 when completing his 2017 e-
QIP. 
Adverse inferences are warranted as well in connection with his failure to provide
full and accurate accounts of his Company A termination and more extensive marijuana
use when responding to OPM investigator questions in his ensuing PSI. Appellant’s
corrected admissions of his termination from Company A and more extensive use of
marijuana were not provided until questioned by an investigator assigned to interview
him in a subsequent counterintelligence screening questionnaire.                                       
                                                               
4
Endorsements 
Applicant did not provide any personal endorsements from his supervisors and
coworkers. Nor did he provide any performance evaluations, character references, nor
evidence of community contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the conditions that could mitigate security concerns. These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. 
The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on
the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
5
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified or
sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the
security clearance process. . . AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  Because all security clearances must be clearly consistent
with the national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
6
Analysis
Applicant presents as an IT consultant for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. Principal security issues in this case center on Applicant’s material
omissions of his termination for cause by his Company A employer and his
understating of the dates and extent of his marijuana use.
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness under Guideline E as the result of his omissions of his  termination for
cause by his Company A employer and his understating of the dates and extent of his
marijuana use in the e-QIP he completed in October 2017. Questionable judgment,
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, are
each core policy concerns of the personal conduct guideline (AG ¶ 15) 
Section 1001 of Title 18 is a specific intent crime and perforce requires a
showing of subjective intent to deceive the Government. See United States v. Puente,
982 F.2d 156, 159 (5  Cir.), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 2934 (1993); United States v.th
Sweig, 441 F.2d 1043, 1046-1047 (9  Cir.), cert. denied, 400 U.S. 847 (1970); Unitedth
States v. Bussey, 942 F.2d 1241, 1250 (8  Cir. 1991). Probing for indices of knowingth
and wilful deceit involves considerations of motive and all the surrounding
circumstances, recognizing how difficult it is to climb into the mind of the actor.
In Applicant’s case, judgment and trustworthiness concerns are directly tied to
Applicant’s employment and marijuana omissions and understatements he furnished in
his e-QIP of October 2017, and which he failed to correct in his ensuing OPM
interview. Because his omissions are material to the Government’s ability to fully
investigate Applicant’s suitability to hold a security clearance, they raise important
trustworthiness, reliability, and judgment concerns under Guideline E.  See ISCR Case
No. 06-20964, at 6 (April 10, 2008).  
Applicant’s termination for cause stemming from his having an inappropriate
relationship with another employee, in violation of his company’s policy, and
understatement of the dates and extent of his past marijuana use invite application of
DC ¶¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine national security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities,” 16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading information; or
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer,
investigator, security official, or competent medical or mental health professional
involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility
determination, or other official government representative,”  and 16(d)(3), “a pattern of
dishonesty or rule violations.” Each of these disqualifying conditions fully applies to
Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s proven intentional omissions of his Company A termination and
understatements of the dates and extent of his marijuana use and ensuing failures to
7
make prompt, good-faith corrections when afforded opportunities to do so in his
ensuing OPM interview preclude the application of any of the other mitigating
conditions potentially available to him under Guideline E. His belated responses to
questions posed to him in counterintelligence screening questionnaire about his
termination and use of marijuana cannot be considered either prompt nor made in
good-faith for mitigation purposes. 
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s omission of his
termination for cause and understatements of the dates and extent of his use  of
marijuana in his 2017 e-QIP, considerations of the evidence covering the
Government’s Guideline E allegations warrant unfavorable conclusions. Applicant’s
omissions and understatements reflect candor lapses incompatible with clearance
criteria. 
Whole-person assessment
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established insufficient 
probative evidence of his overall honesty, trustworthiness, and understanding of DoD
policy constraints on providing inaccurate information material to making clearance
eligibility determination. At this time, Applicant is at continued risk of candor lapse
recurrences.  Evaluating all of the facts and circumstances developed in the record,
Applicant fails to mitigate security concerns associated with the allegations covered by
Guideline E.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
      
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):          AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a -1.c:                      Against Applicant 
                 C   o nclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
8
9
