KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: Once Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, none of the alleged facts remained
controverted and the Government no longer had the burden of production.  At that point, she
became responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the resulting security concerns.  Furthermore, in a signed statement, Applicant admitted
she knowingly used another individual’s medical marijuana. Applicant’s security specialist
position and her security responsibilities were appropriate factors for the Judge to consider in
determining her security clearance eligibility in that they bear upon her knowledge of the
security significance of her conduct. Adverse decision affirmed.    
CASENO: 18-00896.a1
DATE: 03/01/2019
DATE: March 1, 2019
In Re:
---------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 18-00896
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 19, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On October 26, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Government established that
Applicant used marijuana and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant is 40 years old, divorced, and has two children.  She has worked in the industrial
security field for the past 16 years.  She also currently serves in the Army National Guard.  She
admitted using marijuana while holding a security clearance from about 2014 to 2016.  She resigned
from a Navy civilian security specialist position when she learned of a proposal to remove her from
that position due to complaints about her marijuana use.  She was well aware of the rules and
regulation governing security clearances, including the zero-tolerance policy for drug abuse.  Her
current employer is aware of her past illegal drug use.  She attributed her drug involvement to her
divorce in 2014 and loss of contact with her children.  Later that year, she started another
relationship with an individual who had a medical marijuana card and access to marijuana oils and
similar products.  This friend introduced her to marijuana to help her relax and sleep.  Applicant
used it about five times.  The last use occurring in 2016.  When she terminated that relationship, the
ex-friend submitted an IG complaint detailing Applicant’s use of marijuana oils.  Applicant no
longer associates with anyone who uses illegal drugs.  She has signed a statement of intent to abstain
from illegal drugs.  In 2016, 2017, and 2018, she underwent drug tests that were all negative.  A
licenced professional evaluated her and concluded she demonstrated no evidence of an alcohol or
substance use disorder.  
Applicant willingly disregarded the law.  She made poor decisions that raise questions about
whether she will properly protect national secrets.  While she is remorseful for her misconduct,
insufficient time has passed to establish her misconduct will not be repeated.  She has not mitigated
the alleged security concerns.   
Discussion
Applicant contends the Government never established that she actually used marijuana.  She
argues she used CBD oil (Cannabidiol) in which the presence of THC (Tetrahydrocannabinol) was
uncertain.  This argument is not persuasive.  In responding to the two SOR allegations, Applicant
stated:
2
I admit that I used marijuana with a varying frequency in 2014 through at
least 2016.  I would like to clarify that I only swallowed the marijuana oil a total of
five times or less.
I admit my use of an illegal drug as set forth in subparagraph 1.a occurred
after I had been granted a Department of Defense Security Clearance in November
2012.  I am very regretful of my actions to use the marijuana oil, this was a lapse in
judgment that is very embarrassing and out of character.  Below I have addressed the
mitigating factors as suggested by [a DoD employee].1
Once Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, none of the alleged facts remained controverted and
the Government no longer had the burden of production.  At that point, she became responsible for
presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the resulting
security concerns.  Directive ¶¶ E3.1.14 and E3.1.15.  Furthermore, in another signed statement,
1 Applicant’s SOR Response is dated April 30, 2018.  In her appeal brief, Applicant claims she stated in her
SOR Response and in her hearing testimony that she was unsure CBD oil contained THC.  We are unable to find that
statement in her SOR Response.  In discussing the mitigating conditions, her SOR Response does indicate, “I had only
known that the CBD oil was said to not make you feel high and it was NOT a psychoactive.”  Such a statement, however,
does not amount to a renunciation or repudiation of her SOR admissions.  Additionally, while she testified equivocally
about whether she knew use of CBD oil was legal or not, she never requested that her SOR admissions be retracted.  Tr.
at 64-66 and 84-93.  For example, she testified as follows:
[Applicant]:   . . .  And I definitely understand that as part of our Adjudicative Guidelines, you know,
I definitely broke a rule.  And I’m very regretful for that.
[Applicant’s Counsel]: Okay, so the Statement of Reasons -- I’ll go into that -- says that -- “You used
marijuana with varying frequency from about 2014 to 2016, all while holding a Department of
Defense  Security Clearance.”  Is that accurate?
[Applicant]: Yes.
[Applicant’s Counsel]:  Okay.  Now, was it -- how did you use the marijuana?  Was it smoking or was
it edibles?  What was it?
[Applicant]: It was through the cannabis oils -- CBD oils -- cannabis oil.  I was, honestly, at that time,
unsure whether it was illegal or not.  And it’s been a weird phase where it’s legal or not legal.  I see
it sold over the counter in different kinds of health and holistic foods.  I was honestly unsure.  It still
does not take away from it being a mistake.  But is was through the oil form.  [Tr. at 65.] 
Applicant also testified: 
[Department Counsel]: Okay.  Is it -- is it the truth that the only time, in your belief that you used what
you believe to be a controlled substance, was in the form of CBD oil?
[Applicant]: Yes.  [Tr. at 83.] 
3
Applicant admitted she knowingly used another individual’s medical marijuana.2  From our review
of the record, the Judge’s material findings about Applicant’s marijuana use were based upon
substantial evidence, i.e., “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate
to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶
E3.1.32.1.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-04094 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2018).       
Applicant also contends that the Judge applied an erroneous standard.  She argues the Judge
applied a higher standard to Applicant than other individuals when she stated: “As a security
specialist, Applicant is not only required to follow all security rules and regulations, but is required
to ensure that other employees are equally asdiligent.”  Appeal Brief at 11-12, citing from Decision
at 6.  This argument lacks merit because it is based on an incorrect premise.  The quoted sentence
was not used by the Judge as a “standard” for determining Applicant’s security clearance eligibility,3
instead it was merely a conclusion she reached based upon the record evidence.  Under the
adjudicative guidelines, a Judge is tasked to consider, among other matters, “the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct” and “the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation.”   Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(d)(1) and (2).  Applicant’s security
specialist position and her security responsibilities were appropriate factors for the Judge to consider
in determining her security clearance eligibility in that they bear upon her knowledge of the security
significance of her conduct.         
Applicant further contends the Judge did not consider all of the evidence, mis-weighed the
evidence, and did not properly apply the mitigating conditions and whole-person concept.  In her
arguments, she emphasizes, for example, the amount of time that has passed since her last alleged
drug use, her ceasing to associate with anyone who uses illegal drugs, and her submission of a letter
of intent with automatic revocation of her security clearance for any further illegal drug use. 
Applicant’s arguments, however, are neither sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record nor enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence
in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02488
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 30, 2018).  We give due consideration to the Hearing Office case that
Applicant has cited, but it is neither binding precedent on the Appeal Board nor sufficient to
undermine the Judge’s decision.  Id.  Additionally, the Judge complied with the requirements of the
2 In Government Exhibit 4, Applicant stated:
With these medical issues such as back pain, [Applicant’s friend] was approved for a medical
marijuana card.  [The friend] began to use her prescriptions on a regular basis.  Her prescriptions
consisted of marijuana in the plant form, and in the form of an oil.  I did not completely understand
the contents in the oil or the ratio of THC in it.  The only thing I knew about was that it was also said
to help with anxiety.  I was not sleeping at night, and having serious anxiety.  . . .  I have never been
exposed to marijuana before in this manner except while I was with [the friend].  Between the years
of 2014 and 2016 I tried the medical marijuana that [the friend] had approximately five times.   
3 The Decision reflects the Judge correctly applied the “clearly consistent with national interest” standard to
determine Applicant’s security clearance eligibility.  See, Directive ¶ 2.3 and Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(c) as well as Decision
at 7. 
4
Directive in her whole-person analysis by considering the totality of the evidence in reaching her
decision. 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  An applicant’s misuse of drugs while knowing such conduct was incompatible with
security clearance eligibility raises questions about his or her judgment and reliability.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 16-03460 at4 (App. Bd. May 24, 2018).  The decision is sustainable on this record. 
“The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See
also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan      
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy          
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
