1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
     -----------------------------------,  ) 
     also known as -----------------------1 ) ISCR Case No. 18-01641 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for 
access to classified information. Her financial difficulties are due to circumstances 
largely beyond her control (e.g., serious health problems, a separation eventually 
resulting in a divorce, unemployment, and underemployment). She has acted 
responsibly under trying circumstances and will address the unresolved delinquent 
debts as her financial situation continues to stabilize. Accordingly, this case is decided 
for Applicant.    
Statement of the Case 
Applicant completed and submitted a Standard Form (SF) 86, Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions, the official form used for personnel security investigations, 
1 Applicant resumed using her former name per a June 2018 divorce decree. 
03/29/2019
 
2 
 
on November 14, 2017.2 This document is commonly known as a security clearance 
application. Thereafter, on July 24, 2018, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a statement 
of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. The SOR is 
similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security 
guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 21, 2018. Her answers were mixed; she 
admitted 6 of the 12 delinquent debts alleged; she denied the others; and she provided 
short explanations for each answer. She also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on September 24, 2018. The hearing took place 
as scheduled on December 3, 2018. Applicant appeared without counsel. Department 
Counsel offered documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Exhibits 1-5. Applicant 
made an oral presentation, but presented no documentation. No witnesses were called 
other than Applicant.  
 
The record was kept open until January 3, 2019, to allow Applicant to submit 
documentary matters. She made a timely submission on January 2, 2019, and those 
matters are admitted without objections as follows: (1) Exhibit A, military records and 
letters of recommendation; (2) Exhibit B, a June 2018 divorce decree; and (3) Exhibit C,  
a December 2018 establishment judgment and order for child support.   
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance in the defense industry for the first time. She previously held a security 
clearance during previous military service. She is employed as a gunner involved in 
ordnance testing since December 2017. Her formal education includes a high school 
diploma. She married in 2008, separated in May 2017, and divorced in June 2018. She 
is the primary residential parent for two minor children, ages 10 and 5.  
 
Applicant’s employment history includes honorable service in the U.S. Navy 
during 2006-2012, for about five and a half years. She was discharged due to disability 
as explained further below. Her retired pay, which she receives from the Department of 
Veterans Affairs, is about $1,600 monthly.3 She was then unemployed from about 
January 2012 to May 2017, when she left her husband. She then worked as a self-
employed office assistant working for her parents for about six months until she began 
her current job in the defense industry. She earned about $400 weekly working for her 
parents. 
                                                          
2 Exhibit 1. 
 
3 Tr. 44-45.  
 
 
3 
 
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts consisting of charged-off or collection 
accounts for a total of about $18,000. Three of the accounts are medical collection 
accounts for less than $100 each. At the hearing, Applicant agreed that the status of the 
debts remained the same as when she answered the SOR.4 In addition to Applicant’s 
admissions noted above, the 12 delinquent debts are established by three credit reports 
from January 2018, September 2018, and December 2018, respectively.5 So far as I 
can determine, the 12 delinquent debts in the SOR have not been paid, settled, placed 
into a repayment arrangement, cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise resolved.  
 
Applicant attributes her negative financial history to circumstances largely 
beyond her control. She described at length the chronology of events leading to her 
current situation during her hearing testimony.  She was discharged from the Navy in 
2012 due to numerous medical problems, primarily cervical cancer. Her discharge 
paperwork states that the reason for separation was temporary disability, and she was 
placed on the temporary disability retired list, and subsequently she was placed on the 
permanent disability retired list in 2015.6 After her discharge from the Navy in 2012, she 
spent the next five years dealing with illness, in and out of the hospital, and undergoing 
different procedures. Her inability to work during that time placed a financial strain on 
the family finances. Her husband, also a Sailor, continued on active duty for about two 
years. After his discharge in 2014, they relocated to a state to be close to her husband’s 
family. The plan was her husband was supposed to begin a railroad job within two 
months of his discharge, but that was delayed for several months, which created 
additional financial strain. They then started the slow process of rebuilding their financial 
house.  
 
Applicant had a serious medical episode in which she nearly passed away in 
August 2016. After that, her health improved, she returned to being a functioning adult, 
and she started looking into returning to work or going to school through her GI Bill 
benefits. Her husband was opposed to her plans, and marital discord followed. 
Unsatisfied with her husband, she left in May 2017 and moved across the country to live 
with and work for her parents. When she left her husband, she departed with her 
clothing, her children’s clothing, a vehicle, her retired pay, and really nothing else. She 
filed for child support in July 2017 and for divorce in September 2017, but was unable to 
obtain service of process on her husband. That changed when her husband relocated to 
Applicant’s state of residence for his employment in April 2018. 
 
Two months later in June 2018 the state court granted a divorce decree, but 
deferred on the issue of child support.7 Applicant was designated as the primary 
residential parent. The issue of child support was finally settled in December 2018, a 
                                                          
4 Tr. 41-42.  
 
5 Exhibits 3, 4, and 5.  
 
6 Exhibit A.  
 
7 Exhibit B.  
 
 
4 
 
few days after the hearing in this case.8 Her ex-husband was ordered to pay a judgment 
in the amount of $3,180 for child support for the period from May 2017 through 
December 2018. He was also ordered to pay current child support of $484 monthly 
beginning January 2019. The total monthly payment to Applicant is $534 monthly, which 
includes $50 toward the arrearage or judgment.  
 
Since beginning her job in the defense industry, Applicant was able to move out 
of her parents’ home and purchase a relatively new vehicle (a 2017 Hyundai), which 
was necessary to cover the mileage she must drive. She has not incurred new 
delinquent debt other than the automobile and the purchase of a washer and dryer. In 
addition to her retired pay and the child support, she earns about $22 hourly and 
estimated her 2018 earnings at about $45,000.9   
  
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.10 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.11 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”12 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.13 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.14 
 
                                                          
8 Exhibit C.  
 
9 Tr. 64-65.  
 
10 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
11 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
12 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
13 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
5 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.15 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.16 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.17 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.18 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.19 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.20 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . .21 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
                                                          
15 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
16 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
18 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
19 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
20 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
21 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial 
problems that is sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. The two 
disqualifying conditions noted above apply to this case.  
 
 Concerning the evidence in extenuation and mitigation, Applicant receives 
maximum credit under AG ¶ 20(b). Her financial difficulties are due to circumstances 
largely beyond her control as follows: (1) serious health problems resulting in her 
discharge from the Navy due to disability; (2) continuation of her health problems 
resulting in her inability to work for the next five years; (3) her husband’s period of 
unemployment after his discharge from the Navy; (4) her marital separation and divorce; 
(5) her period of underemployment before her current job; and (6) delay in 
establishment of a child-support order, which just commenced in January 2019. Plainly, 
these are circumstances largely beyond her control.  
 
 Moreover, I am persuaded that she acted like a reasonable person who was 
confronting a difficult situation. She left her husband who was unsupportive of her and 
then took a low-level job working for her parents while she sought out and found a 
better job. She also promptly pursued both child support and a divorce, but was delayed 
due to her husband’s location in a distant state. Although she recently bought a car, a 
relatively new 2017 Hyundai can only be described as basic transportation and 
reasonable. With her current employment, retired pay, and the addition of monthly child 
support, Applicant is now in a position to do something about the delinquent debts, and I 
am persuaded that she will do so in due course.  
 
 Following Egan and the clearly consistent standard, I have no doubts or 
concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the 
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the 
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. I 
conclude that she has met her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -- 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. Eligibility granted.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
