1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 DURNELL, Shawn D. )  ISCR Case No. 18-01802 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
03/05/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant continues to have significant 
federal student loan debts that remain delinquent and increasing. Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 15, 2017. 
On July 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 30, 2018. He elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. He provided one document, marked as 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which became effective on June 8, 2017. 
2 
 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. On August 23, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including documents identified as Items 1 
through 5. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and to submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant’s undated FORM response was 
received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on October 4, 2018. He 
did not object to the Government’s evidence.2 He included six new documents, marked 
as AE B – G.3 The SOR and the Answer (Items 1 and 2) are the pleadings in the case. 
Items 3 through 5 and AE A – G are admitted into evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.k, with a brief narrative statement. I have 
incorporated his admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He married in 2010. He and his wife separated in 2014, 
though they remain legally married. They have no children. Applicant graduated from high 
school in 2005. He took online courses from 2011 to 2014, but did not obtain a degree. 
He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since February 2017. He 
held his previous job from 2010 to January 2017. (Item 1) 
 
 Applicant disclosed on his October 2017 SCA that he had $62,000 in past-due 
federal student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.j), and an $805 overdue local tax debt from 2016. 
(SOR ¶ 1.k). He said his debts were due to low income. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant noted in his Answer that his tax debt had increased to $1,200. He made 
a $400 payment in August 2018, and intends to continue making payments to resolve the 
debt. (Answer; FORM Response; AE C; AE D) 
 
Applicant’s ten delinquent federal student loans are alleged as SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
($8,049), 1.b ($4,842), 1.c ($7,793), 1.d ($7,680), 1.e ($8,383), 1.f ($4,739), 1.g ($5,869), 
1.h ($4,796), 1.i ($3,636) and 1.j ($6,746). They are listed on his October 2017 credit 
report, and total $62,533. This is comparable to what Applicant disclosed on his SCA 
($62,081). The credit reports reflect that Applicant received the loans between 2011 and 
2014, when he was taking online courses. He reported on his SCA that the student loans 
had been delinquent since 2013. (Items 1, 3, 4) 
 
                                                          
2 In his FORM Response, Applicant “objected” to certain statements made by Department Counsel in the 
FORM. I do not construe those comments as formal objections to admission of the Government’s evidence.  
  
3 AE A is a July 2018 statement from Applicant’s student loan provider. AE B reflects his student loan 
payments as of September 2018. AE C and AE D concern payments on a local tax debt. AE E is Applicant’s 
student loan rehabilitation agreement, signed August 31, 2018. AE F and AE G are statements from his 
student loan provider, from August and September 2018.  
 
3 
 
The principal on Applicant’s federal student loans is $58,364. (AE A, AE F, AE G) 
As of July 2018, he owed an additional $6,376 in interest and penalties, plus $15,757 in 
fees and costs, for a total balance of about $80,500. (AE A)  
 
On July 31, 2018, the day after he answered the SOR, Applicant entered into a 
loan rehabilitation agreement with his loan provider. The agreement noted that his federal 
student loans were in default. He was to make nine monthly payments of $5.00 each 
month to rehabilitate his loans and bring them out of delinquent status. (Answer; AE E) 
His loans remained delinquent, with increased balances, as of September 2018. (Item 5; 
AE F; AE G) 
 
Applicant made a $105 payment on May 1, 2018. He made a $53 payment on July 
17, 2018. He made a $5.00 payment on August 16, 2018, and another $5.00 payment on 
September 18, 2018. All of Applicant’s payments were applied to interest and fees, and 
not to the principal on the loan. (AE B) 
 
Applicant’s most recent statement from his student loan provider is dated 
September 11, 2018 (between the two $5.00 payments). As of that date, the amount he 
owed in interest had increased to about $6,829, and the amount he owed in fees and 
costs had increased to $15,868. Thus, Applicant’s total loan balance owed had increased 
to $81,061. (AE G) 
 
 Applicant noted in his FORM Response that he now earns $13.05 an hour. This is 
a $4.05 increase from his prior hourly rate. (FORM Response). 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.4 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”5 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”).  
 
5 484 U.S. at 531.  
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.6 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides financial conditions that could raise security concerns. AG ¶¶ 19 
(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); and 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”) 
are applicable, given Applicant’s delinquent federal student loans and the tax debt.7 
 
                                                          
6 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 SOR ¶ 1.k concerns past-due property taxes rather than local income taxes, so AG ¶ 19(f) (“ . . . failure 
to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required”) does not technically apply.  
 
5 
 
The financial considerations guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant took out about $58,000 in student loans during the three years he took 
online courses, from 2011 to 2014. He did not obtain a degree. He now owes over 
$65,000 in principal and interest on the loans. With fees and costs, he owes over $80,000.  
 
 Applicant’s inability to pay his debts more responsibly is due largely to his limited 
income. This is a condition beyond his control, so AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. However, 
to receive full credit, he must show that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
He only recently began to address his debts, making a few small payments. His debts will 
remain in delinquent status until he completes nine months’ worth of $5.00 payments. 
 
 The payment arrangement Applicant has made with his student loan provider may 
be enough to bring his federal student loans out of delinquent status. However, it is not 
enough to keep his total loan balance owed from increasing. Applicant has yet to establish 
a track record of addressing his federal student loan debt in a responsible manner. To do 
so, he needs to make enough payments so that it begins to decrease. Until he does that, 
he will not have shown that his student loans are at a level that he can afford to address 
responsibly. Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), or 
20(d) should apply to mitigate his federal student loan debts, which remain ongoing, 
delinquent and significant.  
 
 Applicant intends to resolve his property tax debt, has a plan in place, and has 
made one $400 payment. He has shown sufficient evidence that AG ¶ 20(g) applies to 
mitigate SOR ¶ 1.k.  
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Put simply, it is Applicant’s burden to mitigate 
the security concerns shown by his significant federal student loan debt, which remains 
delinquent, and he has not done so. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I 
conclude that Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:     For Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
       
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
