1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ADP Case No. 18-02069 
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Moira Modzelewski, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On August 29, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on September 28, 2018, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
The case was assigned to me on January 11, 2019. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 29, 2019, 
scheduling the hearing for February 28, 2019. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant submitted two e-mails post-hearing that I have 
marked AE C and D and admitted without objection.  
03/20/2019
 
2 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 2007. She is a high school graduate, and she went to a 
trade school. She married in 1992 and divorced in 2004. She married again in 2011 and 
divorced in 2016. She does not have children.1 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. She filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
case in 1991, and her debts were discharged in 1992. She admitted that the bankruptcy 
resulted from her financial irresponsibility. She and her first husband filed a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy case in 2001, and their debts were discharged the same year. Her first 
husband handled the family’s finances. She is unsure what caused the second 
bankruptcy.2 
 
 Applicant’s second husband was abusive. She moved out and filed for a 
restraining order against him in February 2014. She withdrew the petition after he 
pleaded with her that it could adversely affect his security clearance, and he agreed to 
go to counseling. They reconciled for a period, and then the abuse started again. He 
threatened to kill her. She moved out permanently in October 2015 with “a couch, a TV, 
four plates, [her] clothing, and [her] dog.”3 
 
 Applicant essentially had to start all over. She used credit cards to get back on 
her feet. She received her health insurance from her second husband. She has health 
problems, and she had to start paying for her own health insurance. Her insurance 
premiums are high, and she has a large deductible. She missed a month of work 
because of her health, and she cared for her mother who has cancer. She was unable 
to maintain the credit card payments, and a number of debts became delinquent.4 
 
 The SOR alleges the two Chapter 7 bankruptcy cases, a $2,453 judgment, and 
12 delinquent debts totaling about $24,146. Applicant admitted owing all the debts, but 
she stated that the judgment was paid through garnishment of her wages. She indicated 
that the creditor for the $4,263 and $1,019 debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.j obtained 
a judgment and a garnishment order against her that was soon to go into effect. She 
also stated that her federal income tax refund of about $500 was diverted toward the 
military exchange account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. The SOR debts are listed on a March 
2018 credit report.5  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 16, 20, 22-23, 43-44; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 33-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6. 
 
3 Tr. at 16, 23; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 18-19, 26-27, 37, 41-43; GE 1, 2; AE C. 
 
5 Tr. at 26-33, 39-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
 
3 
 Applicant has worked a second job since November 2016. She lives frugally. She 
traded her car in for a cheaper model. She lowered her cell phone and cable plans. She 
consulted with an attorney who advised her to file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case. She 
wants to pay her debts, and insisted on a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case. She paid the 
attorney’s retainer, and the Chapter 13 bankruptcy case was filed on March 13, 2019. 
She received financial counseling as a requirement of the bankruptcy. The monthly 
payment to the trustee will be $375. She indicated that she will keep her second job, 
and she will be able to make her monthly payments. She credibly testified that she will 
continue with the Chapter 13 bankruptcy until resolution. She also stated that she is 
willing to provide the DOD with updates on the status of the bankruptcy.6 
 
 Applicant submitted a letter attesting to her excellent job performance at her 
second job. She is praised for her honesty, work ethic, trustworthiness, reliability, 
dependability, and integrity.7  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on June 8, 
2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 18-22, 25, 43, 46-47; GE 1, 2; AE A, C, D. 
 
7 AE B.  
 
4 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems, including two bankruptcies and 
multiple delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
5 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control. 
 
 The bankruptcies in 1992 and 2001 are mitigated by time. Applicant’s current 
financial problems resulted when she left an abusive marriage with next to nothing. The 
debts in the SOR were incurred in order for her to start over. With her health problems, 
high medical insurance premiums, and her mother’s cancer, she was unable to maintain 
the monthly credit card payments. 
 
 Applicant obtained a second job, but it was still not enough to address her 
problems. She consulted an attorney, but she disregarded the attorney’s advice to file a 
Chapter 7 case because she wanted to pay her debts. She paid the attorney and filed a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy case that will enable her to pay her debts through a structured 
plan approved by the bankruptcy court and monitored by the trustee. The plan calls for 
monthly payments of $375, which she credibly stated she will maintain until completion.  
 
 Applicant does not present a perfect case in mitigation, but a trustworthiness 
adjudication is not a debt-collection procedure. It is a procedure designed to evaluate an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 
(App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). I believe Applicant is honest and sincere in her intentions to 
address her debts. I find that she has a plan to resolve her financial problems, and her 
payment of the attorney and filing a Chapter 3 bankruptcy case constitute actions to 
implement that plan. Her financial difficulties were the result of conditions that were 
beyond her control, and she acted responsibly under the circumstances. They do not 
cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b) 
and 20(c) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is partially applicable. It may take time, but I am 
convinced that she will eventually resolve her financial problems.8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009) and ISCR Case No. 09-08462 at 4 (App. Bd. 
May. 31, 2011): “Depending on the facts of a given case, the fact that an applicant’s debts will not be paid 
off for a long time, in and of itself, may be of limited [trustworthiness] concern.” 
 
6 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.9  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
   
 
 
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 Applicant stated that she is willing to provide the DOD with updates on the status of the bankruptcy. The 
adjudicative guidelines give me the authority to grant conditional eligibility “despite the presence of issue 
information that can be partially but not completely mitigated, with the provision that additional security 
measures shall be required to mitigate the issue(s).” I have not done so as I have concluded the issues 
are completely mitigated, and it is unnecessary to monitor Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy case.  
