1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-02151 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 5, 2017. On 
October 5, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B, foreign influence. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AGs) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 31, 2018, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations under Guideline B, foreign influence. Applicant also requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 25, 2019. The 
03/22/2019
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for February 27, 2019. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 - 2 were admitted into evidence without objection. At 
the hearing, Applicant testified, and he submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A – G, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 13, 2019.  
 
    Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel submitted formal requests that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq and Egypt. Applicant did not object and the requests 
were approved. The requests concerning Iraq and Egypt, and attached supporting 
documents were not admitted into evidence, but were included in the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) 1 and 2. Some of the facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact below.   
 
Request for Administrative Notice - Iraq 
 
The request listed supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts. AG ¶ 6, Foreign Influence, provides, “Adjudication under this Guideline can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” A risk assessment in this case 
necessitates consideration of facts concerning Iraq.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the HE 1 source 
documents, and incorporated them by reference. The facts are summarized in the 
written request and will not be repeated in this decision. However, of particular note, are 
the following salient facts from HE 1: 
 
Iraq is a constitutional parliamentary republic. The U.S. State Department warns 
that U.S. citizens traveling in Iraq remain at high risk for kidnapping and terrorist 
violence and to avoid all but essential travel to Iraq. The Islamic State of Iraq and the 
Levant (ISIL) controlled a significant portion of Iraq’s territory at all relevant times. Within 
areas under ISIL control, the Iraq government has little or no ability to exercise control 
and ensure public safety. Kidnappings and attacks by improvised explosive devices 
 
3 
 
(IED’s) occur frequently in many areas of the country, including Baghdad. Such attacks 
often take place in public venues such as cafes and markets.  
 
Anti-U.S. sectarian militias threaten U.S. citizens and Western companies 
throughout Iraq. Iraq witnessed a continuing surge of terrorist activity in 2016, primarily 
as a result of the actions of ISIL. Although the government of Iraq has made significant 
progress in its campaign to retake occupied territory from ISIL, there remains a security 
vacuum in parts of Iraq. The U.S. State Department has also reported that ISIL 
committed the overwhelming number of significant human rights abuses, including 
attacks against civilians, especially Shia but also Sunnis who opposed ISIL, and women 
and children. ISIL members committed acts of violence on a mass scale, including 
killings by suicide bombings, IEDs, execution-style shootings, public beheadings, and 
other forms of execution. Sectarian hostility, widespread corruption, and lack of 
transparency at all levels, weakened the Iraq government’s authority and worsened 
effective human rights protections. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice - Egypt 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the HE 2 source 
documents, and incorporated them by reference. The facts are summarized in the 
written request and will not be repeated in this decision. However, of particular note, are 
the following salient facts from HE 2: 
 
Notwithstanding the long-standing strategic U.S.–Egypt relationship, current 
country conditions are problematic.  The U.S. State Department urges citizens to use 
caution when traveling to Egypt due to terrorism and arbitrary detentions. Terrorist 
groups have committed multiple deadly attacks in Egypt. The potential for terrorist 
attacks in Egypt, including against U.S. citizens and Western interests, remains a 
concern. Two Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) affiliates continue to pose a threat. 
Egypt also faced anti-regime violence primarily targeting security personnel. However, 
in November 2017, terrorists killed more than 312 civilians at a Sufi mosque in North 
Sinai. Also, significant human rights abuses persist in Egypt. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He was married in 2005 and divorced in 2010. He 
married again in December 2013, and he has a two-year-old son. (GE 1, Tr. 28, 35)  
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in the U.S. He was employed in information 
technology by a federal contractor in Iraq from 2004 to 2013. (Tr. 54) He has been 
employed as a senior contracts administrator for a federal contractor since February 
2017. (Tr. 51) He met his current wife in 2013 while she was working as a contractor for 
the United States (U.S.) from 2012 to 2014. (Tr. 43) She was born in Egypt and is a 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise stated, the basis for these findings of fact is Applicant’s security clearance application 
(SCA) dated April 5, 2017 (GE 1) and the summaries of personal subject interviews conducted on 
January 4, 2018, and April 9, 2018. (GE 2) 
 
 
4 
 
dual citizen of Egypt and Iraq.  Applicant’s foreign-born wife and family present security 
concerns for him.  
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 5, 2017.2 In section 
18 (Relatives) and section 19 (Foreign Contacts) of his SCA, he disclosed his wife, her 
parents, and siblings, as dual citizens of Iraq (paternal) and Egypt (maternal) and 
currently residing in Egypt. His wife has one sister, age 23, and two brothers, ages 26, 
and 29. (Tr. 13) Although Applicant’s wife and her siblings were born in Egypt, they are 
considered dual residents of Egypt and Iraq since their father was an Iraqi. His children 
acquired Iraqi citizenship by default. (Tr. 31-32) In 2001, her entire family moved from 
Egypt to Iraq to be with her father’s extended family. (Tr. 43) They remained in Iraq for 
13 years. After college, Applicant’s wife moved with her family back to Egypt in 2014 
due to deteriorating conditions in Iraq. (Tr. 32-33) They maintain no ties to Iraq and 
have no desire to return to that war-ravaged country. (Tr. 33)    
 
 Applicant testified credibly that his wife could not find a job in Iraq after obtaining 
her college degree because her mother was an Egyptian and her family were Shia. (Tr. 
33) They faced discrimination in Iraq. She obtained work in the Green Zone in Iraq 
where she met Applicant near the U.S. Embassy. Applicant finished his assignment 
overseeing contracts and left Iraq in 2013, but returned a few months later to marry his 
wife in December 2013. (Tr. 35) He waited so there would be no conflict of interest. 
Applicant met her family, whom he described as modern, secular, and non-political. (Tr. 
38) Her parents are elderly and do not speak English. They have no ties to the 
government of Iraq or Egypt. Applicant and his wife moved to the U.S. in 2014. She has 
a green card and expects to be naturalized as a U.S. citizen in about one year. (Tr. 38)    
 
 Applicant’s wife’s two brothers were college educated in Baghdad, and her sister 
was college educated in Egypt. (Tr. 41) His wife and her two brothers all worked on a 
U.S. military installation in Iraq from 2012 to 2014, and all completed questionnaires for 
national security positions, and were vetted by either the U.S. DOD or U.S. Department 
of State (DOS) to work in Iraq for a major U.S. contractor. (Tr. 21-24) Applicant provided 
copies of their U.S.-issued security badges allowing access to the installation. (AE 
B,C,E,F) Applicant’s wife was an administrative assistant. Her brother was a network 
administrator with unfettered access to U.S. computer systems. (Tr. 23-24)    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
 Applicant testified credibly that while his wife loves her parents and siblings, his 
relationship with them is cordial, but not like family. Her parents are elderly and retired. 
(Tr. 46) His wife contacts her parents via an application known as WhatsApp 
approximately every few days. (Tr. 44) She uses the same application to contact her 
sister every two weeks, and her brothers about once a month. (Tr. 45) His wife is a 
homemaker and mother devoted to her family in the U.S. Her brothers are employed in 
data processing and telemarketing in Egypt. (Tr. 47) They face prejudice in Egypt 
because their father is Iraqi. (Tr. 47) Applicant’s wife last visited her parents in Egypt in 
2015. (Tr. 48) The parents’ apartment there will likely be inherited by her brothers. (Tr. 
49) Nobody in his wife’s family knows what Applicant does for work.    
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant submitted AE A, which is a character reference letter for his wife written 
by the senior project manager for a federal contractor. It recognizes her for superior 
performance, and significant contributions from 2012 to 2013, while assigned to the 
security department of a major U.S. contractor in Iraq. He also submitted a copy of her 
Iraqi passport that expired in August 2016. (AE D) Applicant stated that she will never 
go back to Iraq and will not renew it. (Tr. 22) Applicant also submitted U.S. Department 
of State (DOS) travel advisories showing that Egypt poses the same level 2 (low) risk as 
France, Germany, and Mexico, compared to Iraq, which is a level 4 risk. (AE G)  
 
         Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
6 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and  
 
(c) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, or pressure, or coercion.  
 
Applicant’s wife’s parents and her two brothers and sister are dual citizens of Iraq 
and Egypt, and residents of Egypt. She loves her parents and siblings. She provides no 
financial support to her parents, but she contacts them regularly, as a dutiful daughter. 
On rare occasions, Applicant exchanges pleasantries with his in-laws during these 
WhatsApp calls. Applicant’s foreign contacts through his wife create a potential conflict 
 
7 
 
of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion, both directly and vicariously through her family members. AG 
¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(c), are implicated by the evidence. Accordingly, Applicant’s 
relationship with his wife’s parents and siblings, who are dual citizens of Iraq and Egypt, 
and residents of Egypt, creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
  
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a long-standing preference for working with and 
supporting the U.S. He served in harm’s way as a federal contractor for over 11 years 
and directly supported U.S. DOD interests. His wife and her two brothers were also 
vetted and hired as federal contractors in Iraq. They have no affinity for Iraq and are 
determined to never return. Their Iraqi citizenship is derived from their Iraqi father. 
His wife’s family has resided in Egypt for five years. They are not involved in 
government, intelligence gathering, or politics in Egypt. That country is a long-
standing ally of the U.S. and it is deemed a level 2 risk by the U.S. Department of 
State, which is akin to the risk level in France, Germany and many other close 
allies. Although he is presumed to have strong bonds of affection with his in-laws in 
Egypt, these bonds are not sufficient to offset or overcome his demonstrated, long-term 
commitment to the U.S. and self-abnegation in its service under dangerous conditions.3  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
                                                          
3 The Appeal Board has held that “an Applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United States 
is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an Applicant in a Guideline B case.” ISCR Case 
04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. March 20, 2007). 
 
8 
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.4  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the U.S. over 
matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially 
in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing whether 
an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S., or 
the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant wife’s parents and siblings are dual Iraqi-Egyptian citizens residing in 
Egypt. Although Iraq is an unstable regime, they have no contacts or affection for Iraq. 
Egypt is a low risk. Applicant’s contact with them is infrequent, if ever, by WhatsApp. 
There is no indication that they are affiliated with the Egyptian government or 
intelligence services. Applicant’s wife’s foreign family members do not pose an 
unacceptable security risk. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant would 
report contacts with his relatives by foreign intelligence agents, and that he has a long-
term commitment to the U.S. All of the mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 8 are applicable to 
the contacts with family members, which are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a –1.d.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
9 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline. Applicant is 51 years old. He submitted a character 
reference on behalf of his wife attesting to her allegiance to the U.S. She is applying for 
citizenship in the U.S. Much of Applicant’s professional life was spent in Iraq supporting 
U.S. interests and he has minimal contact with, and little affection for his in-laws. He is 
very low risk to ever be influenced by them.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no serious questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                      Paragraph 1, Guideline B:                         FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:                             For Applicant 
 
                   Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
          ________________________ 
          Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                               Administrative Judge 
