1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
[Redacted] ) ISCR Case No. 18-02250 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Moira Modzelewski, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement and Substance Misuse). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 9, 2016. 
On October 31, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline H. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016). 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 20, 2018, and requested a decision 
on the written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
03/14/2019
 
2 
 
Government’s written case on December 27, 2018. On December 28, 2018, a complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on January 3, 2019, and submitted a 
response, which was included in the record without objection by Department Counsel. 
The case was assigned to me on March 12, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, alleging that he used 
marijuana with varying frequency from the fall of 2011 to at least July 2017. He denied 
SOR ¶ 1.b, alleging that he intends to use marijuana in the future. His admission of 
SOR ¶ 1.a is incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old analyst employed by a federal contractor since August 
2015. He attended college from August 2010 to May 2015, received a bachelor’s 
degree, and was hired by his current employer shortly thereafter. He has no military 
service. He has never married and has no children. He has never held a security 
clearance. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he answered “no” to a question asking if he 
had illegally used any drugs or controlled substances in the last seven years. When he 
was interviewed by a security investigator in August 2017, he told the investigator that 
he wanted to change his answer to the question to “yes.” He told the investigator that he 
used marijuana once or twice a week during college, that he contributed money to buy 
marijuana, and that he purchased it himself at least once. He told the investigator that 
he stopped using marijuana in 2015, while looking for employment, and abstained for 
four to six months after being hired by his current employer. After he became 
comfortable in his job, he resumed his use of marijuana, smoking it once a month until 
July 2017, with a period of abstinence for four to six months in 2016. He admitted using 
marijuana within 30 days of the interview. 
 
When asked about his future intentions, Applicant told the investigator that he 
had no immediate plans to stop using marijuana and that he intended to move to a 
jurisdiction where marijuana was legal. After being advised that marijuana use violates 
federal law even when it is legal under local law, he told the investigator that he would 
stop using marijuana if he had to choose between using marijuana and holding a 
security clearance. Finally, he told the investigator that he answered “no” to the drug-
related questions in the SCA because he was trying to hide his marijuana use. (FORM 
Item 4 at 7-8.) 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he stated that he had abstained from 
marijuana since his August 2017 interview. He stated that he had disassociated from 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 3) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
the “collegiate sort of crowd” with whom he had used marijuana, and had established a 
new network of work-related colleagues and acquaintances, including an employee 
sports group. He stated that his social circle now consists of other professionals 
including doctors and lawyers. He submitted a statement of intent to refrain from illegal 
drug involvement and acknowledged that any future drug involvement would be grounds 
for revoking a security clearance. He attached documentation of a urinalysis conducted 
on January 23, 2019, which tested negative for marijuana as well as other controlled 
substances.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
 
4 
 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish the 
following disqualifying conditions under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(g): expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance 
misuse, or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse. 
 
 
5 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; 
 
 AG ¶ 26(a) is not established. Applicant’s marijuana use was recent, frequent, 
and did not occur under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) is not fully established. Applicant has acknowledged his drug 
involvement, and he appears to have abstained from marijuana use since his August 
2017 interview. He claims that he has disassociated from his marijuana-using collegiate 
group and has become involved in athletic and professional circles related to his 
employment. He did not provide any corroborating evidence to support his claims. He 
provided a signed statement of intent to abstain from further drug involvement.  
 
 I am not satisfied that Applicant’s assertions are credible. He admitted falsifying 
his SCA to hide his drug involvement.2 During his security interview in August 2017, he 
declared his intention to continue using marijuana until the investigator made it clear 
that marijuana use was an impediment to obtain a clearance. He then declared that he 
would stop using marijuana if he had to choose between marijuana use and a security 
clearance. He appears to be willing to say whatever it takes to obtain a security 
clearance.  
                                                          
2 Falsification of the SCA was not alleged in the SOR. However, conduct not alleged in the SOR may be 
considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is 
applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person analysis. 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted). I have considered Applicant’s 
falsification of his SCA for these limited purposes. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Because Applicant requested 
a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his 
credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 23, 2003).  
 
“Once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 09-01652 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug 8, 2011), citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 
F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement  
and Substance Misuse):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
