1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
 ) ADP Case No. 18-00188 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the concerns posed by his history of marijuana use and 
his falsification of his security clearance application. Eligibility to continue working in a 
public trust position is denied.   
Statement of the Case 
On May 4, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, explaining why it was 
unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him a position of trust. 
The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Security Executive Agent Directive 4, effective June 8, 2017. 
On May 21, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting the allegations, and 
requesting a decision based on the administrative record instead of a hearing. On June 19, 
2018, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant 
03/29/2019
2 
 
received a copy of the FORM on July 31, 2018, and was informed that he had through 
September 14, 2018 to file a response. He did not file a response. The case was assigned 
to me on September 20, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 26-year-old single man with a high school diploma. He has been 
working for a defense contractor as a water blaster since 2013. (Item 4 at 10) 
 
 Applicant has been smoking marijuana approximately once every three months 
since he was 20 years old. He did not disclose his marijuana use, as required on his 2016 
SCA, explaining that he was worried that if he did so, he would lose his job. (Item 4 at 11)   
 
 Applicant continued to use marijuana for approximately 18 months after completing 
his security clearance application. His last use was in December 2017. He has no intention 
of using marijuana in the future. (Item 4 at 2) 
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a trustworthiness position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness determination. 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).1  
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
3 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns under this guideline are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment, and because it raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s history of marijuana use triggers the application of AG ¶ 25(a), “any 
substance misuse.” The following mitigating condition under AG ¶ 26 is potentially 
applicable: 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs are 
used; and 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of 
national security eligibility. 
 
  Applicant contends he will never use marijuana again. However, he did not 
memorialize his intent not to use it again in a signed, sworn statement. Moreover, he 
provided no information about whether he will disassociate himself from his marijuana-
using friend, or whether he will avoid the environment where marijuana is used. 
Consequently, AG ¶ 26(b) is only applicable insofar as he acknowledged his history of 
marijuana use and expressed an intent not to use in the future. 
 
 Applicant’s last use of marijuana was in December 2017, 18 months after he 
completed SCA. Under these circumstances, it is too soon to conclude that his 
                                                                                                                                                             
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
4 
 
history of marijuana use no longer poses a trustworthiness concern. Applicant failed 
to mitigate the trustworthiness concern. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Under this guideline, “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information.” Applicant’s falsification of his 2016 SCA triggers the application of AG ¶ 16(a), 
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine 
national security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” 
 
 Applicant falsified his SCA because he was afraid he would lose his job if his 
employer discovered he had been using marijuana. Intentionally omitting or falsifying 
relevant information to conceal derogatory information from a trustworthiness application 
out of fear of losing one’s job does not mitigate falsification.  None of the mitigating 
conditions apply. Applicant has failed to mitigate the personal conduct trustworthiness 
concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the whole-person concept factors in my analysis of the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, and they do not warrant a favorable conclusion. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:      Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of the United States to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
position of trust. Eligibility for a position of trust is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
