1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00324 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On February 13, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on March 9, 2018, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
The Government’s written case was submitted on July 26, 2018. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on August 1, 2018. She 
responded to the FORM with documents that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
03/18/2019
 
2 
 
through F.1 The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2018. The Government 
exhibits included in the FORM and AE A through F are admitted in evidence without 
objection. 
 
On January 28, 2019, I notified Applicant that I would reopen the record if she 
wanted to submit additional documentary evidence. I reopened the record upon her 
request. She submitted documents that I have marked AE G through J and admitted 
without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 2017. She attended college for a period, but she has not 
earned a degree. She is the single mother of two minor children.2 
  
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, which are attributed primarily to 
unemployment, underemployment, her children’s significant medical problems, and the 
costs associated with being a single mother of two children without meaningful support 
from the children’s father. She filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in 2005, and her debts 
were discharged in 2006.3  
 
 The SOR alleges 41 delinquent debts, including 28 medical debts and 13 
miscellaneous debts. However, the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.v; 1.c and 1.p; 
and 1.d, 1.t, and 1.u are duplicate accounts. There are 27 non-duplicate medical debts 
and 10 non-duplicate miscellaneous debts. The debts are listed on a February 2016 
credit report, an October 2017 credit report, or both credit reports.4 
 
 The ten non-duplicate miscellaneous debts total about $4,350 and include debts 
to telecommunications companies (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-$1,058; 1.d-$435; and 1.bb-$371); 
banks (SOR ¶¶ 1.b-$694; and 1.f-$366); a public utility (SOR ¶ 1.i-$938); a returned 
check (SOR ¶ 1.hh-$60); a toll bridge (SOR ¶ 1.oo-$54); and two retail accounts (SOR 
¶¶ 1.cc-$165; and 1.gg-$212). 
 
 Applicant contracted with a debt-settlement company in January 2018. She 
enrolled four debts totaling $6,675 in the company’s debt-settlement program (DSP), 
including the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The three additional debts are owed to two 
financial institutions ($2,075 and $1,200) and a hospital ($2,500). It is difficult to ascribe 
the three debts to any of the debts alleged in the SOR, although the hospital debt could 
                                                          
1 AE F is a copy of the Government’s FORM. 
 
2 Items 4, 5; AE A. 
 
3 Items 2, 5, 8, 9; AE A, C. 
 
4 Items 6, 7. 
 
 
3 
 
be connected to one or more SOR debts. The DSP documentation called for Applicant 
to pay $252 per month for 18 months, plus $59 per month in fees.5 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the non-duplicate miscellaneous debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, and 1.bb. She wrote in her response to the SOR for all four debts: “I 
have made payment arrangements with a debt consolidation company.” She wrote In 
her response to the FORM: 
 
I finally landed a full time position last year. Since working full time I was 
able to move into my own apartment. I have been trying desperately to 
pay off my debts and maintain a household for me and my children. Many 
of the debt[s] in question ha[ve] already been paid. Some of which are no 
longer on my credit reports. I also contacted a debt consolidation company 
to work out a payment plan. . . . I will continue to work on paying off all of 
my debt as quickly as possible. 
 
 Applicant provided credit reports with her response to the SOR and FORM, but 
no actual proof of payments. I reopened the record for her to submit additional 
documentation. She responded that she was no longer working with the debt-settlement 
company because it was too much money. On January 29, 2019, she retained a law 
firm to repair her credit and dispute inaccurate items on her credit report. She stated 
that she is paying the law firm $109 per month. She also documented that on February 
27, 2019, she paid the $435 debt to the telecommunications company (SOR ¶ 1.d).6 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $938 public utilities debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, but 
she wrote that she was “currently making payments to [the utility company] on this 
account.” The debt was reported by Experian on the February 2016 combined credit 
report, but it is not listed on the February 2018 Experian credit report.7 
 
 Applicant denied owing the non-duplicate miscellaneous debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.cc, 1.gg, 1.hh, and 1.oo. She stated that she was unaware of the $165 debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.cc. The debt was reported by Equifax on the February 2016 combined credit 
report, but it is not listed on the October 2017 Equifax credit report, nor any other credit 
report.8 
 
 Applicant stated that she paid the $212 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.gg. The debt 
was reported with a $212 balance on the February 2016 combined credit report. The 
February 2018 Experian credit report and the March 2018 TransUnion credit report, 
which were submitted by Applicant, also report the account with a $212 balance.9 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 3. 
 
6 Items 2, 3; AE E, G-J. 
 
7 Items 2, 3, 6, 7: AE E. 
 
8 Items 2, 3, 6, 7; AE E. 
 
9 Items 2, 3, 6; AE E. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $60 debt for a returned check (SOR ¶ 1.hh). She 
stated that her credit union was hacked during the time the check was being processed. 
The debt was reported by Experian on the February 2016 combined credit report and on 
the three credit reports from February and March 2018. On July 18, 2018, she sent a 
letter to the creditor requesting verification of the account and deletion from her credit 
report if not verified. No additional information on its status was provided.10 
 
 Applicant stated that she paid the $54 debt for a toll bridge (SOR ¶ 1.oo). The 
debt was reported by TransUnion on the February 2016 combined credit report. It is not 
reported on any subsequent report.11 
 
 Applicant admitted owing some of the medical debts, while denying owing the 
rest. Some of the debts have been removed from her credit report, but there is no other 
evidence that any of the medical debts have been paid.12 
 
 Credit reports indicate that Applicant paid or settled a $188 debt and a $402 debt 
that were not alleged in the SOR. The February 2016 credit report lists a $19,671 
deferred student loan. The balance had increased to $26,966 on the October 2017 
credit report. The loan is reported in March 2018 as deferred with a $27,366 balance. 
The deferment was scheduled to end in May 2018.13   
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
10 Items 2, 3, 6; AE B, E. 
 
11 Items 2, 3, 6, 7; AE E. 
 
12 Items 2, 3, 6, 7; AE D, E. 
 
13 Items 3, 6-8. AE E, J. The SOR appropriately did not allege the deferred student loan nor the two paid 
collection debts. The student loan will be considered in assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation. 
The paid collection accounts are matters in mitigation. 
 
 
5 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems and delinquent debts. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.v; 1.c and 1.p; and 1.d, 1.t, and 1.u are 
duplicate accounts. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the 
same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005). SOR ¶¶ 1.v, 1.p, 1.t, 
and 1.u are concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant attributes her financial problems primarily to unemployment, 
underemployment, her children’s significant medical problems, and the costs associated 
with being a single mother of two children without meaningful support from the 
 
7 
 
children’s father. Those events qualify as conditions that were largely beyond her 
control.  
 
 Applicant paid or settled a $188 debt and a $402 debt before the SOR was 
issued. When she responded to the SOR and FORM, she indicated that she was paying 
her debts through a debt-settlement program. Only one of the four debts in the DSP can 
be positively ascribed to any of the debts alleged in the SOR. She wrote that she would 
“continue to work on paying off all of [her] debt as quickly as possible.” I reopened the 
record to provide her the opportunity to submit additional documentation. She did not 
maintain the DSP. Instead, on January 29, 2019, she retained a law firm to repair her 
credit and dispute inaccurate items on her credit report. On February 27, 2019, she paid 
the $435 debt to the telecommunications company (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
   
 Applicant stated that several debts were paid, and she disputed owing other 
debts. Some debts have been removed from her credit reports. Other than the three 
debts discussed in the above paragraph, there is no proof that any of the debts have 
actually been paid. Nonetheless, I am crediting Applicant with mitigation for all the 
medical debts and the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.cc, and 1.oo. 
 
 Even with reopening the record and giving Applicant credit in mitigation as 
discussed above, I am left with unanswered questions and lingering security concerns. I 
know little about the current state of her finances, such as whether and how she plans 
to pay the debts that are her responsibility.  
 
There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that she made a good-faith effort to pay her 
debts. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find that financial 
considerations security concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j-1.aa:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.bb:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.cc-1.ff:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.gg-1.hh:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.ii-1.oo:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
