1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--- ) ISCR Case No. 18-00426 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On February 13, 2017, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On March 6, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016) (AG) for all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017. 
03/05/2019
 
2 
                                      
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on March 13, 2018. In a sworn statement, dated March 
19, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant 
material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) on May 3, 2018, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was 
furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to his 
case. Applicant received the FORM on May 16, 2018. Applicant’s response was due on 
June 15, 2018. Applicant timely submitted several documents which were marked and 
admitted as Applicant exhibits (AE) A through AE D, without objection. The case was 
originally assigned to another Administrative Judge on July 26, 2018, but because of 
illness issues, it was reassigned to me on February 27, 2019.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with comments all of the factual 
allegations in the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.t.). Applicant’s admissions and comments 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
as a material specialist with his current employer since February 2017. A 1993 high school 
graduate, Applicant received an associate’s degree in 2014, and completed additional 
credits but no other degree. He has never served with the U.S. military. He has never 
been granted a security clearance. Applicant was married the first time in 2007, and 
divorced in 2015. He remarried in 2016. Although he did not list having any children in his 
e-QIP, Applicant has two children born in 1994 and 1996. 
 
Financial Considerations1 
 
In his e-QIP, Applicant essentially attributed his financial difficulties to a period of 
unemployment in 2014 that left him with insufficient funds to pay his rent. He also noted 
that his ex-wife was to repay one particular credit card in 2013 because he was not 
working. He denied having any other delinquencies, accounts in collection, accounts 
                                                          
1 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in 
the following exhibits: Item 4 (e-QIP, dated February 13, 2017); Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, 
and Equifax Credit Report, dated April 19, 2017); Item 6 (Equifax Credit Report, dated December 12, 2017); 
Item 7 (Equifax Credit Report, dated April 30, 2018); Item 8 (Enhanced Subject Interview, dated August 25, 
2017); Item 3 (Answer to the SOR, dated March 19, 2018). 
 
3 
                                      
 
charged off, or repossessions,2 a position that was untrue.3 During his enhanced subject 
interview conducted by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) in August 2017, Applicant initially denied having any other accounts sent to 
collections. Upon being confronted with certain contrary facts, he generally acknowledged 
the delinquent status of most of the accounts. He noted that he had experienced several 
periods of unemployment: October 2012 until February 2013, because he quit his job to 
relocate to his spouse’s new job location, and he was supported by his spouse and his 
401(k); May 2013 until July 2013, for the same reasons; November 2013 until December 
2013, while he was attending school, studying, and looking for a new job, and supported 
by his spouse; July 2014 until October 2014, after he was fired, and was supported by his 
spouse; and November 2016 until February 2017, after he quit and got remarried.  
 
During that OPM interview, Applicant stated that it was his plan to rectify his 
financial problems over the next five years with increased salaries until the accounts were 
paid off.4 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant added that the debt was accrued because 
he had “endured some hardship” and his new plan was to have all of his creditors “paid 
off within [two] years, but no longer than [five] years.”5 In an undated Answer to the FORM, 
Applicant modified his plan by stating that he will have all of his small creditors paid off in 
two years, and the remaining creditors will be paid off in five years.6  
The SOR identified 20 delinquent accounts that had been placed for collection, 
charged off, or repossessed, all generally reflected by Applicant’s April 2017, December 
2017, or April 2018 credit reports. Applicant acknowledged that he had made no effort to 
resolve nearly all the accounts, largely because of a lack of income, but reiterated his 
intention to rectify them. Those debts, totaling approximately $21,206, all of which were 
placed for collection, are described below: 
                                                          
2 Item 4, supra note 1, at 37-41. 
 
3 Unalleged conduct can be considered for certain purposes, as discussed by the DOHA Appeal 
Board. (Conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an applicant's credibility; (b) to 
evaluate an applicant's evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular 
provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis 
under Directive § 6.3.). See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003)). See also 
ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). Applicant’s unlisted and unalleged 
delinquent accounts, as well as his lack of candor on his e-QIP, will be considered only for the five purposes 
listed above. 
4 Item 8, supra note 1. It should be noted that the Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay 
off delinquent debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner 
and otherwise acting in a financially responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 
2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
5 Item 5, supra note 1.  
6 AE B (Answer to the FORM, undated). 
 
4 
                                      
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.a.) is a joint (with his ex-wife) credit-card account for $6,061 that was 
charged off, and by virtue of their divorce decree, both Applicant and his ex-wife are each 
responsible for one-half of the balance; (SOR ¶ 1.b.) is an automobile loan with an unpaid 
balance of $4,404 that was voluntarily repossessed; (SOR ¶ 1.c.) is an apartment lease 
with an unpaid balance of $3,402 from which Applicant was evicted; (SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 1.h., 
1.k., 1.l., 1.n., 1.o., and 1.q.) are medical accounts with unpaid balances of $1,966; $465; 
$368; $231; $207; $206; and $195; (SOR ¶¶ 1.e. through 1.g.) are credit-card accounts 
with unpaid balances of $623; $604; and $491, that were charged off; (SOR ¶ 1.i.) is a 
cellular telephone account with an unpaid balance of $424 that was charged off; and 
(SOR ¶ 1.j.) is an unspecified type of account with an unpaid balance of $372. None of 
those accounts have been resolved. 
In addition, there are several accounts for which there is some evidence of possible 
resolution efforts made by Applicant:  
(SOR ¶ 1.m.) is a cable internet or television account with an unpaid balance of 
$216 for which Applicant submitted one document acknowledging an authorization to the 
collection agent to debit $108.08 on June 20, 2018 – three months after the SOR was 
issued.7 There is also a handwritten entry by an unidentified individual indicating that 
another debit might be scheduled for June 27, 2018, but there is no documentation (bank 
account or credit card register or statement, or creditor-issued receipt) to indicate that 
one payment, much less two payments, had actually been made. The account has not 
been resolved. (SOR ¶¶ 1.p., 1.r., 1.s., and 1.t.) are medical accounts with the same 
collection agent with unpaid balances of $353; $222; $199; and $197, totaling $971. In 
his Answer to the FORM, Applicant contended that he had paid off each of those accounts 
“as of May 30, 2018,”8 and he attached a letter from the collection agent acknowledging 
his authorization for them to initiate weekly $100 electronic payments from his account 
commencing on March 21, 2018, and continuing until May 30, 2018,9 totaling $1,100. The 
authorization does not identify the creditor account numbers to be addressed. Applicant 
failed to submit any documentation, including account registers, creditor receipts, etc., to 
support his contentions that the payments had been made. In the absence of some 
documentation to support his reported efforts, the accounts have not been resolved.  
In response to comments made by Department Counsel regarding evidence of 
possible irresponsible spending by Applicant when he purchased a new automobile 
(actually a used 2009 luxury vehicle) in February 2018, for $12,941, Applicant stated that 
most of the funds came from his insurance after his earlier vehicle was totally lost 
following an accident in March 2016.10  
                                                          
7 AE C (Letter, dated June 14, 2018). 
 
8 AE B, supra note 6, at 1. 
 
9 Item 3 (Letter, dated March 21, 2018), attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1. 
 
10 AE B, supra note 6, at 1; AE A (Statement, dated February 12, 2018); Also see AE A (Customer 
Payment History Recap Sheet, dated February 14, 2018). 
 
5 
                                      
 
In addition to the SOR-related accounts, there is an educational loan for $7,268 
with an unpaid balance of $5,941 that was placed for collection in February 2018.11 For 
some reason, not explained by Applicant, he submitted two scheduled payments of 
$131.18 each to a collection agent for an unidentified creditor or account to take place in 
July 2018.12 In the absence of some commentary connecting the payments to some 
account, the significance of the document is minimal. 
Applicant failed to indicate his current monthly net pay, monthly expenses, debt 
payments, or if he has any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary 
spending or savings. There is no evidence of a budget. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling. There is little evidence that since his SOR was issued in March 2018, 
Applicant has made any significant efforts to contact the vast majority of his creditors, 
enter into repayment plans with creditors, or make payments to creditors to resolve most 
of his delinquent or charged-off accounts, even to the smaller creditors to which he owes 
$195, $206, or $207. Other than his general statements about his future intentions, 
Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that his financial situation has improved, or that 
it is now under control.  
Policies 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”13 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”14   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
                                                          
11 Item 7, supra note 1, at 1. 
 
12 AE D (Scheduled Payments, dated July 5, 2018). 
 
13 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
14 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”15 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.16  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”17  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”18 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
15 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
16 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
17 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
18 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG 19:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
The SOR identified 20 delinquent accounts that had been placed for collection, 
charged off, or repossessed, totaling $21,206. Nearly all of those delinquent accounts 
continue to be unaddressed and unresolved, despite Applicant being fully employed since 
February 2017, and expecting salary increases. Applicant claimed that when he was 
unemployed in 2014, he was unable to make his required monthly payments, but it 
appears that he was simply content to remain unemployed for periods of time sufficient 
for him to continue his education and draw unemployment benefits. Applicant’s failure to 
even address the minor delinquent debts until after the SOR was issued seems to 
constitute an unwillingness to satisfy his debts. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) have been 
established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;19 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;20 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies, but none of the remaining mitigating conditions 
apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties 
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent,” or that it 
is “unlikely to recur.” Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to several periods of 
unemployment, and because he had endured some hardship, not otherwise described. 
In addition, he was divorced in 2015. He had insufficient funds to maintain his financial 
                                                          
19 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
20 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or 
statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
responsibilities. There is no documentation to reflect that Applicant obtained financial 
counseling from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service; disputed his delinquent accounts with the credit reporting agencies or the 
creditors themselves; contacted his creditors to set up repayment plans; or indicated that 
payments had been made to his creditors before the SOR was issued. Those few actions 
that Applicant did make all commenced after the SOR was issued.21  
An applicant who begins to resolve his financial problems only after being placed 
on notice that his or her security clearance is in jeopardy may be lacking in the judgment 
and self-discipline to follow rules and regulations over time or when there is no immediate 
threat to his or her own interests.22 In this instance, to date, there are authorized weekly 
$100 payments to an identified collection agent, to commence two weeks after the SOR 
was issued; one dispute filed that was associated with an unspecified account in May 
2018; an authorized payment to an identified creditor in June 2018; and two scheduled 
payments to an unidentified creditor in July 2018. Before the SOR was issued, Applicant 
simply ignored his creditors. There is no evidence that any other corrective actions have 
been taken by Applicant. There is no evidence to conclude that Applicant’s finances are 
under control. 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
resolution of such issues, one at a time. Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without 
further confirmed sustained action, are insufficient.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
                                                          
21 See ISCR Case No. 12-01335 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2017). 
 
22 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-01213 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2018); ISCR Case No. 17-00569 at 
3-4 (App. Bd. Sept. 18, 2018). 
 
10 
                                      
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.23  
  
There is very little evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant is a 44-year-
old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving as a material specialist with 
his current employer since February 2017. He has professed an intent to rectify his 
delinquent debts within five years. 
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant exhibited a lack of candor when he completed his e-QIP and denied having any 
financial issues other than an eviction for unpaid rent and a credit card he claimed his ex-
wife was supposed to pay. He actually had 20 delinquent accounts that had been placed 
for collection, charged off, or repossessed, totaling $21,206. Nearly all of those delinquent 
accounts continue to be unaddressed and unresolved, despite Applicant being fully 
employed since February 2017. Applicant has made minimal documented efforts to 
resolve his delinquent debts despite promising to do so. Applicant has not obtained 
financial counseling. There is no evidence of a budget, and he offered no evidence to 
indicate that his financial situation has improved, or that it is now under control. To the 
contrary, a new non-SOR delinquent debt, an education loan with an unpaid balance of 
$5,941, was recently added to Applicant’s portfolio of collections. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:24 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
                                                          
23 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
24 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an extremely poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, seemingly avoiding most, if not all, of the debts in his name. Overall, 
the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. See 
SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.t.:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
