1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--- ) ISCR Case No. 18-00286 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On June 15, 2017, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On August 31, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016) (AG) for all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017. 
03/04/2019
 
2 
                                      
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear as to when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the 
case file. In a sworn statement, dated September 5, 2018, Applicant responded to the 
SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A 
complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to 
Applicant by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on December 3, 2018, 
and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the 
Directive as well as the Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received 
the FORM on December 20, 2018. Applicant’s response was due on January 19, 2019. 
Applicant apparently chose not to respond to the FORM, for as of February 27, 2019, he 
had not done so. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2019.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted without comments all of the factual 
allegations in the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.s.). Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
as a technician with his current employer (or subcontractor) since November 2016. A 
2005 high school graduate, Applicant received an associate’s degree in 2012, and a 
bachelor’s degree in 2014. He has never served with the U.S. military. He has never been 
granted a security clearance. Applicant was married in 2012. He has no children. 
 
Financial Considerations1 
 
During his enhanced subject interview conducted by an investigator from the U.S. 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in September 2017, Applicant initially denied 
having any judgments filed against him or having any accounts sent to collections. Upon 
being confronted with certain contrary facts, he either acknowledged the status of certain 
accounts, disputed the status of some accounts, overlooked some accounts, or claimed 
he did recall anything about other accounts. He subsequently attributed his financial 
issues to “bouts of unemployment and low paying jobs, where [he] was unable to cover 
                                                          
1 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in 
the following exhibits: Item 4 (e-QIP, dated June 15, 2017); Item 5 (Enhanced Subject Interview, dated 
September 19, 2017); Item 6 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated June 22, 
2017); Item 7 (Equifax Credit Report, dated January 31, 2018).  
 
 
3 
                                      
 
all of his debt.”2 But, he noted that in April 2017, he received a wage increase and that 
increase would enable him to start paying off his delinquent debts.3 In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant added that the debt was accrued because he was forced to use credit 
cards and sustained his debt. “Unfortunately this debt became too much and [he] was 
unable to pay any of it off.”4 In his e-QIP, Applicant noted only one period of 
unemployment (November 2011 until September 2012) after he was let go by mutual 
agreement (actually fired) following notice of unsatisfactory performance. During that 
period, he was a student supported by his wife and unemployment compensation. 
Although he was not unemployed for any reported period thereafter, another employer 
released him for unsatisfactory performance because Applicant routinely failed to follow 
the company’s shift schedule and was repeatedly disciplined and counseled.5  
The SOR identified 19 delinquent accounts that had been placed for collection, 
charged off, or filed as judgments, all generally reflected by Applicant’s June 2017 or 
January 2018 credit reports. Applicant acknowledged that he had made no effort to 
resolve the accounts, but stated that he planned to do so once the accounts with lower 
balances are paid off.6 Those debts, totaling approximately $93,582, all of which were 
placed for collection, are described below: 
 (SOR ¶ 1.a.) an unspecified type of account for $1,355 that was sold to a debt 
purchaser before becoming a judgment; (SOR ¶ 1.b.) an unspecified type of account for 
$6,555 that was sold to a debt purchaser before being reduced to a judgment; (SOR ¶ 
1.c.) an unsecured guaranteed loan for $3,067 that was charged off; (SOR ¶¶ 1.d. through 
1.p.) education loans that fell into default and were returned to the U.S. Department of 
Education in the amounts of $5,116; $4,032; $6,121; $3,965; $6,121; $376; $4,497; 
$3,164; $6,619; $4,266; $6,913; $8,924; and $9,278; (SOR ¶ 1.q.) an unspecified type of 
account for $11,621 that was charged off; (SOR ¶ 1.r.) an unspecified type of account for 
$1,521 that went to judgment; and (SOR ¶ 1.s.) an unspecified type of account for $71. 
Applicant failed to indicate his current monthly net pay, monthly expenses, debt 
payments, or if he has any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary 
spending or savings. There is no evidence of a budget. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling. There is no evidence that since his April 2017 pay increase he has made any 
                                                          
2 Item 5, supra note 1, at 11. 
 
3 Item 5, supra note 1, at 6-11. 
 
4 Item 3 (Answer to the SOR, dated September 5, 2018). 
 
5 Item 5, supra note 1, at 5. 
6 Item 5, supra note 1. It should be noted that the Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay 
off delinquent debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner 
and otherwise acting in a financially responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 
2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
efforts to contact his creditors, enter into repayment plans with any creditors, or make any 
payments to any creditors to resolve any of his delinquent or charged-off accounts, even 
to the one creditor to which he owes $71. While not alleged in the SOR, it is noted that 
Applicant also had an account with a jewelry company with a high credit of $4,500 that 
went to judgment, but was eventually paid off in 2016.7 Other than his general statements 
about his future intentions, Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that his financial 
situation has improved, or that it is now under control.  
Policies 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”8 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”9   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
7 Unalleged conduct can be considered for certain purposes, as discussed by the DOHA Appeal 
Board. (Conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an applicant's credibility; (b) to 
evaluate an applicant's evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular 
provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis 
under Directive § 6.3.). See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003)). See also 
ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). Applicant’s unlisted and unalleged 
delinquent accounts, as well as his lack of candor on his e-QIP, will be considered only for the five purposes 
listed above.  
 
8 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
9 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
 
5 
                                      
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”10 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.11  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”12  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”13 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
10 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
13 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG 19:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
The SOR identified 19 delinquent accounts that had been placed for collection, 
charged off, or filed as judgments, totaling $93,582. Those delinquent accounts all 
continue to be unaddressed and unresolved, despite Applicant being fully employed since 
November 2016 (and receiving a salary increase in April 2017). Applicant claimed that 
when he was unemployed in 2011-2012, he was unable to make his required monthly 
payments, but it appears that he was simply content to remain unemployed for a period 
of time sufficient for him to continue his education (by increasing the unpaid balance of 
his student loans), and drawing unemployment benefits. Applicant’s failure to even 
address the one delinquent debt in the amount of $71 constitutes an unwillingness to 
satisfy his debts. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;14 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;15  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies, but none of the remaining mitigating conditions 
apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties 
                                                          
14 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
15 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or 
statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent,” or that it 
is “unlikely to recur.” Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to his one period of 
unemployment (November 2011 until September 2012), and insufficient funds to maintain 
his financial responsibilities. There is no documentation to reflect that Applicant made any 
efforts, much less “good-faith” efforts, before or after he was interviewed by OPM; before 
or after the SOR was issued in August 2018; or even after he was sent the FORM in 
December 2018, to: obtain financial counseling from a legitimate and credible source, 
such as a non-profit credit counseling service; dispute his delinquent accounts with the 
credit reporting agencies or the creditors themselves; contact his creditors to set up 
repayment plans; or indicate that payments had been made to his creditors.16  
An applicant who begins to resolve his financial problems only after being placed 
on notice that his or her security clearance is in jeopardy may be lacking in the judgment 
and self-discipline to follow rules and regulations over time or when there is no immediate 
threat to his or her own interests.17 In this instance, to date, there is no evidence that any 
corrective actions have been taken by Applicant. There is no evidence to conclude that 
Applicant’s finances are under control. 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
resolution of such issues, one at a time. Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without 
further confirmed action, are insufficient.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
                                                          
16 See ISCR Case No. 12-01335 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2017). 
 
17 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-01213 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2018); ISCR Case No. 17-00569 at 
3-4 (App. Bd. Sept. 18, 2018). 
 
9 
                                      
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.18  
  
There is very little evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant is a 32-year-
old employee of a defense contractor, serving as a technician with his current employer 
or a subcontractor since November 2016. He had a non-SOR account with a jewelry 
company with a high credit of $4,500 that went to judgment, but was eventually paid off 
in 2016. 
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant exhibited a lack of candor when he completed his e-QIP and denied having any 
financial issues. He actually had 19 delinquent accounts that had been placed for 
collection, charged off, or reduced to judgment totaling $93,582. Those delinquent 
accounts all continue to be unaddressed and unresolved by Applicant, despite his being 
fully employed since November 2016, and receiving a salary increase in April 2017. 
Applicant has made no efforts to resolve his delinquent debts despite promising to do so. 
Applicant has not obtained financial counseling. There is no evidence of a budget, and 
he offered no evidence to indicate that his financial situation has improved, or that it is 
now under control. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:19 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
                                                          
18 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an extremely poor, if not non-existent, track record of 
debt reduction and elimination efforts, seemingly avoiding all of the debts in his name. 
Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.s.:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
