1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00088 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On March 23, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 26, 2018, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on June 28, 2018. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
03/08/2019
 
2 
 
received the FORM on August 31, 2018. Applicant did not respond to the Government’s 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on December 10, 2018. The Government’s 
documents identified as Items 1 through 6 are admitted in evidence without objection. 
Other than his Answer to the SOR, admitted into evidence as Item 3, Applicant failed to 
submit any additional documentation. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. He is 37 years old. As of his 2015 
security clearance application (SCA), he had never been married and he did not have 
any children.1 
 
 Applicant obtained his general education diploma in 2001. He attended college in 
2006, 2012 to 2015, and re-enrolled as of his 2018 response to the SOR, but he had not 
yet earned a degree. He served honorably in the U.S. military from 2001 to 2009, during 
which time he deployed to the Middle East, Central and North America, and Iraq. He 
received numerous medals for his military service. He previously worked overseas for 
two U.S. defense contractors from 2010 to 2013, and he was unemployed from 2013 to 
2015. He has worked as an engineer for a defense contractor since 2015, and he 
received a promotion and recognition awards between 2016 and 2018. He was first 
granted a security clearance in 2003.2   
 
 Applicant has consumed alcohol, at times in excess and to the point of 
intoxication, since age 16. He drank two to three beers once to twice yearly until July 
2002, when he turned 21 years old. He acknowledged that his heavy alcohol abuse 
started during his military service. He then drank four to five beers or hard liquor drinks 
on the weekends at social gatherings. Before his April 2016 driving under the influence 
(DUI) conviction, further discussed below, he drank between five and fifteen beers on 
the weekends. He described his drinking habits during his 2017 background interview 
as moderate, stating that he drank occasionally. In January 2017, he drank three beers 
and three glasses of champagne. In February 2017, he drank two beers with dinner. In 
June 2017, he drank two beers. As of his 2018 response to interrogatories, he last 
drank three glasses of champagne in December 2017.3 
 
 In April 2000, Applicant was charged and convicted of DUI. He was 18 years old. 
He was at a friend’s sister’s house and he drank two to three beers. He did not believe 
he was intoxicated and he drove his friend home. He was pulled over by a police officer 
and administered a breathalyzer. Though his blood alcohol content (BAC) was .04%, 
the officer arrested him because he was a minor. He was fined and his driver’s license 
was suspended for one year.4 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 3, 4.  
 
2 Items 3-5.  
 
3 Items 1, 3-6. 
 
4 Item 1, 3-6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In September 2013, Applicant was charged and convicted of DUI. He had been 
watching football at his cousin’s house, where he drank six to seven beers. He did not 
believe he was intoxicated, attempted to drive home, and got into an accident. He was 
arrested, administered a breathalyzer, and his BAC was .16%. He was fined, ordered to 
take a drug and alcohol awareness course, and his driver’s license was revoked for 
three months. He complied with the court’s sentence and his driver’s license was 
reinstated in February 2014. Applicant stated during his 2015 background interview that 
he had no future intentions of drinking and driving.5 
 
 In April 2016, Applicant was charged with DUI. He was with friends watching a 
hockey game at a sports bar. He drove to the bar but planned to take an Uber home.   
He drank seven to eight beers and three to four shots of hard liquor over three hours. 
He drove to a friend’s house nearby, with the intention of sleeping off the alcohol before 
driving home later. En route, he realized he was too drunk to drive so he pulled into a 
residential neighborhood to sleep. He was arrested after a resident reported an 
unknown parked car in the neighborhood, and the officer smelled alcohol on him. He 
was sentenced to one year of supervised probation, one year of a suspended driver’s 
license, fined, 50 hours of community service, and DUI and victims awareness courses. 
He was also ordered to attended counseling and treatment.6 
 
 Applicant attended an outpatient program consisting of 24 group counseling 
sessions, two individual sessions, and 12+ Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings from 
May to August 2017, when he completed the program. A discharge summary record 
reflects: 
 
[Applicant] accepted the consequences of his alcohol use and understands the 
risks of continued use of any mood altering substance . . . He appears sincere 
about remaining substance fee.7 
 
His discharge diagnosis reflects an Axis I diagnosis of “Alcohol Abuse (In Remission) – 
F10.10,” states that his prognosis is “Good, if [Applicant] follows recommendations,” and 
recommends that Applicant abstain from all mood altering drugs and continue AA 
attendance.8 
 
 In his October 2017 background interview, Applicant stated that he did not 
believe he had an alcohol dependence issue, but he considered himself an alcoholic 
based on information he obtained from the counseling sessions. Though he stated that 
he does so only rarely, he acknowledged in both his 2017 background interview and his 
2018 response to the SOR that he still consumed alcohol. He decided to decrease his 
                                                          
5 Items 1, 3-6. 
 
6 Item 1, 3-6. 
 
7 Item 1, 3-6. 
 
8 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
alcohol consumption because he learned from the counseling sessions that alcohol 
could negatively impact him. He sold both of his vehicles and decided to bicycle or Uber 
wherever he goes. He stated that he previously drank alcohol to feel happy and relieve 
work stress, but realized that he could exercise and listen to music instead. He did not 
provide evidence of continued AA attendance. He stated that his DUIs are common 
knowledge among his family and friends.9 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
9 Item 1, 3-6. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 22. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
 Applicant has a pattern of excessive alcohol consumption and alcohol-related 
incidents away from work. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) are applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides the following relevant conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
 
6 
 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
Applicant’s pattern of excessive alcohol consumption and alcohol-related 
incidents did not happen under unusual circumstances that are unlikely to recur, are 
recent, and are not mitigated by the passage of time. Though Applicant was diagnosed 
upon discharge from treatment in 2017 with alcohol abuse in remission, he was 
recommended to abstain from all mood altering substances and continue AA. Yet, he 
admitted that he still consumed alcohol and he did not provide evidence of continued 
AA attendance. AG ¶¶ 23(a), 23(b), and 23(d) are not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline G in this whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s honorable military 
service and his deployments overseas.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
