 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01211 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 7, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 18, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 9, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on November 
6, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on November 14, 2018, scheduling the hearing for December 3, 2018. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 
6, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf. Applicant 
presented one document, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AppX) A, and admitted 
into evidence. The record was left open until February 3, 2019, for receipt of additional 
 
2 
 
documentation. In a timely fashion, Applicant offered four additional packets of 
documents, which were also admitted into evidence, as AppXs B~E. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (TR) on December 11, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to all the allegations in SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old “independent contractor for [the] State Department.” 
(TR at page 15 line 10 to page 16 line 5, and GX 1 at page 5.) She has been employed 
as an independent contractor since September of 2014. (GX 1 at page 14.)  She is 
married, and has two adult children. (TR at page 16 line 16 to page 19 line 10.) 
Applicant attributes her financial difficulties to her intermittent employment, and to her 
husband’s poor health, due to heart attacks. (TR at page 26 line 12 to page 27 line 4.) 
 
 Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a. Applicant has “settled” her automobile loan with Creditor A, as evidenced by 
documentation from Creditor A. (TR at page 25 line 7 to page 26 line 14, at page 27 line 
5 to page 29 line 23, and AppX B at page 9.) This $20,000 allegation constitutes the 
majority of Applicant’s alleged past-due indebtedness, and is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.b. Applicant is making monthly payments of $83 towards an admitted $2,962 
past-due debt to the satisfaction of Creditor B, as evidenced by documentation from 
Creditor B. (AppX B at pages 10~13.) This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.c, 1.d., and 1.f~1.p Since July of 2018, through the auspices of a debt 
consolidation service, Applicant is making monthly payments of $250 towards these 
thirteen admitted past-due debts totaling about $9,035. (TR at page 19 line 15 to page 
25 line 6, and at page 30 line 22 to page 32 line 5.) This is evidenced by documentation 
from her debt consolidation service. (AppX B at pages 1~7.) These allegations are 
found for Applicant. 
 
 1.e. Applicant has settled her admitted past-due debt to Creditor E for $494, as 
evidenced by documentation from Creditor E. (AppX D.) This allegation is found for 
Applicant. 
 
 Applicant performs her job well, as evidenced by numerous letters of 
recommendation, citations and achievement awards. (AppX C.) 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has admitted to significant past-due indebtedness. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
5 
 
Applicant has addressed her past financial difficulties. She has demonstrated 
that future financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20 has been 
established. Guideline F is found for Applicant.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant has a distinguished history of 
working as an independent contractor for the State Department as evidenced by a 
plethora of letters of recommendation, citations and achievement awards. (AppX C.) 
She performs well at her job.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.p:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
