1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ADP Case No. 18-01967 
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations and personal 
conduct trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On August 15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 12, 2018, and elected to have 
her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant 
received it on October 23, 2018. The Government’s evidence is identified as 
03/04/2019
 
2 
Items 1 through 6. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt 
of the FORM. She did not provide a response, submit documents, or object to 
any of the Government’s evidence. Items 1 through 6 are admitted into evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on February 11, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except those in ¶¶ 1.x and 
2.a, which she denied. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated into the findings 
of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. She married in 1999 and divorced in 2009. She 
has a 17-year-old child from the marriage. Her ex-husband pays court-ordered 
child support. She remarried in 2010. She has a 12-year-old stepchild. She has 
been employed by a government contractor since March 2011.1  
 
 In July 2017, Applicant completed an electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). Section 26 inquired if in the past seven years 
Applicant had any property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed; 
defaulted on any type of loan; had any bills or debts turned over to a collection 
agency; had a credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay 
any as agreed; was evicted for nonpayment; had wages, benefits, or assets 
garnished or attached for any reason; had been over 120 days delinquent on any 
debt not previously entered; or was currently over 120 days delinquent on any 
debt? Applicant responded “no.”2 
  
 In February 2018, Applicant was interviewed by a government 
investigator. She was confronted with each of the debts subsequently alleged in 
the SOR, except those in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.q. She acknowledged each debt 
and explained she failed to disclose each one due to oversight. She did not know 
the amount of each debt or when each debt became delinquent. She said the 
reason for the delinquencies was because she did not have enough money due 
to her husband’s unemployment. She told the investigator that she intended to 
pay each debt. She gave the investigator a time period for when each debt would 
be paid. It ranged from one week and up to five years. She also indicated she did 
not know when she would satisfy one of the debts.3  
 
 Applicant told the investigator that she paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.x owed to 
an apartment complex for a broken lease from 2011. She provided a document 
to the investigator, but it did not confirm the debt was paid. The investigator told 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Items 3, 4. 
 
3 
her that she could provide additional information to show it was paid. None was 
provided.4 This debt is not resolved.  
 
 Applicant told the investigator that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b was for a car 
repossession from 2004. She said she had reached a settlement agreement with 
the creditor that required her to make monthly payments for six months. The 
investigator gave her an opportunity to provide documents after the interview to 
substantiate the settlement. She did not provide documents to the investigator or 
in her SOR answer.5  
 
 Applicant told the investigator that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was for a broken 
rental agreement from an apartment she lived in from June 2011 to July 2013. 
She intended to settle the debt with monthly payments for six months. She did 
not provide supporting documentation.6  
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR regarding her failure to disclose any 
delinquent debts on her e-QIP, she stated:  
 
 This information was entered in as an error due to multiple 
corrections being made to my e-QIP. I would never do anything that 
would falsify my facts. The mistake was made after the attempt to 
make several correct[ions] to my e-QIP.7  
 
 Applicant subsequently provided an additional statement where she 
admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a, but stated: 
 
This information was entered in as an error due to corrections being 
made to my E-QIP. I would never intently falsify any information. 
Once again this mistake was made after correcting information 
(providing my address from 10 years ago) to my E-QIP.8. 
 
 Applicant did not voluntarily disclose her delinquent debts when she was 
interviewed by the government investigator. She told the investigator that her 
failure to disclose each delinquent debt when confronted was due to an 
oversight. There is no evidence supporting her assertions that she told the 
investigator she had previously disclosed her delinquent debts on her e-QIP or 
that there was a problem when she tried to correct other mistakes. I do not find 
Applicant’s statements credible. I find she intentionally failed to disclose 
delinquent debts on her e-QIP.  
                                                          
4 Items 3, 4. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 4. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
8 Item 2.  
 
4 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are corroborated by her admissions and 
credit reports from August 2017 and May 2018. Applicant did not provide 
evidence about when her husband lost his job; how long he was unemployed; 
her income; whether she has a budget; any proof that she paid any of the debts; 
or documents to substantiate that she paid a debt she disputed, or settlement 
agreements she indicated she had entered.9  
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, next to each debt (except ¶ 1.x), she 
admitted owing that debt and said that she had hired a credit repair company. 
She provided a letter from the company from September 2018, stating that it had 
been retained by Applicant to remove several fraudulent and/or inaccurate 
accounts from her credit file. It stated that its fraud department was investigating 
her accounts. Applicant acknowledged to the credit repair company that any 
accounts that she is financially responsible for will be negotiated and paid.10 
Applicant did not provide any statements, explanations, or other evidence that 
any of the alleged accounts, which she admitted owing, were due to fraud or 
were inaccurate. There is no evidence Applicant has received financial 
counseling from this company or other entity.11 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, 
the administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in determining an applicant’s 
eligibility for a position of trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG 
¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
9 Items 2, 3, 4. 
 
10 Item 2. 
 
11 Item 2.  
 
5 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, states that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that 
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty 
hours. The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in 
individuals to whom it grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, 
risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial 
considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial 
distress can also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a 
possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern 
such as excessive gambling mental health conditions, substance 
misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in 
illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. Affluence 
that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, 
including espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might 
knowingly compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It 
encompasses concerns about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other 
qualities essential to protecting sensitive information. An individual who is 
financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in 
handling and safeguarding sensitive information.12 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that began accumulating in 
about 2004, which she has been unable to pay or resolve. There is sufficient 
evidence to establish the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or 
identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a 
non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documentary proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute 
or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she has paid or resolved any of 
her delinquent debts. Her debts are recent and ongoing. She has not established 
a reliable financial track record. There is insufficient evidence to conclude future 
financial problem are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to the loss of income due to her 
husband’s unemployment. This was beyond her control. For the full application of 
 
7 
AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. She 
did not provide details as to when her husband lost his job; how long he was 
unemployed or if he is still unemployed. She told the government investigator 
that she had payment agreements with some creditors. She also said she would 
pay some debts within a week and other debts within future time periods. She did 
not provide proof that she paid any of the creditors. The evidence is insufficient to 
show she has acted responsibly regarding her delinquent debts since they began 
accumulating. AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she has participated in credit or 
financial counseling or has a budget to show responsible financial management. 
Although she recently hired a credit repair company, there is insufficient evidence 
to conclude that there are clear indications that her financial problems are being 
resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
  
 Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence of good-faith efforts to resolve 
any of her debts. She disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.x, but did not provide 
evidence to substantiate her dispute and actions. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e) do not 
apply.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is 
any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the 
security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with 
the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern 
and may be disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine 
security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities. 
 
Applicant has had financial issues since at least 2004 when her car was 
repossessed. She accumulated numerous delinquent debts since then. She did 
not disclose any of the delinquencies on her e-QIP. She did not voluntarily 
disclose them when she was interviewed by a government investigator. When 
confronted with each delinquent debt, she told the investigator that her omissions 
 
8 
were due to oversight. She did not mention to the investigator that she had 
previously disclosed them on an earlier version of her e-QIP, but after editing the 
e-QIP the debts were not saved or entered. I did not find her explanation 
credible. I find Applicant deliberately failed to disclose her delinquent debts. The 
above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following 
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
There is insufficient evidence that Applicant made a prompt good-faith 
effort to correct the omissions and disclose her financial problems before being 
confronted by the government investigator. She told the investigator that she 
failed to disclose each of her delinquent debts was due to oversight. Applicant’s 
failure to provide answers on her e-QIP truthfully is not minor. The Government 
relies on those seeking positions of trust to honestly disclose information, which 
may sometimes be derogatory. Failure to do so raises questions about a 
person’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 
17(c) do not apply.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate 
an applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge 
should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light 
of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. She has a history, beginning in 2004, of financial 
problems. She deliberately failed to disclose these issues on her e-QIP. She told 
the government investigator that she had settlement agreements with some of 
her creditors, but failed to produce documentary evidence to substantiate her 
statements. She recently hired a credit repair company to dispute fraudulent or 
inaccurate debts, but this action does not mitigate her failure to address or 
resolve the numerous delinquent debts she admitted she owed. She failed to 
provide information about her current finances or the period of time her husband 
was unemployed. Applicant has not established a sufficient reliable financial 
track record. There is insufficient evidence to overcome the trustworthiness 
concerns raised under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, 
personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.x:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility 
for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
