       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
     )      
 ----------------------------------        )       ISCR  Case No.  18-02745   
    )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel
      For Applicant: Pro se      
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant 
failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding his alcohol consumption. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Statement of Case
On December 6, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent, Directive 4, National Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), effective June 8, 2017.
03/29/2019
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 3, 2019. He elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on February 5, 2019, and interposed no objections to the materials in
the FORM. He timely supplemented the FORM with additional information about his
alcohol consumption on March 5, 2019. Applicant’s submission was accepted without
objection as Item 7. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2019. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline G, Applicant allegedly was involved in five alcohol-related
incidents between July 1984 and March 2016. Allegedly he was (a) employer-referred to
an alcohol treatment facility following his fall in March 2016, as a condition of his return to
work; (b) received treatment at the treatment facility for diagnosed alcohol use disorder-
severe from July 2016 to September 2016; and (c) evaluated by a licensed clinical
psychologist in October 2018 and was diagnosed with alcohol use disorder-mo  d  e  r a  t e  .      
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR
with explanations. He claimed the three alcohol-related incidents between 1984 and 1994
are aged. He claimed that the partial withdrawal symptoms he experienced in the alcohol
treatment facility in March 2016 were caused by a combination of prescribed sleep aid
Ambian and high doses of pain medication. Further, he claimed that all of the group
members being treated at the alcohol treatment facility were required to attend meetings
convened by Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). 
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 57-year-old engineering manager for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant never married and has no children. (Items 3-4) He earned a bachelor’s
degree in May 1997 from an accredited university and a master’s degree from another
respected university in engineering management in January 1999. (Item 3) Applicant
reported no military service. Since October 2000, Applicant has worked for his current
defense contractor as an engineer in various capacities, most recently as an engineering
manager. (Items 3-4) 
Applicant’s alcohol history
Between 1984 and 1994, Applicant was involved in four alcohol-related incidents.
(Items 2-4) In two of the incidents (1984 and 1986), he was charged with drinking in 
public. In September 1989, records confirm that he was arrested and charged with driving
while intoxicated (DWI). In court, he was ordered to complete alcohol education classes in
a state-sponsored alcohol safety action program (VASAP), which he completed. And, in
2
October 1994, he was arrested and charged with DWI, reckless driving, and refusal of a
blood-alcohol content (BAC) test at the scene. Appearing in court, he was ordered to
complete alcohol education classes at his state’s VSAP. (Items 2-4) Applicant is credited
with completing this program.
         In March 2016, Applicant was hospitalized after he fell and broke both legs.(Items4-
5) Hospital personnel noted that Applicant displayed symptoms of alcohol withdrawal
while he was hospitalized. (Items 4-5) While receiving physical therapy for a little over two
months (July 2016 to September 2016) at a local treatment facility, he was out of work
and receiving disability benefits. (Items 4-5) While in outpatient treatment at this facility,
he told treatment providers that he would regularly consume six to eight measured drinks
nightly during the weekdays and up to a pint of hard liquor and beer on weekends. (Item
5) A licensed substance abuse provider at the facility diagnosed him with alcohol use
disorder-severe and mandated him to participate in six weeks of group therapy and
submit to random drug and alcohol testing for a year after the incident. (Items 5-6) During
treatment he was mandated to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings and remain
abstinent. After treatment ended, facility providers recommended that he continue to
adhere to an abstinence regimen. (Items 5-6). With this advice, Applicant still continued to
drink after completing his outpatient treatment regimen, albeit at a reduced rate. (Item 6)
Because his March 2016 accident involved alcohol, Applicant’s employer required
that he attend alcohol-related counseling before he would be permitted to return to work.
Applicant, in turn, was evaluated by a licensed clinical psychologist in October 2018.
(Item 6) After taking personal history from Applicant and administering tests to him, Dr. A
diagnosed Applicant with alcohol use disorder-moderate. (Item 6) 
Based on her evaluation and diagnosis, Dr. A assigned a poor prognosis without
sustained abstinence by Applicant. (Item 6) By Applicant’s own accounts in his March
2017 interview with an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), and
in his more recent 2018 evaluation session with Dr. A, he continues to drink, albeit in
reduced amounts. (Items 4 and 6) To what extent he continues to drink is unclear, and
cannot be answered without more updates from Applicant.
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
3
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Alcohol Consumption
              
The Concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  AG ¶ AG 21.
    B  urden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
4
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant comes to these proceedings with a considerable history of alcohol-
related incidents over a 34-year period dating to 1984. Between July 1984 and October
1994, he was arrested for four alcohol-related offenses and pled guilty to three. Principal
security issues raised in this case center on Applicant’s alcohol-related offenses covered
by Guideline G, and his more recent treatment and evaluation by licensed mental health
providers following a fall in March 2016.
Alcohol Consumption concerns
         Applicant’s completion of a employer-directed alcohol treatment program in July-
August 2016 followed his recurrent alcohol-related incidents over a 25-year period. His
history of alcohol-related incidents and ensuing diagnoses and qualified prognoses by
licensed clinicians raise concerns over his risk of future alcohol abuse and warrant
application of several disqualifying conditions (DCs) of the AGs for alcohol consumption
(AG ¶ 21) may be applied: DC ¶¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such
as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace
or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol use
or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol abuse disorder,” 22(c)
“habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless
of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use disorder,” and DC 22(d),
“”diagnosis by a duly qualified mental health professional (e.g., physician, clinical
psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social worker) of alcohol use disorder,” fully
apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.
Applicant’s completion of an employer-directed treatment program in July 2016
and employer-referral for alcohol evaluation in October 2018 included both diagnoses
and prognoses. Professional evaluators at the outpatient health clinic and Dr. A’s facility
diagnosed Applicant with alcohol use disorder that ranged from severe (the health clinic
evaluator’s assessment to moderate (Dr. A’s diagnosis). Both evaluators assigned  poor
5
prognoses for so long as Applicant elected to continue drinking. At this time, it is not
clear how much alcohol Applicant consumes weekly, or his frequency of use.
Based on Applicant’s long history of alcohol-related arrests, the more recent
findings of his substance abuse alcohol evaluators, and his own acknowledgments of his
continued consumption of alcohol, albeit at reduced rates, none of the potentially
available mitigating conditions are available to Applicant. At this time, it is too soon to
make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability to avoid abusive drinking in the
future.
Whole-person assessment
Applicant’s lengthy civilian service with his employer (over 18 years) is respected
and appreciated. Endorsements from his current employer and from others who know
him were not provided and cannot be evaluated for probative value. Considering the
record as a whole, safe predictions cannot be made at this time about Applicant’s ability
to avoid alcohol-related incidents in the foreseeable future and abstain from drinking in
compliance with his professional evaluators. Alcohol concerns are not mitigated. 
                                               Formal Findings
           In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:          Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, conclusions
are warranted that it is not  clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or contin-
ue Applicant’s security clearance.  Clearance is denied. 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
6
  
7
