1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-02121 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jason R. Perry, Esq.  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 7, 2016. 
On September 26, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline C, foreign preference. The DOD 
CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 7, 2018, denying all of the SOR 
allegations under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline C, foreign preference. 
Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on January 25, 2019. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
03/20/2019
 
2 
 
(DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for February 26, 2019. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 - 3 were admitted into evidence without objection. At 
the hearing, Applicant testified, and he submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A – N, which 
were admitted without objection. He had a character reference witness testify on his 
behalf. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 6, 2019.  
 
    Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
relating to Turkey. Applicant did not object and the request was approved. The request 
concerning Turkey and attached supporting documents were not admitted into evidence 
but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Some of the facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact below.   
 
Request for Administrative Notice - Turkey 
 
The request listed supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts. A risk assessment in this case necessitates administrative notice of facts 
concerning Turkey. I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the HE 1 
source documents, and incorporated them by reference. The facts are summarized in 
the written request and will not be repeated in this decision. However, of particular note 
are the following salient facts from HE 1: 
 
Notwithstanding the long-time strategic U.S. – Turkey relationship, current 
country conditions are problematic.  The U.S. State Department urges citizens to avoid 
travel to Turkey due to terrorism and arbitrary detentions. Terrorist groups explicitly 
target Western tourists and expatriates for kidnapping and assassination. The potential 
for terrorist attacks in Turkey, including against U.S. citizens and interests, remains 
high. The U.S. Government does not allow family members to accompany personnel 
assigned to the U.S. Consulate in Adana unless they are working in the Consulate. 
Turkey is a transit country for foreign terrorist fighters wishing to join the Islamic State of 
Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and other terrorist groups fighting in Syria and Iraq. Since a July 
2016 coup attempt, the Turkish Government has operated under a state of emergency, 
with far reaching effects on the country’s society and institutions, restricting the exercise 
of many fundamental freedoms. Profound and significant human-rights abuses persist.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He was born to a Kurdish family in Turkey and came to 
the United States (U.S.) in 1998 to attend college. He was naturalized as a citizen in 
September 2001. (GE 1) He obtained a bachelor’s degree in 2005, and a master’s 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise stated, the basis for these findings of fact is Applicant’s Security Clearance Application 
(SCA) dated October 7, 2016 (GE 1) and Applicant’s answers to interrogatories verifying the summary of 
a personal subject interview conducted on November 22, 2016. (GE 2) 
 
 
3 
 
degree in 2008. (Tr. 31-33) Applicant was married in August 2017 to a U.S. citizen who 
is a special needs teacher. (Tr. 67-69) They have a one year old daughter. (Tr. 34) He 
has applied for a job as a linguist for a federal contractor attached to armed forces of 
the U.S. overseas, and he needs a security clearance. Applicant’s elderly parents still 
live in Turkey. He also has a sister and two brothers living in Turkey with their families. 
(Tr. 33) None of Applicant’s family members were ever affiliated with, or worked for, the 
Turkish government and they are not political. (Tr. 77)  
 
 Applicant presented testimony from his supervisor who was also simultaneously 
serving as a military reservist. The witness testified that he was a master sergeant in the 
U.S. Army reserve with 17 years of active duty. He hired Applicant and directly 
supervised him on the job as a federal contractor. (Tr. 38-40) He testified that Kurds are 
commonly persecuted in Turkey, and they are in disfavor. He testified that Applicant is 
honest, reliable, and loyal to the U.S. He would have no hesitation recommending 
Applicant for a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant testified that his Turkish passport expired in 2014 and he affirmatively 
renounced his Turkish citizenship in 2018 through the Turkish Embassy in the U.S. (Tr. 
34, 54, 61) He currently works for one federal contractor, but he is sponsored for a 
security clearance by another contractor to be a linguist. (Tr. 42) He testified credibly 
that Kurds are not allowed to keep their own names in Turkey and there is widespread 
prejudice against them. (Tr. 45-49) He has no real estate interests, bank accounts, or 
other financial interests in Turkey. (Tr. 50) He has no plan to live in Turkey again. (Tr. 
79) He has never been approached by government – intelligence services during his 
visits to Turkey. (Tr. 53)  
 
 Applicant was married previously from 2002 to 2009, and he came to the U.S. on 
a student visa, sponsored by his first wife. She was a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 57) He has a 
U.S. passport, which is set to expire in April 2019. He has applied for renewal of that 
passport. (Tr. 58-60) He traveled to Turkey to visit his parents from May to June of 
2012; May to June 2013; and his last trip to Turkey was in May 2015 for one month. (Tr. 
59-61) He used the Turkish passport until it expired in 2014, but he always used the 
U.S. passport to enter the U.S. He speaks Kurdish, Turkish, Italian, and French. 
(Answer to SOR) He contacts his 73-year old mother by Skype about once a week, and 
his father occasionally. (Tr. 82) His two brothers are in the cleaning business. He 
contacts them, and his sister, about once every three months. (Tr. 85) He does not 
stand to inherit anything from his parents. (Tr. 85)  
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 7, 2016.2 
In section 19 (Foreign Contacts) of his SCA, he disclosed his foreign family members 
living in Turkey. In section 20B (Foreign Activities) he disclosed that he was involved as 
president of the People’s Democratic Union (“HDP”) political party from January 2016 to 
July 2016. He explained that it was the third largest political party in Turkey. He 
accepted the unpaid position to bolster his resume with volunteer experience.3 He 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 1, p. 63. 
 
4 
 
majored in political science in college. He was contacted by a citizen of Denmark to 
operate this organization because that individual needed Applicant’s social security 
number to set up the non-profit organization. (Tr. 99) His duties were primarily 
administrative. The stated goals of this non-profit organization were to promote human 
rights and it was generally opposed to the Turkish government. (Tr. 100) Applicant 
testified that its values are closely aligned with the U.S. Government’s interests. 
(Tr.101) He accepted no money for the organization or on its behalf. (Tr. 128) 
   
 Applicant testified credibly that he voted one time in a Turkish election via the 
Turkish embassy in the U.S. in 2015 after he became a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 123) He still 
maintained his Turkish citizenship at that point. Essentially, he voted because he 
disagreed with the incumbent Turkish government’s human-rights abuses and policies. 
He now votes in U.S. elections. His parents are retired professionals and were never 
involved with the Turkish Government or politics. His family members believe that 
Applicant is in the information technology industry, and he does not discuss his work 
with them. (Tr. 116)  
 
 He owns automobiles, but no real estate, in the U.S. where he has lived for 22 
years. He maintains modest savings accounts and a 401(k) retirement plan in the U.S. 
(Tr. 69) Applicant attached seven favorable character-reference letters to his Answer. 
He also attached a letter to the Turkish embassy in the U.S. verifying that he renounced 
his citizenship and was no longer a Turkish citizen effective March 15, 2018. (AE N) He 
provided three additional character references at his hearing. (AE D,E,H) He also 
provided a letter from the dean of his university stating that Applicant was on the dean’s 
list for one semester (AE I), plus copies of his college transcript and diplomas from his 
undergraduate and master’s degrees. (AE K,L,M)  
 
         Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
 
6 
 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant’s parents, sister, and two brothers, are citizens and residents of 
Turkey. He contacts his mother weekly as a dutiful son via Skype, and his siblings less 
frequently. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion, both directly and through his family members. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are 
implicated by the evidence. Accordingly, Applicant’s relationship with his parents and 
siblings, who are citizens and residents of Turkey, creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
  
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
Applicant has demonstrated a long-standing preference for working and living in 
the U.S. for the last 22 years. He is sponsored by a federal contractor for employment 
overseas as a linguist and he expressed a willingness to serve in dangerous conditions. 
He has the background, upbringing, and understanding of languages and culture that is 
invaluable to U.S. foreign interests. Although he is presumed to have strong bonds of 
affection with his parents and siblings in Turkey, these bonds are not sufficient to offset 
or overcome his demonstrated, long-term commitment to the U.S. and intention to 
continue in its service under dangerous conditions.4  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
                                                          
4 The Appeal Board has held that “an Applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United States 
is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an Applicant in a Guideline B case.” ISCR Case 
04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. March 20, 2007). 
 
 
7 
 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.5  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the U.S. over 
matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially 
in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing whether 
an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, the country is known to conduct intelligence operations 
against the U.S., or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant’s parents are Turkish citizens residing in Turkey, and his siblings are 
citizens and residents of Turkey, which is an unstable regime. His contact with them is 
infrequent by Skype. There is no indication that any of his family members are affiliated 
with the Turkish government or intelligence services. Applicant’s foreign family 
members do not pose an unacceptable security risk. His wife and child are in the U.S., 
and his future lies here. He has no plan to return to Turkey. There is sufficient evidence 
to conclude that Applicant would report contacts with his relatives by foreign intelligence 
agents, and that he has a long-term commitment to the U.S. All of the mitigating 
conditions in AG ¶ 8 are applicable to the contacts with family members, which are 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.b.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 explains the security concern about foreign preference stating: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
AG ¶ 10 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying including: 
 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
8 
 
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country; 
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by any 
country other than the United States; 
 
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; 
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment,        
position, or political office in a foreign government or military 
organization; and 
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in any way that conflicts with U.S. national 
security interests; 
 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law; and 
 
(f) an act of expatriation from the United States such as declaration of 
intent to renounce U.S. citizenship, whether through words or actions. 
 
AG ¶ 10 lists some examples that raise foreign preference concerns. Applicant 
voted in a Turkish election one time, he was president of HDP for a six month period, 
and he previously possessed a Turkish passport. If his fleeting participation in HDP 
were determined to be participation in foreign activities, then ¶ 10(d) might be applicable 
to demonstrate foreign preference and raise a security concern.     
 
AG ¶ 11 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national security 
interests; 
 
(b) dual citizenship is based solely on parental citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country, and there is no evidence of foreign preference; 
 
(c) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the foreign 
citizenship that is in conflict with U.S. national security interests; 
 
(d) the exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen; 
 
(e) the exercise of the entitlements or benefits of foreign citizenship do not 
present a national security concern; 
 
 
9 
 
(f) the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, entity, or 
association that poses a low national security risk; 
 
(g) civil employment or military service was authorized under U.S. law, or 
the employment or service was otherwise consented to as required by U.S. 
law; and 
 
(h) any potentially disqualifying activity took place after receiving the 
approval by the agency head or designee. 
 
AG ¶¶ 11(b), (c) and (e) apply. Applicant was born to Turkish parents and came 
to the U.S. at age 19. He expressly renounced his Turkish citizenship and he has 
applied for a job as a linguist overseas serving the United States. He is patriotic towards 
the United States and is willing to sacrifice for the United States. He voted one time in a 
Turkish election with the hope that Turkey would adopt democratic values. That did not 
conflict with U.S. foreign policy or present a national security concern. He also had  
fleeting involvement with the HDP, but did not view that as contrary to U.S. foreign 
policy. I do not construe it as participation in foreign activities. He produced 
documentary evidence that he renounced his Turkish citizenship. His oath of allegiance 
contains a renouncement of foreign allegiance. If they ever existed, foreign preference 
security concerns are mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant is 40 years old. He submitted 
character references from his supervisors attesting to his allegiance to the U.S. Virtually 
 
10 
 
all of his adult work life was spent supporting U.S. interests. He has stepped forward to 
serve as a linguist overseas. He is married with a child and committed to his life here.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no serious questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has  
mitigated foreign influence security concerns and foreign preference security concerns.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                      Paragraph 1, Guideline B:                         FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:                             For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
                      Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:                             For Applicant 
 
                   Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
          ________________________ 
          Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                Administrative Judge 
