1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
)
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01504 
) 
In the matter of: 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On June 8, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence).1 In a response dated August 9, 2018, Applicant admitted the sole allegation 
raised and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned this case on November 1, 2018. On 
January 7, 2019, a notice was issued setting the hearing for January 24, 2019. The 
hearing commenced as scheduled.  
The Government offered three documents, which were accepted into the record 
without objection as Government exhibits (Exs.) 1-3. Applicant gave testimony, 
introduced four witnesses, and offered four items, which were accepted into the record 
without objection as Exs. A-D. A transcript (Tr.) of the proceedings was received on 
February 5, 2019, and the record was closed.  After my review of the record as a whole, 
and in light of the applicable directive, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate foreign 
influence security concerns. 
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, the AG were amended. The 
present AG, applied here, is in effect for any adjudication dated on or after June 8, 2017.  
03/08/2019
  2 
 
  Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about the People’s Republic of China (China). The request was offered 
as Government Ex. 3. Applicant did not object to its admission. I have taken 
administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported by source 
documents from official U.S. Government publications.2 The facts considered include, 
but are not limited to, the following: 
 
China has an authoritarian government, dominated by its Communist Party. It 
has a poor human rights record. China suppresses political dissent, engages in arbitrary 
arrests and detentions, forced confessions, torture, mistreatment of prisoners, and 
religious suppression.  
 
China is the world’s most active and persistent perpetrator of economic 
espionage. It is among the most aggressive countries in seeking sensitive and protected 
U.S. technology, as well as military and economic intelligence. China targets the United 
States with active intelligence-gathering programs, both legal and illegal. Its focus is on 
obtaining information and technologies from the United States that could be beneficial to 
China’s military modernization and economic development.  
 
China’s intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, 
frequently seek to exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can 
use their insider access at work to steal trade secrets, often using removable media 
devices or e-mail. Recent cases involving actual or attempted espionage by China 
against the United States, as well as incidents involving the illegal export of sensitive 
technology to China, exist.  
 
In China, authorities routinely monitor telephone conversations, facsimile 
transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and Internet communications. Authorities open 
and censor mail. Its security services have entered personal residences and offices to 
gain access to computers, telephones and fax machines. Hotel guest rooms are 
sometimes bugged and searched for sensitive or proprietary materials. The U.S. State 
Department warns that United States citizens have been interrogated or detained for 
reasons stated to be related to “state security” whilst in China. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old information technology professional (assistant 
administrator) who has worked in the same capacity for various contractors for almost 
12 years. She has been in her current job for eight years. Applicant has earned a 
                                                          
2 I also take notice of an Associated Press (AP) article, dated September 10, 2018, by Christopher 
Bodeen (Group: Officials destroying crosses, burning bibles in China): “China’s government is ratcheting 
up a crackdown on Christian congregations in Beijing and several provinces, destroying crosses, burning 
bibles, shutting churches and ordering followers to sign papers renouncing their faith, according to 
pastors and a group that monitors religion in China. . . . The campaign corresponds with a drive to 
“Sinicize” religion by demanding loyalty to the officially atheist Communist Party and eliminating any 
challenge to its power over people’s lives. 
 
  3 
 
bachelor’s degree, completed two years of post-graduate study, and received a post-
graduate certificate. Applicant is proud of her U.S. citizenship and this country. 
Moreover, she enjoys her right to vote and her ability to serve on a jury.  
 
Raised in China, Applicant and her husband immigrated to the United States in 
1999 after living in Europe for several years. She became a United States citizen in 
2010. The couple has two adult children who were raised and educated in the United 
States. The couple owns their own home. Remaining in China as citizens and residents 
are Applicant’s mother, father, one sister, and Applicant’s parents-in-law.  
 
A well-regarded colleague, neighbor, and friend, Applicant, her husband, and 
children have notable roots in their community. They are active in their Christian faith 
and have a strong interest in the faith and culture of their Jewish friends. Applicant’s 
husband has a long history of work for the United States government and with American 
media. They believe they have been fortunate to build careers and a family in the United 
States over the past two decades.  
 
Applicant has worked to impress upon her family and in-laws in China “how much 
she loves this country” and has “shared with all her four elder parents her most 
important treasure, her Christian faith.” (Tr. 26) Applicant also has one sister who is a 
long-term citizen of the United States, where she has raised her own family. Another 
sister lives close to their parents in China, where the sibling and her parents visit 
multiple times a week. (Tr. 40) Applicant maintains contact with her parents anywhere 
from daily to multiple times a week via telephone, email, and social media. She regularly 
contacts her sister in China. Applicant’s husband communicates with his parents 
weekly. Applicant visits her family in China annually. (Tr. 41, 45) Her parents and sister 
have visited the United States from China once or twice in the past decade. (Tr. 42-43) 
 
 Applicant is personally aware of the nature of the Chinese government. During 
the uprising at Tiananmen Square in 1989, Applicant joined her fellows from academe 
in demonstration against that government. As a result, she was interrogated several 
times and threatened with imprisonment. During China’s Cultural Revolution, her 
parents and in-laws “all were made to suffer physically and emotionally, how bad you 
can’t imagine.” (Tr. 33) None of these kin mention Applicant’s husband’s work with a 
U.S. governmental entity. (Tr. 33) She noted that her husband’s employment placed 
them at risk every year when they traveled to China. (Tr. 33) Every time they return to 
China they keep a “very low profile . . . and don’t want to tell people where [they] work 
because [they are] concerned and worried about [their] security.” (Tr. 33) Applicant 
noted: “every time when we go back to China, we feel our life is threatened.” (Tr. 37) 
 
In the past, a few of Applicant’s husband’s siblings were contacted to talk to the 
police. (Tr. 34, 44) The siblings feel threatened because of Applicant’s husband’s work. 
(Tr. 37) Applicant stated: “[the police] want to warn them ‘why your brother works for [his 
employer?] . . . kind of threatening, you know?’ Even our relatives feel a threat because 
my husband works for [that entity]. It’s an anti-China entity.” (Tr. 34) The brothers have 
been asked to observe and report on Applicant’s husband’s activities. (Tr. 38, 44) One 
particular contact left a brother scared. (Tr. 44) Consequently, Applicant and her 
husband try to keep a low profile in order to avoid trouble for their families. (Tr. 44)  
  4 
 
It was also noted that Applicant’s parents and parents-in-law, all of whom are in 
their mid- to late-80s or early-90s and in declining health, are Christians. Because of 
their age and faith, they “keep a low profile in their daily lives” in China. (Tr. 36) 
Applicant posited that her parents and parents-in-law have not been interrogated 
because of their age. (Tr. 38) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s adjudicative goal is 
a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under the AG, the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount 
consideration. Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence that transcends beyond 
normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in 
those to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may fail to safeguard such information. 
The denial of a security clearance is in no way suggestive that an applicant is anything 
less than a loyal citizen. 
 
Analysis 
 
 Under the AG, foreign contact and interests, including, but not limited to, 
business, financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U. S. interests or 
otherwise be made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Assessment of foreign contact and interests should consider the country (China) in 
which the foreign contact or interest is included.  
  5 
 
 The AG lists nine available disqualifying conditions. Given that Applicant has 
multiple members of his family who are Chinese nationals living in China, I find the 
following apply:  
 
¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country, if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, 
and  
 
¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology.  
 
Under ¶ 8, two mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
  
¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 As a threshold issue, I note that China has an authoritarian government 
dominated by its Communist Party. It is the world’s most active and aggressive 
perpetrator of economic espionage, particularly with regard to its pursuit of sensitive and 
protected U.S. technology and both U.S. military and economic intelligence. It is known 
to specifically target the United States with its intelligence-gathering programs. Both its 
government and private entities within its borders are known to exploit Chinese citizens 
and those with family ties to China in order to gain access to trade secrets and other 
protected information of U.S. origin. Human rights violations and suppression of 
religious freedom is common. China is known to monitor various forms of 
communication, including those made via the Internet. Consequently, heightened 
scrutiny is warranted in this matter.  
 
 Applicant is clearly and naturally a caring daughter, sister, and daughter-in-law. 
Regular communication is maintained with her family in China, and annual visits are 
made. What heightens interest in these relationships is that they involve citizens and 
residents of China, where aggressive economic espionage and exploitation of its own 
  6 
 
citizens is well documented. Indeed, Applicant’s own testimony emphasizes the 
concerns Chinese oversight has on its citizenry, and how her husband’s work has 
singled out their family in the past. With Applicant’s siblings advised by Chinese officials 
to observe and report on Applicant’s husband’s activities; Applicant and her family’s 
past interest to the Chinese state; and the fears shared by her family and relations 
abroad - “staying under the radar” represents little assurance that, at present, Applicant 
will not or could not be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of 
these kin and those of the United States. These conditions obviate application of ¶ 8(a). 
 
 Applicant presents a strong case tethering her life in and commitment to the 
United States. There is no question that her loyalty is to this country, and that she 
retains no sense of loyalty to China. Despite 20 years in the United States, and a 
lifetime raising her family, becoming a part of her church and community, and living her 
dream, certain factors cannot be overlooked. She is clearly devoted to her aged 
parents, parents-in-law, and sister in China. They maintain regular telephonic and 
electronic contact, and Applicant and her husband visit China annually. They do so in 
full knowledge that her husband’s work lifts them from the low profile they attempt to 
maintain into a spotlight, a beam clearly proven to raise the interest of Chinese officials 
and which continues to engender fear in all involved. Consequently, Applicant’s 
untested resolve cannot, at this time, be found to be unquestionably in favor of the 
United States. Therefore, ¶ 8(b) can only be found to apply in part.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. The ultimate determination of whether 
to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors related to the 
whole person concept have already been discussed, but some warrant emphasis. 
 
Applicant is a mature, information technology professional with a bachelor’s 
degree and post post-graduate certificate. Raised in China like her husband, the two 
married in Europe and moved here about 20 years ago. Applicant became a U.S. citizen 
in 2010. Applicant’s parents, parents-in-law, and a sister at citizens and residents of 
China. Applicant’s immediate family in China are known to Chinese officials due to her 
activities during the Tiananmen Square upheaval, and the activities of her parents and 
parents-in-law during the Chinese Cultural Revolution which led them to suffer  
unimaginable physical and emotional pain. Along with Applicant’s in-laws and her 
husband’s siblings, they are of interest currently to Chinese officials due to her 
husband’s work, a situation that Applicant admits is the cause of considerable worry and 
life-threatening fear. Their Christian faith also raises issues under the current Chinese 
administration.  
  7 
 
This process is not designed to elevate those already in fear of threat by a 
foreign entity into a position where their safety, or the safety of their loved ones, is 
further jeopardized. The situation here poses greater risk for Applicant, her family, and 
any safeguarded information in which she may be entrusted. This is particularly true 
during their worrisome annual trips to China, where they are made even more 
vulnerable to monitoring, threat, and manipulation. Applicant’s candid and forthright 
testimony highlights the concerns raised in this case. Foreign influence security 
concerns remain unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
