1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-02476 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 7, 2017. On 
October 26, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the
DOD on June 7, 2017.
Applicant timely  answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file 
of relevant material (FORM) on January 9, 2019. Applicant received the FORM on 
January 15, 2019. The Government’s evidence, included in the FORM  and identified as 
03/22/2019
2 
 
Items 1 through 5, is admitted without objection. Applicant did not provide a  response to 
the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 2019. Based on my review of the 
documentary evidence, I find that Applicant has not mitigated the financial concerns. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old machinist for a federal contractor. He is thrice divorced 
and has two adult children. (Item 2) He obtained his general education degree (GED) in 
1980.  He has never held a security clearance. He has been employed with his current 
employer since August 2017. (Item 3) 
 
Financial 
 
 The SOR alleges in 1.a-1.i, nine delinquent accounts including auto, rent, 
consumer, and medical collection or charged-off accounts totaling approximately 
$24,000. (Item 1) Applicant admitted four of the nine debts listed on the SOR , which total 
more than $12,000, and provided explanations. He denied the other accounts claiming 
that in the case of 1.a, the account was  “taken off the books” and he does not owe $9,500.  
He denied 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i  claiming that  they were unknown charges and creditors.  
(Item 1) His credit reports confirm the delinquent debts. (Items 4, 5) 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquent debts to a period of unemployment. He was 
unemployed from June 2016 to August 2016. He received unemployment benefits during 
this time to support himself. He also reported unemployment from August 2009 to 
September 2010. (Item 3) He provided no other information other than one of his divorces 
had a negative impact on his finances . 
 
 Applicant admitted that he owes the account in 1.b, in the amount of $8,555 due 
to unemployment. He did not provide any information as to how or when he would address 
the debt. 
 
 As to SOR allegations for  1.c, 1.d,  and 1.f (medical accounts), Applicant states 
that he could set up an installment plan if he knew the creditor or was provided an invoice. 
 
 As to 1.i, Applicant states that cable equipment was  left in the unit. He did not 
think he owed for the equipment. 
 
 During his investigatve interview in 2018, Applicant stated that most of the 
delinquent accounts were due to his former spouses or that he had no knowledge of the 
accounts. He told the investigator that he would look into them by contacting the creditor 
and trying to resolve the account. (Item 3) There is no information in the record as to 
Applicant’s income, budget, or any financial counseling. He provided no documentary 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 2) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
evidence of any kind to reflect any efforts he has made to pay his bills or settle with an 
installment plan. 
 
      Policies 
 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
4 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, and failure to pay his 
delinquent debts or set up any payment plans raises two disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
meeting financial obligations”. 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
5 
 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20 (e): consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or 
irresponsible spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, a history of late paymenys or of non-
payment, or other negative financial indicators. 
 
 Applicant provided no documentation that any of the delinquent accounts have 
been addressed or paid.  He was unemployed for a short time but he presented no nexus 
to the delinquent accounts. Neither did he present any specific information concerning his 
divorces.  He admitted that he owes some debts and promises to pay and set up plans. 
However, he provided no documentation to confirm his assertions. There is no information 
in the record as to his current salary. It is impossible to know if he is financially stable. 
Applicant has furnished insufficient information to meet his burden. There is no record of 
financial counseling. He provided no information that the accounts were not his accounts. 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
    Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
6 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Applicant is thrice divorced and has two adult children. He has worked as a 
defense contractor for several employers.    
 
 The record does not provide sufficient information as to why Applicant accrued so 
many debts. He was unemployed for a short time. He wants to pay his debts and promises 
to set up plans. He did not submit any documentation that he has done anything to resolve 
his accounts, or that he does not owe them. He has not received financial counseling. 
There is no information as to his salary and ability to pay his debts.   
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    Against Applicant:   
 
     Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
