       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
     )      
   )       ISCR  Case No.  18-00442   
    )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq.  
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant  
failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding her financial considerations. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of Case
On March 2, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent, Directive 4, National Security
Adjudicative Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated June 8, 2017.
03/29/2019
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 5, 2018, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to other judges on May 13, 2018 and July 13, 2018, respectively, and
reassigned to me on January 9, 2019. The case was scheduled for hearing on February
13, 2019. The Government’s case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5), which were
admitted without objection. Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and 15 exhibits (AEs
A-O), which were admitted without objection. The transcript was received on February 26,
2019.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit her the opportunity to supplement the record with documented responses from her
credit reporting agencies to her disputed accounts. For good cause shown, Applicant was
granted 30 days to supplement the record. (Tr. 80) Department Counsel was afforded five
days to respond.
Within the time permitted, Applicant provided eight separate documents that were
comprised of the following: excerpts from her 1099-Cs, proof of no collection accounts,
disputes and outcomes, comprehensive dispute history and outcomes, a personal
statement of Applicant, a student loan repayment plan, and additional letters of
recommendation. Applicant’s submissions were admitted as AEs P-W 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 14 delinquent debts
exceeding $134,000. Allegedly, these debts remain unresolved and outstanding.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all but one of the allegations in the
SOR with explanations. She admitted SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b-1.n and denied the allegations
covered by SOR ¶ 1.a for stated reasons that she is in full compliance with her loan
modification agreement of 2014. For the remaining debts, she claimed extenuating
circumstances associated with periods of unemployment and difficult circumstances
during the lengthy economic downturn beginning with the 2008 market crash.  She further
claimed that her remaining listed debts no longer appear on her 2018 credit report. She
claimed that she has received financial counseling on the debts in issue. And, she
claimed that she is honored to be working for her current employer and the Army as a
contractor.
.
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 39-year-old statistician for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. Most of the allegations in the SOR were admitted by Applicant and are
adopted as relevant and material findings. The remaining allegation is reserved for fact-
finding based on the developed evidence at hearing. Additional findings follow with
respect to Applicant’s admitted allegations
2
Background
Applicant cohabits with her partner and has one child (age six months) from this
relationship. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 19) She earned a bachelor’s degree from a prestigious private
university in foreign affairs and a master’s degree in economics from a respected state
university in her former state of residence in December 2005. (GEs 1-2 and AEs G-I) She
attended graduate classes in statistics from the same state university between January
2014 and May 2016 but earned no degree or diploma. (GEs 1-2 and AEs G-I) Since
2017, she earned a graduate certificate from an accredited state university in her current
state of residence and is 12 hours short of earning a master’s degree from the same
university. (AEs G-I) Applicant reported no military service. 
Since January 2018, Applicant has worked full time as a statistician for her current
employer while she completes her graduate education studies. (GEs 1-2 and AEs G-H
and U; Tr. 20) Between 2015 and 2017 she worked for a technical services company in
her former state of residence as an analyst. (GE 1) Previously, she worked for other
employers in various technical capacities. (GEs 1-2 and AEs G-H and U) She held a
security clearance for a brief period in 2015 while she interned for the Army. (Tr. 21) For
almost several months (October 2012-January 2013), she was unemployed. (GEs 1-2)
During this period of unemployment, she devoted her energies to the real estate business
her parents started in her former state of residence and earned very little money (GE 1;
Tr. 21-24)  
Applicant’s finances
Between 2006 and the present, Applicant has operated a residential property
business with her mother. Between 2006 and 2008, she and her mother purchased 11
residential properties (single family homes) in her prior state of residence that ranged in
price from $69,000 to $180,000. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 24-26, 47-48) Applicant financed their
purchases primarily with mortgages in her name individually, with some initial
contributions from her mother who sold her home to help with the initial financing. (GEs 2-
5; Tr. 25-26, 66-68, 70) In 2018, Applicant and her mother purchased a 12   home in herth
prior state of residence and financed their purchase with a $64,000 mortgage. (GE 5; Tr.
47) Applicant and her mother purchased these properties with the primary goal in mind of
raising money for their retirement. (Tr. 25-26) All told, Applicant generated loan proceeds
for her residences totaling more than $1 million based on her sole credit. (GEs 2-5; Tr.
26-27, 45-46) 
Applicant has consistently borne full responsibility for the financing and
management of the 12 properties she purchased with her mother. (Tr. 26) Credit reports
and Applicant’s payment history confirm that all of the residences are currently rented,
and she is current with all of her mortgages. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 27-28, 46, 67) However, these
properties have little equity, and some are underwater according to Applicant. (Tr. 53-54) 
Besides the first mortgages on the 12 properties Applicant financed, Applicant
secured a second mortgage on one of her properties in the amount of $45,000 in 2006.
3
(GEs 2-5; Tr. 26-27, 70-71) The loan became delinquent in 2013 while Applicant was
unemployed. (Tr. 28-29) After talking with the lender about her situation in 2014, she was
able to obtain a loan modification on this loan that called for monthly loan payments of
$100. (AE A; Tr, 29-30) Applicant documented monthly payments since 2014 in
compliance with her modification agreement. (AE A; Tr. 29-30, 70)
Between 2008 and 2013, Applicant struggled with her finances and used her credit
cards to finance her household necessities and business expenses associated with her
rental properties. (GEs 2-5 and AEs G-H and U; Tr. 23, 71) Altogether, Applicant
accumulated over $134,000 in delinquent credit card debt during this 2008-2013 time
frame. (GEs 2-5) Three  of the listed delinquent SOR debts (¶¶ 1.b-1.d) were canceled by
the common creditor following Applicant’s unsuccessful efforts to dispute inaccuracies
and work out payment arrangements for the balances owed on all three delinquent
accounts.  (AEs B-D; Tr. 31-33) 
In December 2017, the creditor for SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b-1.d issued 1099-C
cancellation of debt notices for each of the debts that total approximately $21,000. (AEs
B-D; Tr. 31-32) Applicant is in agreement that the debts covered by the cancellation of
debt notices for SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b-1.d were in default at the time the cancellation notices
were issued and had not previously been addressed by her. Because of the cancellation
of the debts by the creditor for SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b-1.d, federal taxes became due on the
$21,000 in imputed income from the debt cancellations. Excerpts from Applicant’s 2017
federal tax return document Applicant’s inclusion of the imputed $21,000 as income from
the canceled debts. (AE P) Applicant, accordingly, is credited with including her
cancellation of debts covered in AE F as imputed income in her 2017 federal income tax
return. Whether she ultimately owed any taxes for tax year 2017 after accounting for
deductions is unclear. (AEs B-D and P; Tr. 33) 
Applicant, however, has not been able to address any of the remaining credit card
debts that exceed $99,000 in the aggregate. (GEs 2-5; Tr.33-39) Applicant disputed these
debts on grounds of inaccuracy (without disputing the entire amounts of the reported
debts), and they have since been removed from her 2018 credit reports. (GEs 2-3 and 5
and AEs G-H; Tr. 39, 68-69) None of the removed debts, though, reflect documented
disputed amounts, and Applicant did not provide any corroborative proof of her dispute
letters to the credit reporting agencies, who never responded to her. (GEs 2-5 and AEs E-
F; Tr.33-39, 72-79) Because Applicant has produced no evidence of her addressing any
of these SOR debts, the removal of these remaining consumer debts from her credit
reports cannot reasonably be attributed to payment or successful dispute initiatives, as
opposed to other reasons like payment satisfaction or the age of the debts. (Tr. 73-78)
Currently, Applicant has no specific plans in place to address any of her remaining
delinquent debts covered in the SOR. (Tr. 68)
For lack of sufficient income sources of her own and the economic unfeasibility of
raising rents on any of the 12 properties she owns, Applicant has not been able to make
any headway with her listed SOR debts and remains at risk to revenue setbacks on her
real estate should she encounter loss of tenants or other unanticipated real estate
4
expenditures in the future. (Tr. 82-83) She has been a full-time student throughout 2017
and 2018, while reportedly holding down a full-time position since 2018, and has not been
in a position to work out any payment plans with her remaining creditors or pursue any
realistic opportunities to consolidate her debts. (GE 4 and AEs G-H and U; Tr. 39-41) 
To her credit, Applicant enrolled in a financial credit counseling course in February
2019 and earned a certificate of counseling in February 2019. (AE L) At the time of her
counseling, Applicant did not request a debt repayment plan preparation from her
counselor, and none was prepared. (AE L) From her counseling sessions, she acquired
lessons about the importance of budgeting and staying within budget. (AE L; Tr. 83)  But
without a payment plan or plans in place, predictable assessments of her ability to mount
serious repayment efforts in the foreseeable future cannot be made.
Applicant currently grosses about $106,000 a year based on her 2017 federal tax
return and nets about $4,400 a month from her current employer and maybe $1,000 a
month from her real estate investments. (AE P; Tr. 39-41) She has a 401(k) retirement
plan with about $20,000 in the account. (Tr. 42) Significantly, she expressed no plans at
this time to use any of her monthly discretionary income to address any of her SOR
debts. Her repayment plans at this time, though, are limited to paying off the roughly
$155,000 in aggregate student loans she has, once she completes her graduate studies,
by setting aside $1,500 a month to pay off the loans. (AE V) 
Character references 
Applicant is well-regarded by friends, former colleagues and tenants, and
professors who have interfaced academically in her current graduate program. (AEs K
and W) All credit Applicant with loyalty, a strong work ethic, honesty, reliability, and
trustworthiness. 
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2©.
5
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
6
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulated delinquent debt that
she has amassed over a five-year period (2008-2013) Altogether, Applicant accrued
over $135,000 in delinquent debt, mostly from credit cards she used to finance her
residential properties and manage her home necessities. Most of her debts remain
unresolved and outstanding.
Financial Concerns
      Applicant’s incurring of delinquent debts warrant the application of three of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”;
19(b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Historically, the timing of addressing delinquent debts is critical to an assessment
of an applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following rules and
7
guidelines necessary for those seeking access to classified information or to holding a
sensitive position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR
Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s cited extenuating
circumstances (i.e., unemployment, the 2008 market crash, and her education
commitments) provide some mitigation credit for her failure to address her accrued
debts. Based on her cited circumstances, MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” has some
application to Applicant’s situation.  
Considering all of Applicant’s  cited circumstances, the “acting responsibly” prong
of  MC ¶ 20(b) has only limited application and cannot excuse her past failures to
address her debts with evidence of payments and payment plans that reflect at least the
beginnings of a good track record of addressing her remaining consumer debts. Failure
to make more good-fath efforts to address her remaining debts, precludes her from fully
availing herself of the  benefits of MC ¶ 20(b)  See ISCR Case No. 15-06440 at 3-5
(App. Bd. Dec. 26, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)
(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005). For similar reasons, MC ¶
20(d), “the individual initiated and is adhering to a  good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” is not available to her.
To be sure, all of Applicant’s remaining SOR debts have since been removed
from her credit reports. Historically, removal of delinquent debts from an applicant’s
credit reports has never been enough to satisfy the good-faith requirements for
favorably resolving the applicant’s delinquent debts. “That some debts have dropped off
his or [or her] credit report is not meaningful evidence of debt resolution.” ISCR case
No. 14-05803 at 3 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016)(citing ISCR Case No. 14-03612 at 3 (App.
Bd. Aug. 25, 2015) The Fair Credit Reporting Act requires removal of most negative
financial items from a credit report seven years from the first date of delinquency or the
debt becoming collection-barred because of a state statute of limitations, whichever is
longer. See 15 U.S. § 1681c. And, in Applicant’s case, she could not verify whether her
remaining SOR debts were removed because of her dispute letter, or for some other
reason. Removal of delinquent debts by themselves is not enough without other
evidence of good-faith payment initiatives to favorably resolve raised debt issues.
To her credit, Applicant has made some progress with some of her debts. She is
to be credited with keeping her real estate first mortgages in current status to date.
Compliance with the terms of her modification agreement with creditor ¶ 1.a and the
cancellation of debts with SOR creditors ¶¶ 1.b-1.d. and her ensuing inclusion of
imputed income from these debt cancellations on her 2017 federal income tax return is
worthy of credit to Applicant as well. In recognition of these combined efforts, she is
entitled to partial application of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated and is adhering to a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” of the financial
guideline.  Only partial benefit of MC ¶ 20(c)  “the individual has received or is receiving
financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a
non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is
8
being resolved or is under control.” For while the counseling was of meaningful benefit
to her in improving her understanding of the importance of budgeting and managing her
finances generally, she has not been able to use the counseling to make further gains in
resolving her remaining SOR debts.  
For lack of documented corroboration, other potentially applicable mitigating
conditions are not available to Applicant. Application of MC  ¶ 20(e), “the individual has
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debts which is the cause of
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue,” requires documentation of
Applicant’s reasonable dispute requests to the credit reporting agencies, which
Applicant could not provide. 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
In Applicant’s case, her failure to demonstrate more concerted steps in resolving her
SOR debts, a necessary beginning to stabilizing her finances consistent with clearance
eligibility criteria, is concerning. Her accumulated delinquent debt accruals and
heightened leveraging risks associated with her real estate portfolio place her at
considerable disadvantage in her ongoing efforts to bring her finances under control.
Taken together, her modest efforts to date in addressing her remaining SOR debts are
not enough at this time to warrant favorable findings and conclusions with respect to
raised security concerns about her finances. 
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. She has shown
insufficient  progress to date in addressing her remaining SOR-listed debts, even with
her increased discretionary income. While her payment efforts associated with her
mortgage debts, and to a lesser extent, her honoring of her tax obligations in connection
with her three SOR debt cancellations, merit positive credit.
Applicant’s general contributions to the U.S. defense effort through her Army
intern service and her statistical work are considerable and merit a good deal of respect
and appreciation. The endorsements she has received from former colleagues, 
tenants, and her former graduate school professor reflect positive on her overall loyalty,
honesty, reliability and trustworthiness. And, most importantly, the achievements she
has established in her academic pursuits are impressive and will serve her well in her
chosen field of statistics. But at this time, though, her positive credits are insufficient to
surmount historical trust and judgment issues associated with her debt accumulations
and inability to manage her finances in a sound and prudent manner, consistent with
meeting the high standards set for approval of eligibility to hold a security clearance.
9
Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing her finances reflect too little
evidence of restored financial responsibility and judgment to overcome reasonable
doubts about her trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect classified information
or occupy a sensitive position. See AG ¶ 18. Conclusions are warranted that her
finances are insufficiently stabilized at this time to meet minimum eligibility requirements
for holding a security clearance.  Unfavorable conclusions are entered with respect to
the allegations covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.n. Favorable conclusions are entered for SOR
¶¶ 1.a-1.d.  Eligibility to hold a security clearance under the facts and circumstances of
this case is inconsistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraphs 1.e-1.n:                           Against Applicant
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:                             For Applicant
  Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
11
  
12
