1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-02276 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Moira Modzelewski, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On October 11, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant responded to the SOR on November 3, 2018, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On December 20, 2018, 
Department Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on January 11, 2019. The hearing was convened as scheduled on 
February 25, 2019.  
Evidence 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which 
were admitted without objection. 
03/08/2019
 
2 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Afghanistan. Without objection, I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the request. The facts are summarized in the written request and will not 
be repeated verbatim in this decision. Of particular note is that the risk of terrorist 
activities in Afghanistan remains extremely high. No section of Afghanistan is safe or 
immune from violence, and the potential exists throughout the country for hostile acts, 
targeted or random, against U.S. and other Western nationals at any time. The 
country’s human rights record remains poor. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2013. He was born in Afghanistan to Afghan parents. His 
family fled to Pakistan in 1984 to avoid the war. They returned to Afghanistan in about 
2004. He was granted asylum in the United States in 2010 because of threats made 
against his family. He became a U.S. citizen in 2016.1 
 
 Applicant’s father is deceased. His mother is a citizen of Afghanistan, currently 
residing in the United States with Applicant. He used to send her money through a 
friend in Afghanistan, but he stopped in about 2017. He has ten brothers and sisters. 
Eight of his siblings live in European countries. He has a brother and a sister who are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. His sister is a widow who does not work outside 
the home. His brother is in school. Applicant also still has a few friends in Afghanistan. 
None of his family in Afghanistan have any direct connection to the Afghanistan 
government or any terrorist organization.2 
 
 Applicant’s fiancée is a U.S. citizen originally from Afghanistan. She is pregnant 
with their first child. He does not own any assets in Afghanistan. He and a partner invest 
together in flipping houses in the United States.3 
 
 Applicant worked as a language instructor on a U.S. military installation from 
2011 to 2013. He has worked under dangerous conditions as a linguist with the U.S. 
military in Afghanistan since 2014. He does not see his family when he is working in 
Afghanistan. He will occasionally call his family, but he does not tell them that he is 
working in Afghanistan. He credibly testified that his family in Afghanistan could not be 
used to coerce or intimidate him into revealing classified information.4   
 
 Applicant received a letter and certificates of appreciation from U.S. military 
personnel in Afghanistan. The U.S. personnel recognized Applicant for how his linguistic 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19-21, 30-33; GE 1-4. 
 
2 Tr. at 24-28, 36-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
3 Tr. at 26-29, 40-41. 
 
4 Tr. at 21-24, 27, 29-30, 33-36; GE 1-4; AE A-C. 
 
3 
 
skills, positive attitude, work ethic, and dedication increased their units’ readiness and 
contributed to the success of their mission.5   
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
5 AE A-C. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant’s mother, siblings, and some friends are citizens of Afghanistan. Two of 
his siblings and his friends are residents of Afghanistan. The potential for terrorist 
violence against U.S. interests and citizens remains high in Afghanistan, and it 
continues to have human rights problems. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a potential 
conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion. The above disqualifying conditions have been 
raised by the evidence.  
 
 
 
5 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Afghanistan. The nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record 
are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. He credibly testified that his family in 
Afghanistan could not be used to coerce or intimidate him into revealing classified 
information. The Appeal Board has held that such a statement, standing alone, is of 
limited value, unless there is record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar 
manner in the past in comparable circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous 
track record of complying with security regulations and procedures in the context of 
dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the 
national security.6 In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the 
Appeal Board discussed this issue as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
6 
 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
Applicant worked under dangerous conditions as a linguist with the U.S. military 
in Afghanistan since 2014. He was recognized by U.S. military personnel for how his 
linguistic skills, positive attitude, work ethic, and dedication increased their units’ 
readiness and contributed to the success of their mission. I find that Applicant can be 
expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 
8(a) is applicable to his relatives who are residing in the United States and Europe. AG 
¶ 8(b) is applicable to all of Applicant’s foreign contacts.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s work with the U.S. military in Afghanistan earned him praise from 
U.S. military personnel. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s proven record of 
action in defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable 
result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”7 The complicated state of affairs in 
Afghanistan places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that 
his foreign family members do not pose an unacceptable security risk. He has met that 
burden.  
                                                          
7 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
