1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 18-01219  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Moira Modzelewski, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
03/29/2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 16, 2017. On October 
15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) 
sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. 
The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on June 
8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant timely  answered the SOR and elected to have her case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file 
of relevant material (FORM) on December 4, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on 
December 12, 2018. The Government’s evidence, included in the FORM  and identified 
2 
 
as Items 1 through 6, is admitted without objection. Applicant responded to the FORM 
with a packet of documents, which was marked as Item A, and admitted into the record 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on March 12, 2019. Based on my review 
of the documentary evidence, I find that Applicant has  mitigated the financial concerns. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee for a federal contractor. She is separated from 
her husband who she married in 2011, and she has two adult children. (Item 2) She 
obtained her general education degree (GED) in 1990. She obtained an undergraduate 
degree in 2010. She has never held a security clearance. She has been employed with 
her current employer since June 2017. 
 
Financial 
 
 The SOR alleges in 1.a-1.m, 13 delinquent accounts including student loans 
totaling $53,781, medical collection or charged-off accounts, and consumer accounts for 
a grand total of approximately $60,382. (Item 1) Applicant admitted  debts listed on the 
SOR with the exception of 1.k-1.m, and provided explanations. She also denied one 
account (1.f) that had been paid, and the Government withdrew the allegation.  (Items 1, 
2) Her credit reports confirm the remaining delinquent debts. (Items 5, 6) 
 
 Applicant attributes her delinquent debts to  her husband who is now incarcerated 
and his inability to work due to mental illness. She also was unemployed from May 2016 
to June 2017, approximately 13 months. (Item 4) In addition she had a child who required 
surgery. She and her husband have been separated and she has a two-year protective 
order in place that forbids any contact other than from attorney to attorney. Applicant 
plans to divorce him.  With her response to FORM, she included a Marital Separation and 
Property Agreement. This court document requires Applicant’s husband to pay three 
medical debts which were the result of injuries Applicant sustained from her husband’s 
violent behavior.  (AE A) 
 
 Applicant explained that she purchased a home in 2008, but the property was in 
her name only. Her husband disappeared frequently and did not contribute to home or 
living  expenses. She managed to stay current with the mortgage after some difficulty. He 
also assaulted Applicant  and was often violent.  Applicant stressed that he also incurred 
bills that he did not pay, and Applicant was left with the accounts including medical and a 
cell phone account. Applicant submitted a social security statement that shows that her 
husband has not had any income for the majority of his life. (Item 2)   
 
 As to SOR allegations 1.a to 1.e, and 1.g,( student loans), Applicant stated that 
she had some student loans under NELNET that are in good standing. She submitted 
documentation with her response to FORM that a forebearance ended in March 2019; 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 3) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
and the six student loans are now  rehabilitated; and she is not past due on any balance. 
She submitted receipts from November, December, and January. She submitted her 
payment of $289.38, which is her new monthly payment on the consolidated student 
loans. (AE A) 
 
 As to SOR 1.h., Applicant provided documentation that she researched the 
account and has paid the phone account. (AE A). Applicant made two payments  of 
$405.52. The account is satisified in full. Her husband was responsible for the charges, 
and the property agreement provides that he reimburse her for  her payments to address 
the phone amount. 
 
 As to SOR 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k, three medical accounts totaling approximately $2,200, 
Applicant  paid $300 to date. The medical bills are for the hospitalization that occurred 
when her husband dislocated her finger. He is to pay the medical debts according to the 
property separation agreement, but she had decided to make payments as she doubts 
that he will. She provided documentation of her payments. (AE A) As to 1.k,  she disputed 
the account, and it has been removed from her credit report. She provided documentation 
that she paid the account in 1.l for lab work. 
 
 As to SOR 1.m, Applicant disputed the account in the amount of $2,911, as it is 
her husband’s account. However, despite the fact that he is to pay according to the marital 
property agreement, she has set up a payment arrangement of $55 a month automatically 
deducted from her account. She provided a receipt and documentation to prove her claim. 
(AE  A) 
 
 During her investigative interview in 2017, Applicant  candidly stated that she was 
behind on her mortgage payments due to unemployment and surgery. She also spoke of 
her payment plan for state taxes. However, she is now current with her mortgage. She 
has paid non-SOR debts as reflected in her response to FORM. She had no problems 
when she was working in a prior job for 12 years. Applicant went to school after work to 
improve her job opportunities. She used money from her 401(k) to help pay bills. Her 
marriage in 2011 created financial hardship. She stated that she had paid several of her 
husband’s debts. Since the assault, he is in jail. She has a protective order. She 
addressed her student loans and the medical debts, which  were in forebearance until 
March 2019. (Item 4) 
 
   
     Policies 
 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
4 
 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her credit reports, and failure to pay her 
delinquent debts or set up any payment plans raises two disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
6 
 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20 (e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of  the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the debt. 
 
 Applicant provided documentation that her student loans are consolidated and she 
is making timely payments. Her other delinquent debts have been satisified or disputed.  
She was unemployed for a year after having surgery. Her soon to be ex-husband 
assaulted her and caused the injuries which led to the medical debts. He contributed 
nothing to the home or living expenses. She submitted specific information about 
payments she has made. She provided a marital property settlement agreement. 
Applicant has furnished sufficient information to meet her burden. She is divorcing her 
husband who caused many of the financial problems. The five listed  mitigating conditions 
apply. 
 
    Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Applicant is separated from an abusive husband. He assaulted her and she 
suffered injuries from the assault which resulted in hospitalization. She has a protective 
order in place. He is now in jail. She was unemployed for one year. Circumstances beyond 
her control adversely affected her finances, and she acted reasonably and responsibly to 
address her delinquent debts. She took action and addressed her student loans and the 
other accounts.    
7 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:    For Applicant:   
 
     Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
