 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01759 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 19, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 10, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On July 3, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline G. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on August 4, 2018, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
September 5, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Notice of Hearing on September 11, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
October 2, 2018. The Government offered Government Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 5, 
 
2 
 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
presented Applicant Exhibit (AppX) A. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) 
on October 12, 2018. Pursuant to repeated requests, the record was left open for five 
months for the receipt of additional evidence. On January, 2, 2019; February 4, 2019; 
and March 4, 2019, respectively, AppXs B, C, and D were submitted, and received 
without objection. The record closed on March 4, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the one allegation of the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5.) 
He has been employed with the defense contractor since 2004, and has held a security 
clearance since 2013. (TR at page 18 line 16 to page 21 line 5.)  
  
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
 1.a. Applicant started drinking alcohol “regularly” in 2006. (TR at page 27 lines 
1~6.) Until 2006, his regular consumption would be about “eight drinks” at one sitting. 
(TR at page 27 line 17 to page 28 line 4.) That consumption “increased both in 
frequency and in quantity” in “about 2008.” (TR at page 28 lines 5~20.) In 2013, 
Applicant was diagnosed as suffering from “fatty liver disease,” but Applicant continued 
to consume alcohol. (TR at page 29 lines 1~24.) His treating physician thought 
Applicant was drinking excessively; and as a result, “advised . . . [Applicant] to quit 
drinking.” (Id.) However, Applicant continued to consume alcohol. 
 
 From September of 2013 until January of 2014, Applicant received treatment for 
his liver disease. (TR at page 33 line 3 to page 34 line 23.) There he “learned a lot 
about alcohol, alcoholism, or alcohol addiction.” (Id.) As a result, Applicant abstained 
from alcohol consumption until May of 2014. (TR at page 34 lines 15~23.) He then 
returned to its consumption, “more than approximately six drinks at the time during the 
week. On the weekend . . . it was variable but would tend towards more 10 drinks at a 
time.” (TR at page 37 line 18 to page 38 line 3.) In October of 2015, and again in 
February of 2018, Applicant was diagnosed as suffering from an “alcohol use disorder, 
moderate.” (GXs 4 and 5.) However, Applicant continued to consume alcohol until 
August of 2018, a month after the issuance of the SOR. (TR at page 18 lines 1~8.) In 
the last seven months, Applicant has been committed to his alcohol abuse recovery, as 
evidenced by his authored progress reports. (AppXs B~D.)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
3 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
  
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
4 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 22 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Three conditions may apply: 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) of alcohol use disorder; 
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; and 
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 Applicant was diagnosed as suffering from an alcohol use disorder in 2015 and 
again in 2018, but continued to consume the intoxicant. These facts establish prima 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate those concerns. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 23 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Three conditions may apply: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
                                                                                                                                  
Although it appears that Applicant now acknowledges his alcohol abuse problem; 
with only seven months of sobriety after more than a decade of abuse, it is too soon to 
say Applicant’s abusive consumption will not recur in the future. Alcohol Consumption is 
found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
5 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Alcohol 
Consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
