1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
------------------- ) ADP Case No. 18-00025 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
 For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
_____________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
The Applicant seeks eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) 
position designated ADP-I/II/III. On April 20, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued to her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a response dated 
January 22, 2018, she admitted seven of 16 allegations and requested a determination 
based on the written record. On April 20, 2018, the Government issued a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) with eight attachments (“Items”). The case was assigned to me on July 
26, 2018. Based on my review of the record as a whole, I find Applicant failed to mitigate 
financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
 Findings of Fact 
Applicant is a 53-year-old administrative assistant and consultant. Married for the 
third time, she is the mother of four adult children and two adult stepchildren. At issue are 
16 delinquent debts totaling about $80,000, as gleaned from her security clearance 
application (SCA) and credit reports submitted as Items 4 and 6 of the FORM. The 
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
03/25/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
overwhelming majority of these debts, about $68,558, consist of federal and state taxes 
owed (SOR allegations 1.c-1.f) Applicant cites the origin of many of these delinquent 
debts to a failed home remodeling business run by her second husband when she lived 
with him in about 2009, as well as to medical debts accumulated when she had no health 
insurance coverage.    
 
At issue in the SOR are the following delinquent debts: 
 
1.a – Collection account ($552) – Addressed. This balance and those noted below 
at 1.h ($1,160) and 1.j ($335) are related, consisting of the underlying debt and 
two collection efforts. While it is unclear how or when they were combined, 
Applicant provided a November 2017 receipt reflecting both entity names, 
payments of $1,381.48, and a showing the balance due is now zero. (FORM, Ex. 
A) 
 
1.b – Collection account ($286) – Addressed. This account was settled by payment 
of $184.69 in February 20018. (FORM, Ex. B) 
 
1.c-1.d – State tax liens ($28,291, $4,490) – In repayment. Applicant wrote that 
these 2009 business taxes were “rolled in” with personal income taxes from 2010 
and 2012. (FORM Response Narrative) Applicant explained that her portion of this 
debt, as opposed to that owed by her second husband, is $10,667.38. She 
provided a copy of a payment schedule and evidence of $446 debit payments 
since July 2017.  
 
1.e-1.f – Federal tax liens ($3,209, $32,568) – No progress shown. On some 
unspecified date, Applicant was told by a representative at the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) that as of October 2014, these 2007, 2009, and 2010 personal 
income taxes were no longer collectible. She wrote: “They could accept voluntary 
payments but would not create a payment agreement and would not track any 
payments.” She also wrote that the IRS’ “only solution . . . would be to create a 
‘mirror’ account which would separate my-ex-husband and myself and allow me to 
pay toward the total, showing my payments. A mirror account would take 90 days 
to create.” Applicant provided no documentary evidence substantiating where the 
status of these liens last was. (SOR Response Narrative) A February 2018 IRS 
letter shows the unpaid balances for 2007, 2009, and 2010 uncollectable because 
Applicant “can’t pay the money you owe at this time. . . .” (Supplemental FORM 
Response) It reflects $34,370.71 remains at issue. 
 
1.g – Medical collection ($2,553) – No documentary evidence. The balance is 
owed to a periodontist. Applicant ceased making payments on the balance in early 
2013. Applicant wrote she would commence making payments on the balance until 
paid, but provided no documentary evidence to that effect. (Ex. D) 
 
1.h – see 1.a above. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
1.i – Medical collection ($400) – Addressed. Applicant satisfied this debt by 
payment of the settlement amount of $133.64 in December 2016. (Ex. E) A second 
receipt from that date shows the balance as paid in full on deposit of $724. 
(Supplemental FORM Response) This account appears to be merged with the one 
below at 1.p. 
 
1.j - see 1.a 
 
1.k – Medical collection ($300) – Status unclear. Applicant provided a copy of an 
acknowledgement to debit $100 from Applicant’s account toward this surgical 
practice in December 2016. A handwritten notation indicates “pd in full 12/16,” but 
it is unclear if this is a settlement offer or even whether the $100 was drawn. An 
accompanying bank statement from April 2016 provides little insight. 
1.l – Medical collection ($3,805) - No documentary evidence. Applicant wrote that 
this delinquent balance was sufficiently old that she had to request it be put back 
on the provider’s books. It is unclear when or if this action transpired. She further 
conveyed she does not have to make monthly payments, currently owes $3,5479, 
and plans to pay the balance within the next two years.  
 
1.m – Medical collection ($485) – Addressed. Applicant offered a page from an 
Experian credit report showing: this account with an original balance of $485, 
payments made between September 2016 through January 2017, a handwritten 
notation stating “paid 12/15/16,” and no past due amount owed. The account was 
opened in 2014. Based on the payments made and lack of outstanding balance, it 
is probable this debt was paid.   
 
1.n – Medical collection ($1,047) Unaddressed – No documentary evidenced of 
progress by Applicant. 
 
1.o – Medical collection ($228) Unaddressed – No documentary evidenced of 
progress by Applicant. 
 
1.p – Medical collection ($668) – see 1.i above. 
 
Policies 
 
In this matter, The Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, is controlling. The DOD considers 
ADP positions to be “sensitive positions.” For a person to be eligible for sensitive duties, 
the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness must be such that assigning the 
person to a sensitive position is clearly consistent with the national security interests of 
the United States. AG ¶ 2.c. Applicants for ADP positions are entitled to the procedural 
protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination is made. 
(Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals, dated November 19, 2004)  
 
 
 
 
4 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive 
information. The Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States to grant 
or continue his or her access to sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security” standard requires that “any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). An eligibility for a public trust position decision 
is not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. It is merely an indication 
that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established 
for issuing access to sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this guideline 
is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts and both Federal and state tax-related 
liens. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do 
so;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax a required.  
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
As a threshold issue, it is noted that Applicant’s second husband had business 
problems that seem to have adversely affected Applicant’s finances. It is also noted that 
multiple debts were incurred because Applicant lacked medical insurance. However, 
insufficient information and documentary evidence was introduced to show she acted 
responsibly at the time the debts were incurred. At best, AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part 
regarding the creation of the debts at issue.  
 
There is documentary evidence reflecting attempts to address those debts over a 
three-year period. Between 2016 and 2018, Applicant addressed in varying degrees the 
delinquent debts at 1.a, 1.b, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j., 1.m, and 1.p. She also instituted a repayment 
plan for the state lien obligations noted at 1.c-1.d. The rest, including about $35,000 in 
unaddressed federal tax liens, either remain unpaid or lack documentary evidence 
reflecting effort on the part of Applicant. Applicant’s current financial condition is unclear, 
but it is shown that the IRS determined Applicant is presently unable to make payments 
on her tax balance. Further, there is no documentary evidence reflecting she has received 
financial counseling. Under these circumstances, it is difficult to surmise that Applicant is 
adhering to a holistic debt resolution or financial rehabilitation plan, has her debts 
currently under control, or has the present ability to do more to address her delinquent 
obligations. At best, I find AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part. Lacking evidence of financial 
counseling or that Applicant is adhering to an organized plan for addressing the debts at 
issue, none of the other conditions apply.  
 
 
 
 
6 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. Under AG ¶ 2(a), the need to utilize a “whole-
person” evaluation is set forth. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated 
my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old administrative assistant and consultant. She is the 
married mother of four adult children and two adult stepchildren. At issue are 16 
delinquent debts totaling $80,377. Of that sum, Applicant has shown progress or payment 
on nearly half of the debts in the past three years. State tax obligations in the amount of 
about $52,000 from about a decade ago are now in repayment with highly reasonable 
monthly payments of less than $500.  
 
What remains worrisome is how Applicant is to proceed with the rest of her 
delinquent debts. Applicant’s present finances and ability to make payment toward old 
debts is unclear. Her delinquent obligations include a debt to the IRS for over $40,000 
upon which the IRS states she cannot at presently pay. Applicant failed to describe her 
methodology or approach for addressing her debts in the past, and no strategy is 
expressed for resolving her remaining outstanding accounts in the future. This process 
does not expect an applicant to satisfy or address all of her obligations; indeed, 
Applicant’s demonstrated progress is commended. What is needed, however, is some 
description of a coherent and appropriate plan to address the remaining debts at issue 
going forward. Without such a scheme, her likelihood of success cannot be surmised. In 
light of the foregoing, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs1.h-1.j:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.n-1.o:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
