1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
[REDACTED] ) ISCR Case No. 18-02091 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement 
and Substance Misuse) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his past drug abuse and related criminal activities. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on June 12, 2017. On 
August 17, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines H and J. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017.  
Applicant answered the SOR on September 17, 2018, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on October 4, 2018. On October 5, 2018, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM,) which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5, was sent to 
03/22/2019
 2 
Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on October 
12, 2018, and responded on October 23, 2018. The case was assigned to me on 
December 6, 2018. On February 8, 2019, I reopened the record to allow both parties to 
submit any additional evidence. Neither of the parties submitted additional information, 
and I closed the record on February 22, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Under Guideline H, the SOR alleges that Applicant purchased and used 
methamphetamine with varying frequency from April 1995 through at least March 2015, 
and that he manufactured methamphetamine from approximately March 2012 through at 
least July 2012. The SOR further alleges that in July 2012, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with unlawful manufacture of a controlled substance, he later pled guilty and was 
sentenced to three years’ probation and fined. Applicant violated his probation, and it was 
revoked.  
 
Under Guideline J, the SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested in 2002 and 
charged with receiving stolen property, and was arrested in 2007 and charged with 
receiving stolen property and flight to avoid in-state detainer. The SOR cross-alleges the 
July 2012 arrest, conviction, and sentence. It further alleges that in March 2015, Applicant 
was arrested and charged with burglary, he pled guilty and was sentenced to 12 months 
imprisonment to be served concurrently with the 22 months of probation that had been 
revoked from the July 2012 arrest and conviction. Applicant admits each of the 
allegations, offers brief explanations, and states that since he was released from 
incarceration, he has paid his fines and is no longer on probation. Applicant’s admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old janitor employed by a defense contractor since April 
2017. Applicant has two minor children. (GX 3.) Applicant first use methamphetamine in 
April 1995 while at a party with a friend. He states that he became immediately addicted. 
He began to use methamphetamine, which he purchased on the street, daily. Over time, 
Applicant turned to theft to support his addiction, which resulted in the 2002 and 2007 
arrests. (GX 3; GX 4; GX 5.) 
 
In 2012, Applicant’s addiction escalated and he began to manufacture 
methamphetamine at home. His mother reported his activity to the police and Applicant 
was arrested and charged with manufacturing a controlled substance. He served 17 days 
in jail, and was sentenced to three years’ probation. Despite being on probation, Applicant 
continued to use methamphetamine. In March 2015, he broke into a residence 
presumably to steal items, but did not take anything. Applicant was alarmed by his 
behavior and, recognizing that he needed help with his addiction, sought out local law 
enforcement and turned himself in for arrest. (GX 3.) He was arrested and charged with 
burglary and his probation was revoked. Applicant pled guilty and was incarcerated from 
March 2015 until January 2017. (GX 3; GX 4.) 
 
 3 
Applicant successfully completed a drug treatment program and was accepted for 
work release in approximately September 2016. He was released from prison and 
successfully completed his probation in January 2017. He has been working for his 
current employer since April 2017, where he has been a crew leader for more than one 
year. He has fully paid his fines. (Response; Answer.) Applicant’s employer is an 
employment rehabilitation and placement program familiar with Applicant’s background. 
As a condition of employment, Applicant was required to undergo a background 
investigation and submit to a drug screening.  
 
Applicant fully disclosed his prior drug use and related arrests on his e-QIP and 
openly discussed them during his personal subject interview. He is remorseful for the 
harm he caused his family and himself, including the financial strain he placed on his 
family because he was unable to maintain steady employment during his addiction. 
Applicant has not used methamphetamine or any other illegal substance since March 
2015. He has no intention of using drugs or participating in criminal conduct in the future. 
His professional and personal lives are stable and he is supporting himself financially. He 
stated that “everyone” is aware of his past drug addiction and related criminal conduct. 
(GX 4.) Applicant stated his intention to never used drugs in the future on his signed, 
sworn e-QIP.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 4 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
  
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances . . . can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations.  
 
Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the record evidence, establish the 
following disqualifying conditions under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 25(a) any substance misuse; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution . . . . 
 
 
 5 
The following mitigating conditions may also apply: 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment were drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed a statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
Applicant was addicted to methamphetamine for many years, during which time 
he committed criminal acts to support his addiction. However, when Applicant broke in to 
a residence in March 2015, he recognized that his addiction was out of control and that 
he needed help. Aware that he had committed a crime and was in violation of probation 
and would likely go to prison, he nevertheless voluntarily surrendered to law enforcement, 
which constitutes a profound acknowledgment of his drug involvement. He pled guilty, 
which necessarily required that he admit his conduct. Additionally, Applicant’s past drug 
use is well known by his family, friends, and colleagues. He has not used any illegal 
substances since March 2015. He successfully completed a drug program, was 
forthcoming during his background investigation, and passed a drug screening. He has 
also submitted a signed statement of his intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance abuse in the future. Given Applicant’s four years of abstinence and the record 
evidence as a whole, I conclude that AG ¶ 26(b) applies. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
The following disqualifying conditions apply under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence . . . of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(d): violation or revocation of parole or probation. . . . 
 
 
 6 
The following mitigating condition is potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
While addicted to methamphetamine, Applicant committed crimes to support his 
addiction. He was arrested four times between 2002 and 2015, for receiving stolen 
property, fleeing to avoid detention, manufacturing methamphetamine, and finally for 
burglary. In 2012, he was placed on probation for three years, yet continued to use 
methamphetamine. In 2015, he broke in to a residence. However, he did not steal 
anything from the residence and voluntarily surrendered for arrest, pled guilty, and was 
sentenced to prison. He was granted work release in 2016 and released from prison and 
successfully completed probation in 2017. He has worked for his current employer since 
April 2017 and was promoted to crew leader over one year ago. He fully paid his fines. 
There is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including no criminal conduct in four years, 
successful completion of probation, and a good employment record. AG ¶ 32(d) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H and J in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant has met his high burden of persuasion.  His four years of abstinence 
clearly demonstrates his commitment to reform and rehabilitation. He accepts 
responsibility and is remorseful for his past conduct. Applicant candidly disclosed his past 
drug abuse and related criminal history. His voluntary surrender to law enforcement and 
his disclosures of adverse information are indicators of his willingness to self-report any 
unforeseen misconduct. His positive behavioral changes are a testament to his 
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment.  
  
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H and  
J and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns raised by his conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has 
 7 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.e:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
