 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01589 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 6, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 11, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On July 3, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 2, 2018.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.)  On 
September 10, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on September 12, 2018, and received by him on September 20, 
2018. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of 
the FORM. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM. Applicant did not object to Items 1 
 
2 
 
through 6, and they are admitted into evidence, hereinafter referenced as Government 
Exhibits 1 thorough 6.   
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He is unmarried with no children.  He has a Master’s 
degree.  He is employed with a defense contractor as an Electrical Design and Analysis 
Engineer.  He is seeking to retain a security clearance in connection with his 
employment.  Applicant began working for defense contractor A in 2011.      
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified five delinquent debts that have been charged off or placed for collection 
totaling in excess of $34,000.  Applicant admits to each of the delinquent accounts listed 
in the SOR.  Credit Reports of Applicant dated June 3, 2016; and April 21, 2018; 
confirm the indebtedness listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 5 and 6.)      
 
Applicant executed a security clearance application in April 2016 while working 
for defense contractor A, where he has worked since September 2011.  At this time, 
however, he is being sponsored for a security clearance by defense contractor B.  To 
help resolve his delinquent debts, in August 2016, Applicant enrolled in a debt 
resolution program, and three of the five debts listed in the SOR are included in the 
program.  Another debt, listed in the SOR, he claims has been paid off.  Applicant 
provided documentation of a debt resolution program, but there is no evidence of 
payments made after May 2017.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  Applicant completed a 
financial questionnaire in October 2017 that reflects a negative income.    
 
The following delinquent debts became owing:  
 
1.a.  A delinquent debt owed to a credit union was charged off in the approximate 
amount of $12,816.  Applicant stated that he has reached an agreement with the 
creditor and has started making monthly payments of $150 on August 28, 2017.  
(Government Exhibit 2, attachment 3.)  An email dated August 22, 2017, documents a 
payment agreement with the creditor, but there is no evidence that Applicant has made 
these payments.  Applicant failed to submit anything in response to the FORM.  The 
account remains outstanding.  (Answer to SOR.)    
 
 1.b.  A delinquent debt owed to a bank was charged off in the approximate 
amount of $10,273. Applicant stated that he enrolled in a debt resolution program and 
the account is one of many that will be settled through the program. (Applicant Exhibits 
1 and 2.)  Applicant failed to submit anything in response to the FORM, to show that 
 
3 
 
ongoing payments have been made.  The account remains outstanding.    (Government 
Exhibit 2.) 
 
 1.c.  A delinquent debt was charged off in the approximate amount of $5,168.  
Applicant stated that he enrolled in a debt resolution program and the account is one of 
many that will be settled through the program.  (Government Exhibit 2, attachments 1 
and 2.)  Applicant failed to submit anything in response to the FORM, to show that 
ongoing payments have been made.  The account remains outstanding.    (Answer to 
SOR.) 
 
 1.d.  A delinquent debt was charged off in the approximate amount of $4,604.  
Applicant stated that he enrolled in a debt resolution program and the account is one of 
many that will be settled through the program.  Applicant Exhibits 1 and 2.  Applicant 
failed to submit anything in response to the FORM, to show that ongoing payments 
have been made.  The account remains owing.  (Government Exhibit 2 attachments 1 
and 2.) 
 
 1.e.  A delinquent debt was placed for collection in the approximate amount of 
$1,330.  Applicant stated that the debt was settled and paid on August 2, 2018, through 
the debt resolution program.  Applicant submitted an undated settlement agreement 
with the creditor, but there is no evidence that payments were made.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit 2, attachment 5.)   
 
 Applicant has not stated how or why he fell behind on his financial obligations in 
the first place, accumulating over $34,000 in debt in under two years.  There is no 
documentary evidence to show that he has continued to make the agreed payments 
beyond the initial payment.  There is nothing in the record to indicate when his financial 
situation will be resolved, and whether it is likely to recur.  There is insufficient 
documentation in the record to show that Applicant can control his finances and live 
within his means without difficulty.  He remains excessively indebted.       
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
 
4 
 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
 
5 
 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant is excessively indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR.  Although he 
claims that the debts are now being paid, he has failed to respond to the FORM, and did 
not provide sufficient documentary evidence to show that they are still being paid. The 
record lacks appropriate documentation to substantiate the information he has provided.   
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant has provided no explanation for the delinquent debts, specifically how 
or why he got into debt in the first place.  He also failed to provide evidence in mitigation 
to show that he is continuing to pay off his debt as agreed.  Under the particular 
circumstances here, Applicant has failed to establish that he has acted reasonably or 
responsibly with respect to his debts.  As it stands, Applicant started to address his debt 
and has demonstrated nothing more.  He has not demonstrated that future financial 
problems are unlikely.  Most importantly, it has not been demonstrated that his current 
financial problems are under control.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  In the Government’s FORM, Applicant was 
told to provide documentary evidence in response to the FORM that supports the 
applicable mitigating conditions.   Applicant failed to respond.  There is insufficient 
documentation in the record to show that Applicant has resolved or continues to work 
toward resolving his delinquent debt.  Accordingly, Applicant has not demonstrated that 
he is financially responsible.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
