1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 18-01232 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
 For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
  Andre Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On May 4, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct).1 In a response notarized on June 4, 2018, Applicant admitted all but one of 
the allegations. He also requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. I was assigned the case on January 24, 2019.  
A hearing originally scheduled for December 5, 2018, was cancelled due to 
inclement weather. A December 12, 2018, notice, setting the hearing for January 24, 
2019, was issued. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Subsequently amended, the AG applied 
here are applicable for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017. 
03/15/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
The Government offered three documents, accepted into the record without 
objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-3. Applicant gave testimony and proffered three exhibits, 
accepted without objection as Exs. A-C. The record was held open through February 8, 
2019, so that additional materials could be offered. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
February 5, 2019. With no supplemental materials received, the record was closed on 
February 8, 2019. Based on the testimony, materials, and record as a whole, I find 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old data center technician who has worked for the same 
employer for about three years. He is currently earning about $68,000 a year. He came 
to that job in 2015, after a colleague helped him find a new position when his former 
job’s salary was cut from $86,000 a year to $40,000 due to a contract renegotiation. He 
has maintained some level of security clearance since 1992. Applicant completed two 
years of college before earning a degree from a technical school as an electronic 
technician. Widowed over a decade ago, he has two grown children: a son, currently 
supported in part by Applicant while he completes college, and a daughter, who has 
completed college and presently living at home. (Tr. 14)  
 
 In the past several years, Applicant has acquired debts which have become 
delinquent. He experienced a period of unemployment from May 2013 to September 
2013.2 He has been trying to earn supplementary income by driving for a car service 
part time. (Tr. 18) Because he has owned his home for 25 years, he has built up notable 
equity. He is in the process of refinancing the home in order to satisfy the debts at 
issue. (Tr. 18-19) No documentary evidence of negotiations related to this effort was 
presented. The debts at issue in the SOR are: 
 
 1.a – Student loan collection account ($17,744) – Unpaid. Applicant promised his 
late wife that he would make sure their children were educated. Applicant took special 
care to make sure his daughter went to college because she has a learning disability. 
(Tr. 17) Applicant took this loan for her education between 2010 and 2012, and 
ultimately another loan for his son. Applicant reported that he has spoken to the lender 
about his financial situation and his strategy for resolving his debt, he but provided no 
documentary evidence reflecting such communication. (Tr. 19-20) The loan balance 
remains unaddressed. (Tr. 18) 
 
 1.b – Charged-off account ($8,063) – Unpaid. This credit card debt was incurred 
when Applicant’s children were in college. The last activity on this account was from 
2013, the year Applicant’s son started college. Applicant does not recall the 
circumstances under which this debt became delinquent. (Tr. 23) He is hoping to 
address this debt with his home refinancing proceeds as well. (Tr. 23) 
                                                          
2  This was Applicant’s most significant period of unemployment. He had shorter lapses of unemployment 
between contracts over his career that “lasted no more than approximately a month or two.” (Tr. 36) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 1.c – May 2015 judgment related to a pest control service ($1,043) – Unpaid. 
Applicant testified that he made two $150 payments in mid-2018 toward this delinquent 
debt, but was unable to provide documentation to that effect.  
 
 1.d – Telecommunication collection account ($1,712) – Unpaid. This debt is 
related to a cell phone service plan from about 2013. The charges on the phone had 
become unwieldy. When this provider would not reduce his charges or his terms, he 
accepted an offer from another company which said it would “take care” of this bill. (Tr. 
32) He believed this satisfied the balance. Only later did he learn the balance was still 
owed. The debt remains unpaid. (Tr. 33)   
 
 1.e – Collection account ($6,185) – Unpaid. This account is related to a 
timeshare property for which Applicant used to pay $240 a month. It was acquired in 
about 2003 or 2004. Applicant testified that he has been paying on this delinquent debt 
balance since 2017 through payroll deductions. (Tr. 38) Applicant provided no 
documentation reflecting such deductions or payments. 
 
 1.f – Medical collection ($135) – Applicant believes this may actually be related to 
a jewelry store account. He thought the debt was paid, but failed to provide any 
documentary evidence reflecting that status.  
 
 In May 2016, Applicant executed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). He answered “no” in response to “Section 26 – Financial Record – 
Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts Other than previously listed, have any of the 
following happened? . . . In the past seven (7) years, you defaulted on any type of loan? 
. . . In the past seven (7) years, you had bills or debts turned over to a collection 
agency? . . . In the past seven (7) years, you had any account or credit card suspended, 
charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?” He similarly answered “no” in 
response to “Section 26 – Financial Record – Delinquency Involving Enforcement Other 
than previously listed, have any of the following happened to you? . . . In the past seven 
(7) years, you had a judgment entered against you?” As noted above, the answer to 
both queries should have been “yes,” as Applicant later admitted in his SOR response.  
 
With regard to the first inaccurate answer, Applicant’s explanation was that he 
was “terrified” about his debts and “made a bad error in judgment,” for which he humbly 
apologizes. (Tr. 41) He was “overwhelmed and scared at the time [that he would lose 
his security clearance and job]. . . .” (Tr. 45) He remains worried about his poor 
judgment in this matter. With regard to the second inaccurate answer, however, 
Applicant “didn’t really know what a judgment is. . . . I had no idea really.” (Tr. 45) 
  
 Currently, Applicant earns a net monthly income of about $3,600 a month. He 
continues as a part-time driver intermittently, which can supplement his income with an 
additional $300-$400 a month. Such surplus funds are generally applied to everyday 
needs, such as groceries. (Tr. 44) He is current on his mortgage payments. He expends 
a lot of money on prescription co-pays due to health problems including diabetes, high 
blood pressure, and optical issues. After he pays all of his monthly bills, he retains some 
 
 
 
 
4 
money “every blue moon,” which he sends to his son. (Tr. 49) His daughter helps 
contribute toward household expenses. Applicant has about $50 in his savings account 
and no retirement or 401k retirement account. He has not received financial counseling. 
Applicant concedes that he is living paycheck to paycheck. (Tr. 57) 
 
 A co-worker and friend of Applicant noted that Applicant is dedicated to his job 
and this country. He cited Applicant’s commitment to his children and his child 
mentoring as a coach. He applauded Applicant’s resilience over the past few years with 
regard to his fluctuations in salary. (Ex. A) A former supervisor of Applicant’s noted that 
Applicant’s friendly and energetic personality helped keep his grueling workdays 
positive and upbeat. (Ex. B) He further wrote that Applicant is personable, pleasant, 
honest, and a “stand-up guy”. (Ex. B) Another colleague expressed that Applicant is a 
trustworthy and able professional capable of safeguarding information. (Ex. C) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision after a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility and will be 
resolved in favor of the national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only 
those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the record evidence. 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR. Under the Directive, an applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in those to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Decisions are in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government offered documentary evidence reflecting that Applicant 
has numerous delinquent debts and an adverse judgment. This is sufficient to invoke 
financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do 
so; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Four conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
           There are multiple delinquent debts at issue. There is no documentary evidence 
reflecting any payments made, or efforts to settle or address any of the debts at issue in 
the SOR. While a part-time job was an effective way to increase his income to some 
degree, the proceeds from that job were used to pay for everyday expenses, not pay 
 
 
 
 
6 
down delinquent debt. Regardless, I find AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part with regard to the 
creation of these delinquent debts noted in the SOR.  
 
With regard to the actual delinquent debts at issue, they have been neglected or 
unaddressed for some time. His assertion that he made a couple of payments on the 
debts at 1c and 1.f, and was in repayment through payroll deduction on the debt at 1.e 
was not substantiated by documentary evidence. Moreover, there is no documentary 
evidence reflecting that his plan to satisfy these debts by refinancing his home has been 
implemented or is financially manageable. Without such documentation, none of the 
available mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 Here, Applicant failed to disclose delinquent accounts and an adverse judgment 
on his eQIP. Therefore, if Applicant’s answers were intentionally false or meant to 
mislead or misrepresent, the following disqualifying condition could apply:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant admitted that he provided a false answer with regard to eQIP Section 
26 – Financial Record – Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts because he was 
scared. While he has most contritely apologized, he remains scared about his false 
answer, an issue he did not immediately correct. This admission raises AG ¶ 16(a) and, 
given the facts here, obviates application of any of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 17. 
However, he was very credible in his admission that he was then unaware of what a 
judgment was, leading him to a negative answer with regard to Section 26 – Financial 
Record – Delinquency Involving Enforcement on the eQIP. In finding no falsity or intent 
to mislead in this answer, I find that AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply to allegation 2.b. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those factors. I 
 
 
 
 
7 
am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old data center technician who has worked for the same 
employer for about three years, currently earning about $68,000 a year. He came to that 
job in 2015, after suffering a large drop in income (from $86,000 to $40,000) due to a 
contract renegotiation. He has maintained some level of security clearance since 1992. 
Applicant completed two years of college before earning a degree from a technical 
school. He is a widower with two grown children. He occasionally helps his son 
financially when he can. His son is away at college and his daughter, a college 
graduate, currently lives with him and contributes toward household expenses.   
 
The main source of Applicant’s financial distress is hard to determine, but 
meeting his promise to his late wife to make sure the children were college educated 
has taken an economic toll. At present he owes about $35,000 in delinquent debts, 
nearly half of which is comprised of delinquent student loans. Applicant believes he has 
made some payments on at least three of the six accounts at issue, but he provided no 
documentary evidence reflecting such efforts. While he has devised a plan to address 
his debts by seeking a home refinance, no documentation was provided reflecting such 
a plan has been initiated, implemented, or is manageable. Meanwhile, Applicant has 
conceded that he is presently living paycheck to paycheck. Consequently, it is unclear 
how any efforts to address these delinquent debts might be initiated in the near future. 
 
Applicant contritely confessed that he misrepresented the truth on his 2016 eQIP 
when he denied having had any bills or debts turned over to collection, charged off, or in 
default in the preceding seven years. Under the facts offered, this falsity cannot be 
mitigated. However, his denial of having any adverse judgments against him in the 
same time period was based on confusion and not an intent to mislead. Taking all these 
factors together, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate both financial considerations and 
personal conduct security concerns.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge 
