1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00563 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Moira Modzelewski, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On September 4, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 6, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on December 4, 
2018. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant was 
03/11/2019
 
2 
 
 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not provide a response 
to the FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. Items 1 through 
6 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He began college in 2006 and graduated in May 2012 
having earned a bachelor’s degree. He married in 2013. He has no children. Applicant 
has been employed by a federal contractor since October 2016.  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant has approximately $156,322 in delinquent student 
loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g). He stated in his October 2016 security clearance 
application (SCA) the following: 
 
I attended a private university. With little financial literacy, I took out private 
and government loans that I couldn’t hope to pay. Since leaving college, 
I’ve been unemployed and haven’t been able to secure a job that paid more 
than $13.25 an hour. The defaulted loans are a consequence of my inability 
to secure adequate wages given my college education and my inconsistent 
employment history. I wish the story was different but those are the facts.1 
 
* * * 
 
My Federal Student Loans tally to approximately $51,988. My private loans 
are approximately $177,683.2 
 
Regarding the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h (credit card debt-$1,189), 1.k (medical debt-
$119), 1.l (medical debt-$63), and 1.j (cell phone debt-$198), Appellant stated in his SCA 
the following: 
 
The credit card was a simple issue of non-repayment. It’s been closed and 
written off. The other three collection issues are still pending and total $380 
dollars. One is a cancellation fee, the other is a fee for an urgent care trip 
that I thought was resolved a long time ago and the last one is a fee that 
was supposed to be paid by my previous employer when I was forced to 
visit the ER within the hospital I was working at.  
 
* * * 
 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
The [credit card] charge has been written off and charged off as a bad debt. 
The other three are still open in collections.3  
 
* * * 
 
The open collection accounts are simple to resolve. $380 dollars will take 
care of that. The [credit card debt] issue has been resolved.4  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in November 2017. He 
was confronted with the delinquent student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e. He 
told the investigator these were private student loans, and he cannot afford to pay them 
because he does not earn enough income. The creditor offered to settle the debt for a 
lump sum amount of $63,000, but Applicant could not afford it. He has no plans to resolve 
these loans because he cannot afford to make the monthly payments required.5  
 
 Applicant was not sure if the student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g were 
private student loans or government loans. He stated his government student loans were 
in a rehabilitation program, and he did not know if the loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g were 
part of that program. He said he could not pay these loans because he does not earn 
enough income.6  
 
Applicant told the investigator that he intended to pay the debt in SOR ¶ 1.l by 
December 2017.He said that he would contact the creditor for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k in 
December 2017, to discuss it. He said he contacted the creditor for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j 
and would call the creditor again in December 2017, to try and resolve it. Regarding the 
credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.h, he did not plan on contacting the creditor to resolve it 
because he cannot pay this debt and his federal student loans at the same time. Applicant 
did not provide any documents or other information regarding his efforts to resolve these 
smaller debts.7  
 
 The investigator confronted Applicant with the charged off debt in SOR ¶ 1.m 
($2,200). This was a loan he used to purchase his wife’s engagement ring. He indicated 
that because he had inconsistent employment, he was unable to pay this loan. Due to his 
current plan to pay his federal loans, he does not have sufficient funds to resolve this 
debt.8  
 
                                                          
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Item 3.  
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 4. 
 
7 Item 4. 
 
8 Item 4. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant was employed from October 2015 to September 2016 before starting his 
current job. He disclosed that he worked as a camp counselor during the summers (June 
through August) while in college from 2009 to 2012, and then continued during the 
summers through 2016. He lists other employment from September 2014 to February 
2015 (he left this job because it was a temporary job for six months); October 2013 to 
May 2014 (he left this job to work at summer camp); November 2012 to December 2012 
(he quit this job because it did not suit him).9  
 
 Applicant disclosed to the investigator that he and his wife took a five-day cruise 
in August 2017 to the Bahamas. He and his wife also took a five-day cruise to Jamaica 
and Cayman Islands in May 2014.10 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and credit reports from January 2017 and February 2018 
corroborate all of the debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant did not provide any information 
about his and his wife’s current income; documents to substantiate he is paying his federal 
student loans; a budget; or proof that he resolved the smaller debts.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
9 Items 3, 4. 
 
10 Items 3, 4. 
 
11 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
  
 
6 
 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has delinquent student loans, credit card debts, medical debts, and other 
debts totaling more than $160,000. He is unwilling and unable to pay his delinquent debts. 
Despite stating he would address the small debts, he failed to provide proof that he did. 
He does not intend to resolve his private student loans and other debts. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant has not paid or provided evidence of action he may have taken to resolve 
any of the delinquent student loans or other debts that are charged off or in collection. His 
delinquent debts are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to unemployment and 
underemployment. These were conditions beyond his control. For the full application of 
AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly. Applicant did not provided sufficient 
evidence to show he has acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant attended 
college for six year and obtained student loans to pay for his education. He was aware of 
the amount of the loans he was using for his education. Although he said his federal 
student loans are in a rehabilitation program, he failed to provide evidence to substantiate 
his claim. He has decided that the amount owed for his private student loans is too much 
to pay; however, he and his wife took a cruise in 2014. Applicant has been employed 
since October 2015. He has not made an effort to pay a $63 medical bill or the loan he 
 
7 
 
 
obtained to purchase his wife’s engagement ring. After he completed the SCA in October 
2016, which put him on notice that his delinquent debts were a concern, he took a cruise 
with his wife in August 2017. AG ¶ 20(b) has minimal application.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling and his debts are 
under control. There is no evidence he is making good-faith efforts to pay any of debts 
alleged in the SOR. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He has an overwhelming amount of student loans that 
are delinquent. He indicated he had no hope of paying them. He indicated that he is 
paying his federal student loans, but provided no evidence. He has not paid small 
consumer debts, including a loan for his wife’s engagement ring. He did not provide 
evidence of any action he has taken to resolve, settle, or pay these debts. Applicant did 
not provide evidence of his current financial budget or a plan for resolving his financial 
problems. Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves 
me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:  Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
