 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00095 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Catie E. Young, Attorney At Law, Griffith, Young & Lass 
 
 
March 25, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 25, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On January 24, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F Financial Considerations.  The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO)10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective within the DoD after June 8, 2019.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 30, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 15, 2018.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on November 15, 2018, and 
the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 7, 2018. The Government 
offered four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered seven exhibits, referred to as 
Applicant’s Exhibits A through G, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant 
testified on his own behalf. The record remained open until close of business on 
 
2 
 
January 11, 2019, to allow the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional supporting 
documentation.  Applicant submitted four Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as 
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits H through K, which were admitted without objection.  
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 11, 2019. 
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 64 years old. He is married with four grown children.  He has two 
Master’s degrees, one in Business Administration, and one in Law.  He also holds 
various certifications.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a Technology 
Consultant/Engineer.  He is applying for a security clearance in connection with his 
employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
  The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified four delinquent student loan or educational debts totaling in excess of 
$100,000, as well as a Chapter 7 bankruptcy wherein he discharged approximately $3.5 
million in delinquent debt, most of which were delinquent mortgage accounts for six 
foreclosed properties.  Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth in the SOR 
under this guideline.    Applicant has been working for his current employer since April 
2016.  Credit Reports of Applicant dated July 9, 2016; and June 6, 2017, confirm the 
indebtedness listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 3 and 4.)   
 
Applicant has a steady employment history.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  His wife, 
with whom he has been married for 35 years, also worked outside the home for a time, 
and generated income for the family.  Applicant’s explained that his wife is from a family 
of real estate professionals and at some point, she became a real estate broker.  From 
2001 to 2006, with the growing real estate economy in the state, Applicant and his wife 
took their excess disposable income, and purchased a number of investment properties, 
in hopes of it sustaining their expenses.  At the time, Applicant was sending his four 
children to a prestigious private school and lived a comfortable lifestyle.   
 
In 2006, Applicant’s wife began to have a series of health problems which 
eventually caused her to stop working.  By this time their children were in college and 
Applicant had cosigned for their student loans.  As the value of their real estate 
properties started declining, renters started defaulting on rent.   Applicant could not 
afford to pay the mortgages on their properties, nor did he have the money to pay his 
children’s student loans.  He tried to get deferments, or forbearance type of extensions 
on the student loan debt, but was unsuccessful.  During this period, Applicant even 
relocated without his wife to take a higher paying job.  More, recently, he has had to 
move his mother-in-law in with them, to take care of her.   
 
 
3 
 
1.a.  In 2013, to clear up his financial problems, Applicant hired an attorney who 
recommended that they file for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy protection.  In June 2013, 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy, and in September 2013, his debts of 
approximately $3.5 million were discharged.  Applicant was unable to discharge the 
student loans pursuant to Federal Bankruptcy Law.  Related to this filing, Applicant 
received a certificate of financial counseling.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  
 
1.b.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a student loan that was past due in the 
amount of $2,231 with an approximate balance of $48,319.  Applicant cosigned on his 
daughter’s student loan for college.  When he entered into the agreement, he thought 
that his daughter would be able to pay the debt.  The debt has been owing since 2009.  
Applicant has tried to initiate payment by website, but his account cannot be located.  
(Tr. p. 43)  It is his intent to pay the debt if he can find out who to pay.  He has also 
disputed the debt with the credit agencies.  (Tr. p. 78.)  Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 
K indicates that Applicant has been made an offer to settle the debt by the creditor in 
the amount of $371 monthly for eleven months beginning on January 15, 2019, with a 
balloon payment of $5,919 due on December 15, 2019.     
 
1.c.  Applicant was indebted to a bank for a delinquent student loan that was charged 
off in the approximate amount of $31,976.  Applicant cosigned on his son’s student loan 
for college.  When he entered into the agreement, he thought that his son would be able 
to pay the debt.  This debt was ultimately charged off.  Applicant received a 1099-C 
cancellation of debt regarding the debt.  (Applicant’s Exhibits B and I.)  Applicant stated 
that he has paid taxes on the amount of the forgiveness.  (Tr. p. 48.)       
 
1.d and 1.e.  Applicant was indebted to a bank for two educational loan accounts that 
were charged off.  Applicant cosigned on his childrens’ loans for their education.  Both 
loans were ultimately charged off by the creditor.   Applicant received a 1099-C for each 
debt, which was a cancellation of the debts.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C, and Tr. p. 51.)  
Applicant stated that he has paid taxes on the amount of the forgiveness.  (Tr. pp. 51-
52.) 
 
Applicant’s credit report showed another charged-off account, not listed in the 
SOR, in the amount of $31,997, showing a past-due amount of $30,597.  Applicant did 
not know about the debt.  Post-Hearing Exhibit H, indicates that the creditor has 
extended an offer to Applicant to make payment arrangements to resolve the debt. 
 
Since he has been working for his current employer, Applicant’s financial affairs 
have been more stable.  He has incurred no new delinquent debt.  He now owns only 
one property, his primary residence, and is current on the mortgage payments.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  Applicant is also current with all of his consumer debt.  He has 
learned a hard lesson from his mistakes in the past.  He now lives within a budget, and 
makes smart decisions as to how he spends his money.  Applicant recently started a 
401(k) that has about $3,000 in it.  (Tr. p. 53.) 
 
Letters of recommendation from Applicant’s colleagues and friends reveal that 
Applicant is a true professional, who is committed to work, his family, and enjoying the 
 
4 
 
freedoms our country provides.  He is respected by all who know him.  He has 
consistently provided exceptional work effort and productivity.  He is also described as 
being a hard-working, honest and trustworthy man of integrity, who is a wonderful 
father, co-worker, friend and human being.  He is highly recommended for a security 
clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F.)     
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant became delinquently indebted due to a series of unexpected 
circumstances beyond his control.  In hindsight, Applicant realizes that he made some 
risky and reckless decisions when he invested in real estate too quickly, and in too 
many properties, without a sufficient financial safety net.  To complicate matters, his 
wife’s illnesses prevented her from working, which negatively impacted their finances.  
The sudden downturn in the real estate market also caused them to fall behind on their 
mortgage payments.  Applicant’s children’s inability and unwillingness to pay their 
student loans, leaving it all up to the Applicant, all contributed to his financial 
indebtedness.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant now understands the vastly unstable nature of the real estate market 
and that it can ruin one’s financial status, if not careful.  As a result, in 2013, he was 
forced to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and discharged $3.5 million dollars in debt.  
Unable to discharge the student loans, and unable to afford to make the payments, the 
debts were charged off.  Applicant has paid taxes on the student loan debt that was 
cancelled or forgiven, and plans to follow a prescribed payment plan to resolve the only 
other remaining student loan that remains unaddressed in the SOR.  Applicant’s 
conduct shows growth and maturity toward handling his financial affairs.  He has no 
other delinquent accounts and now understands the importance of maintaining financial 
responsibility.  Going forward, Applicant must live within his means and continue to 
resolve his debts in compliance with his creditors.  Under the particular circumstances 
of this case, Applicant has acted reasonably and responsibly with respect to his debts.  
Accordingly, it is found that his debts are now under control.  Furthermore, Applicant 
has demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely.  If it is determined that he 
owes any other creditor, he will immediately set up a payment arrangement to resolve it.  
There are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant is well respected on the job and 
performed favorably.  He has also demonstrated reasonable and responsible conduct in 
resolving his delinquent debts.  In addition, he has provided documentation from the 
creditors that confirm his testimony.  Applicant has demonstrated that he is financially 
responsible.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  National security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
