 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01816 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 25, 2019 
____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 23, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 6, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 2019. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 23, 2019, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on February 7, 2019. The Government offered seven exhibits, referred to 
as Government Exhibits 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. The 
Applicant offered six exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through F, which 
 
2 
 
were admitted without objection.  Applicant called one witness and testified on her own 
behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 4, 2019. 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old and divorced a second time.  She has a high school 
diploma.  She holds the positon of Security Specialist 1 for a defense contractor.  She 
seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense 
industry.  
 
Paragraph 1 Guideline F – Financial Considerations   The Government alleges that the 
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she is financially overextended and at risk 
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to pay Federal income taxes for tax years 
2010; 2014; 2015; and 2017.  It also alleges that she is indebted to three creditors in the 
amounts of $501; $170; and $125, respectively.  In her Answer, Applicant admits 
allegation 1.a., and denies the remaining allegations.  Credit reports of the Applicant 
dated May 9, 2015; January 27, 2016; and December 13, 2017, reflect that each of 
these debts were at one time owing and delinquent.  (Government Exhibits 3, 4 and 5.)  
  
 Applicant has been married and divorced twice to the same man.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit B.)  Her first marriage was from 1985 to 2000.  Her second marriage was from 
2006 to 2011.  Applicant has two children from the marriage who are now adults.  For 
the most part, Applicant has raised her children and provided for them financially by 
herself.      
 
 Applicant began working in the defense industry in 2005 for a previous employer.  
Her employment was not stable or sufficient to live on.  She began working for her 
current employer in 2017 and applied for a security clearance at that time.  Since 2017, 
she has been working full time, and earning enough money to pay her bills, living within 
her means, and successfully controlling her finances. 
  
 Applicant testified that she has always filed her income tax returns on time.  She 
was unable to pay her taxes on time beginning in 2010 because she was unemployed.  
She continued to be unemployed most of 2011.  Her divorces also caused financial 
difficulties.  In November 2011, she was hired by an employer but was laid off in 2014 
due to corporate downsizing.  Applicant even moved out of state to find a job and was 
hired in March 2015, but the job only lasted for 30 days.  She was hired by another 
company in May 2015 where she worked until 2017.   
 
 In 2017, Applicant began working for her current employer and has been earning 
sufficient monies to live on and pay her past-due bills.  In 2017, she contacted and hired 
a tax agency to assist her in resolving her back taxes owed.  The agency helped 
Applicant enter into a settlement agreement with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to 
resolve her Federal back taxes owed in the amount of $16,000.  Since February 28, 
 
3 
 
2018, Applicant has been making regular monthly payments to the IRS in the amount of 
$100.  (Tr. p. 43 and Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  She recently asked the IRS to raise her 
monthly payment from $100 monthly to $171 monthly because she could afford it and 
because she wants to get the debt resolved as soon as possible.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, 
and Tr. p. 51.) 
   
 1.b.  During her interview with the DoD investigator, Applicant learned that she 
was also indebted to a bank for a delinquent credit card in the amount of approximately 
$501.  She promptly paid the debt off in November 2018, even before she received the 
SOR in this matter.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C, and Tr. p. 44.)   
 
 1.c.  Applicant was indebted to a gas company in the amount of approximately 
$170.  Applicant stated that she first learned about this debt when she received her 
credit report from the Government.  She contacted the creditor and they had no record 
of this debt.  Applicant’s account with this creditor is in good standing.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit D.) 
 
 1.d.  Applicant was also indebted for a medical bill in the amount of 
approximately $125.  She was not aware of the debt until the investigation in this matter.  
The debt has been resolved.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.) 
 
 Applicant testified that her past has been a rough road, but things have greatly 
improved.  She now has a better job, earning $3,000 monthly, and her employment is 
stable. Her salary has significantly increased from the past employment she has had.  
She enjoys her job and she now has no delinquent debts.  Applicant also has a 
retirement plan with her current employer.  (Tr. p. 53.)   
 
 Applicant’s brother-in-law, who has known the Applicant for the past forty years, 
and who has military and defense industry experience, and who has held a security 
clearance in the past, testified that Applicant is a very responsible individual.  He has 
watched her through life struggles and finds her to be exceptionally trustworthy and 
reliable, no matter what she is confronted with.  She lives within her means and pays 
her bills.  She is recommended for a security clearance.  (Tr. pp. 56-62.) 
 
 Letters of recommendation from Applicant’s immediate supervisor and other 
friends and colleagues attest to her dependable nature, her punctuality, her hard work 
and dedication as well as her integrity.  She has enriched the team with her abilities and 
work experience.  She is honest and loyal and can always be counted on to do the right 
thing.  She is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F.)    
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant was unable to pay her all of her bills, including her taxes, and became 
delinquently indebted. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
  
Beginning in 2010, Applicant’s financial situation began to decline.  She was 
divorced and unemployed and trying to raise two children on her own.  In this situation, 
she was unable to pay her taxes and a few bills.  Since getting back to full-time 
employment in 2017, her finances have been vastly improved.  She has hired a tax 
resolution agency who has helped her enter into a settlement agreement with the IRS 
that she following.  She has also resolved her other delinquent debts, which were rather 
small in the first place.  She has always filed all of the state and Federal income tax 
returns over the years, so that is not an issue.  She has acted reasonably and 
responsibly under the circumstances.  She is now earning enough money to live on and 
is paying her bills and living within her means.  Applicant is now on the correct financial 
path.  There are clear indications that the problem is resolved and under control, and 
there has been a good faith effort to resolve her debts. The Financial Considerations 
concern has been mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  Applicant has 
demonstrated responsibility and good judgment even in the face of many life struggles.  
 
7 
 
She is well respected on the job, and shows the level of maturity required in order to 
have access to classified information.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
 
 
   Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  National security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
