1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01873 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline B, foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
     Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 7, 2016. 
On September 26, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. An amended SOR, was subsequently 
issued under Guideline F, alleging a child-support arrearage, and under Guideline B, 
foreign influence. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AGs) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR with a detailed six-page answer, admitting 
that at one time he owed most of the delinquent debts alleged, but he has since 
03/15/2019
 
2 
 
 
resolved all but two of the alleged delinquencies. He attached documentary evidence to 
his Answer with explanations. Applicant answered the amended SOR on February 17, 
2018, denying the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.i and admitting the allegation at SOR ¶ 2.a. 
The case was assigned to me on January 30, 2019. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for February 26, 
2019. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
The Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10 were admitted into evidence 
without objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through P, which were admitted without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was 
received at DOHA on March 6, 2019.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about China or the Peoples Republic of China (PRC). The request and 
the attached source documents were not admitted into evidence, but were included in 
the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
The request listed supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts. AG ¶ 6, Foreign Influence, provides, “Adjudication under this Guideline can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” A risk assessment in this case 
necessitates administrative notice of facts concerning the PRC.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the HE I source documents, and incorporated them by reference. The facts 
are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this decision. 
However, of particular note, are the following salient facts gleaned from HE 1. 
 
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA 
 
The National Counterintelligence Executive has identified China and Russia as 
the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. China's 
intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to 
 
3 
 
 
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China, who can use their insider 
access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or e-mail. 
 
 In assessing the military and security developments in China, the DOD has 
reported that: Chinese actors are the world's most active and persistent perpetrators of 
economic espionage. Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic 
information will continue at a high level and will represent a growing and persistent 
threat to U.S. economic security. The nature of the cyber threat will evolve with 
continuing technological advances in the global information environment. Chinese 
leaders are focused on developing the capabilities they deem necessary to deter or 
defeat adversary power projection and counter third-party, including U.S., intervention 
during a crisis or conflict. China's military modernization is producing capabilities that 
have the potential to reduce core U.S. military technological advantages. 
 
Further, the DOD found that China very likely uses its intelligence services and 
employs other illicit approaches that violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain key 
national security and export-restricted technologies, controlled equipment, and other 
materials unobtainable through other means. China is using its cyber capabilities to 
support intelligence collection against the U.S. diplomatic, economic, and defense- 
industrial base sectors that support U.S. national defense programs. China uses state-
sponsored industrial and technical espionage to increase the level of technologies and 
expertise available to support military research, development, and acquisition. 
 
The organizational network of China's military-industrial complex is such that the 
People's Liberation Army (PLA) is able to access sensitive and dual-use technologies or 
knowledgeable experts under the guise of civilian research and development. China has 
in place a long-term, comprehensive military-modernization program designed to 
improve its armed forces' capacity to fight short-duration, high-intensity regional conflicts 
and, as China's global footprint and international interests grow, its military 
modernization program has become progressively more focused on investments for a 
range of missions beyond China's periphery. 
 
In assessing the national-security implications of the bilateral trade and economic 
relationship between the U.S. and China, the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission has reported: Since at least the mid-2000s, the Chinese 
government has conducted large-scale cyber-espionage against the United States. 
China has compromised a range of U.S. networks, including those of DoD, defense 
contractors, and private enterprises. China's material incentives for continuing this 
activity are immense and unlikely to be altered by small scale U.S. actions. China's 
progress modernizing its defense industry is due in large part to China's substantial and 
sustained investment in defense research and development (R&D). China's large-scale, 
state-sponsored theft of intellectual property and proprietary information also has 
allowed China to fill knowledge gaps in its domestic defense and commercial R&D. 
 
With respect to human rights concerns observed in China, the U.S. Department 
of State reported: The People's Republic of China (PRC) is an authoritarian state in 
 
4 
 
 
which the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is the paramount authority. CCP members 
hold almost all top government and security apparatus positions. Repression and 
coercion have markedly increased recently, particularly against organizations and 
individuals involved in civil and political rights advocacy, and public interest and ethnic 
minority issues, and against law firms that took on sensitive cases. 
 
Human rights concerns that were observed included: extralegal measures to 
prevent public expression of critical opinions; repression of free speech, religion, 
association, assembly and movement for certain minorities; extrajudicial killings; 
enforced disappearance and incommunicado detention, including prolonged detentions 
in "black jails;" torture and coerced confessions of prisoners; detention and harassment 
of individuals who sought to peacefully exercise their rights under the law; a lack of due 
process; searches of premises without warrants; monitoring of communications; 
opening of domestic and international mail; as well as severe restrictions on citizens' 
freedom of association and free speech.  
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 56 years old. He married in 1994 and divorced in 2011. (Tr. 35) 
Applicant was married previously from 1985 to 1990, and he has two adult children from 
that marriage. He has been cohabitating for two years with a Chinese national, who 
recently applied for citizenship in the United States. (Tr. 36) She has a green card. 
Applicant reported some college but no degree. (Tr. 39-40) He served honorably in  the 
U.S. Navy from 1983 to 2004 and attained the rank of Chief Warrant Officer-3 (CWO-3). 
He had an explosive ordnance disposal specialty rating and earned numerous awards 
including three Meritorious Service Medals, several Naval Commendation Medals, and 
Naval Achievement Medals. Applicant held security clearances for most of his career, 
without incident. He previously worked as a security specialist (GS-15) for Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS) from 2005 to 2010, and he is now employed by a federal 
contractor helping to stand up the weapons of mass destruction office for DHS.  
 
The SOR alleges delinquent debts totaling $28,537 plus a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
petition filed in 2014 that was dismissed three months later. The Amended SOR adds 
an allegation of an arrearage to a state division of child support in the approximate 
amount of $9,278. However, Applicant denies that alleged arrearage (SOR ¶ 1.i) and  
there is no credible evidence to establish it. His ex-wife furnished an affidavit stating that 
Applicant has timely paid all child support directly to her as required by the divorced 
decree. No state agency was ever involved. (AE J) The Amended SOR also added a 
Guideline B, foreign influence, allegation at ¶ 2.a. Applicant admitted most of the 
allegations in his Answer to the SOR and attached documents demonstrating that he 
has either resolved, or is in the process of resolving, all but two of the alleged debts.  
 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s October 7, 2016, 
security clearance application (SCA) (GE 2). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant testified credibly that he traveled extensively for his job at DHS and 
relied on his wife to pay their bills and handle the finances. (Tr. 72) When they started 
having marital difficulties, he obtained his credit report in 2009, and realized that he did 
not recognize many of the delinquent debts reflected. (Tr. 109) He requested validation 
of the debts in accordance with the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA) and 
attempted to settle them at a compromised amount, to no avail. (Tr. 110) It was 
apparent that his ex-wife misused a general power or attorney, which Applicant 
provided to her in his absence, and she ran up exorbitant credit-card debts. (Tr. 112) He 
procured the services of a credit-repair agency, which was unhelpful. His divorce 
became final in 2011.  
 
Applicant submitted a matrix at his hearing that reflects settlement, or a payment 
plan, for all but two of the alleged debts in the SOR. (AE P) He also provided 
documentary substantiation in support of the matrix. SOR ¶ 1.a, a charged-off debt in 
the amount of $17,971, was settled for $5,391 on December 18, 2018. (AE B and G) 
SOR ¶ 1.b was a past-due debt to a bank in the amount of $1,161. Originally, Applicant 
was informed that he was unable to pay on this joint account because his ex-wife had 
included it in her Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing in 2013. (Tr. 50, 58) That bankruptcy made 
it extremely difficult for Applicant to access the websites of creditors or negotiate 
settlements. The past-due amount of $1,154 was paid via check on February 24, 2019. 
(AE N) The account is now current. (Tr. 49-51) All of their accounts were held jointly due 
to the hazardous nature of Applicant’s job. (Tr. 50) 
 
In July 2018, before the SOR was issued, Applicant hired a second, more 
reputable, credit-counseling agency. (Tr. 59-60) He did not know what some of the 
delinquencies were for, or whether they had been included in his ex-wife’s bankruptcy 
case. SOR ¶ 1.c was a debt placed for collection by a university in the amount of 
$4,327. Applicant made eight payments of $100 from February 2018 through October 
2018 and the university pulled the delinquency back from its collection agency in 2019. 
It agreed to accept three payments of $2,300 over 90 days to settle it. Applicant 
provided documentary evidence that he has made several payments in accordance with 
that agreement. (AE L, M, O, Tr. 52-54)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d was a charged-off debt by a federal credit union in the amount of 
$3,839. The account was settled via payment in the amount of $1,344 on December 18, 
2018, and the balance is now zero. (AE C and H) SOR ¶ 1.e was a medical bill placed 
for collection in the amount of $121. It resulted from an insurance dispute after Applicant 
was hit by a drunk, uninsured, driver, while Applicant was operating a rental car. 
Applicant testified credibly that his credit-counseling agency, and lawyers, made 
repeated efforts to contact the creditor and it was unable to locate any account for 
Applicant. Applicant logically believes it was paid by the insurance company or should 
have been. (Tr. 55-56) Applicant tried to file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition pro se in 
September 2014. It was dismissed in December 2014, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, 
because he missed a meeting and was unsure how to proceed with the process. (GE 4-
6) He attempted to resolve the delinquencies run up by his ex-wife on his own.    
 
 
6 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a charged-off account in the amount of $674. Applicant’s 
credit-counseling agency and law firm contacted the creditor and were unable to obtain 
any account information. I trust that it no longer exists. Applicant used his GI bill 
education benefits at an out-of-state institution. While he was away, he left virtually 
everything that he owned, including guitars, amplifiers, bikes and shadow boxes –  
Medals etc. in a storage facility. He fell behind on payments to the storage company, as 
a struggling student enduring a divorce, and he received notice that his belongings 
would be sold at auction due to a past-due amount of $444. (Tr. 63-64) He could not 
attend the auction. He settled this debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h for $200 on January 25, 
2019, despite that the company auctioned off his property, which had a value greatly 
exceeding the $444 owed.   
 
Applicant’s Chinese cohabitant came to the U.S. in 2009 with her deceased 
husband who was a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 78) She took an exam for U.S. citizenship in 
February 2019. (Tr. 39) They met on the match.com dating website in 2015. (Tr. 74) 
She works as a massage therapist. (Tr. 93) Applicant testified that she never had any 
affiliation with the Chinese government or intelligence services. She contacts her 
parents in China using the “we-chat” application a few times each week. Applicant has 
never met her parents or siblings, and they do not speak English.  (Tr. 84) She visits her 
family in China once each year and stays for a month. (Tr. 99) Applicant professes his 
love for his cohabitant. (Tr. 92)  
   
Applicant provided a copy of his impressive resume and two positive character 
reference letters attesting to his integrity, trustworthiness, and reliability. He had 
financial counseling first in 2009 with a credit-repair company, and again in 2014. He 
has acquired no recent delinquent debts, and his financial situation is stable.  
 
                                          Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
7 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports (except SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.i), answer to the SOR, and documents submitted at 
the hearing. The Government produced substantial evidence to support the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.2  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;   
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors and otherwise resolved debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt, which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.   
 
 Applicant endured an expensive divorce and a downturn in the economy. He 
mistakenly relied on his ex-wife to handle the finances while he was overseas, and she 
misused a general power of attorney that he provided. He pays child support to her 
                                                          
2 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
9 
 
 
directly in compliance with the terms of their divorce decree. These conditions were 
beyond his control. He has done everything possible to pay off most of his delinquent 
debts and enter into repayment plans for others. He documented strict compliance with 
these repayment plans through a stream of continuous payments to creditors including 
the university. He has now produced relevant and responsive documentation, 
demonstrating that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
appropriately engaged a two different credit-counseling services to address his financial 
problems. He also retained the professional services of a law firm, which effectively 
addressed the allegations in the SOR. He had independent financial counseling. All of 
his debts alleged in the SOR, have been paid in full or they are in repayment plans. He 
has met his burden to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his 
debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. The mitigating 
conditions enumerated above in AG ¶ 20 apply.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
 
10 
 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
Applicant’s girlfriend was born in China, but came to the United States in 2009 
and applied for U.S. citizenship recently. He cohabitates with her, and she is in contact 
with her parents in China. Applicant’s girlfriend creates a potential conflict of interest 
and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion, both directly and through her family members. Applicant bears a very heavy 
burden in mitigating security concerns where a country is hostile to United States 
interests. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7 (b), and 7(e) are implicated by the evidence. Accordingly, 
Applicant’s relationship with his girlfriend creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
  
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
Applicant has demonstrated a long-standing preference for working and living in 
the U.S. He served in harm’s way in explosive-ordnance disposal in the U.S. Navy for 
22 years. He received numerous awards and decorations for his service. He continued 
to serve U.S. interests as a civilian at DHS with high level clearances in a critical billet 
supporting national security. Although he admits strong bonds of affection with his 
Chinese girlfriend, these bonds are not sufficient to offset or overcome his 
demonstrated, long-term commitment to the U.S. and self-abnegation in its service 
under dangerous conditions.3  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
                                                          
3 The Appeal Board has held that “an Applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United States 
is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an Applicant in a Guideline B case.” ISCR Case 
04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. March 20, 2007). 
 
 
11 
 
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.4  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the U.S. over 
matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially 
in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing whether 
an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S., or 
the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
    Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant has a home and 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
12 
 
 
family in the U.S. and he has devoted his professional life to counter-terrorism efforts 
and U.S. national security. 
 
Applicant’s finances and foreign contacts are no longer a security concern. The 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline B, 
foreign influence.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:            FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:              For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:                      FOR APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraph 2.a:                                  For Applicant  
 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                 Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                Administrative Judge 
 
