       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX )  ADP Case No. 18-01718 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Moira Modzelewski, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust1
position.
On 6 July 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) raising trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
hearing by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The record in this case
closed 9 January 2019, when Applicant’s response to the FORM was due. Applicant
provided no additional documents. DOHA assigned the case to me 26 February 2019.
Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-5 .1
DoD conducts trustworthiness determinations for contractor personnel employed in Information Systems2
Positions defined in DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated January 1987,
as amended, pursuant to DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) of Security
Executive Agent Directive 4, effective with any decision issued on or after 8 June 2017.
1
03/04/2019
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations. He is a 30-year-old field
technician employed by a U.S. defense contractor since April 2017. He served
honorably in the United States military from June 2001 until February 2007, when he
was discharged in paygrade E-5. He has been divorced since December 2017. He
previously held a clearance while in the military. (Item 3).
The SOR alleges, Government exhibits (Items 2-5) establish, and Applicant
admits three delinquent debts totaling over $27,000. The debts comprise two delinquent
education loans totaling over $15,000 and a delinquent automobile loan totaling nearly
$12,000.
Applicant disclosed no financial issues on his November 2017 application for a
public trust position (Item 3), but was confronted with the SOR debts during his March
2018 interview with a Government investigator (Item 4). He stated that his ex-wife
obtained the automobile loan in his name (in May 2011).  He stated he was unaware of3
this delinquency until he was confronted with it during his interview. Similarly, he
acknowledged that the education loans were his, but stated that he had received no
delinquency notices and was unaware of the delinquencies until he was confronted with
them during the interview. Nevertheless, he stated his intent to contact the creditors and
arrange payments or otherwise resolve the debts.
However, Applicant has documented no contacts with his creditors since his
March 2018 interview. Moreover, he provided no budget or financial statement. He has
not documented any financial or credit counseling. He provided no work or character
references, or any evidence of community involvement.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to sensitive information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of a position of public trust. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as
a whole, the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Trustworthiness decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s public trust position. The
Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the
However, he did not state that she had done so without his permission. The account was an individual3
account.
2
SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
Government’s case.  Because no one has a right to a public trust position, the applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.4
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns. Applicant has $27,000 in
delinquent debt for which he has documented no action since at least March 2017.5
Applicant meets none of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations, 
given that he has documented no actions to address his debts. Moreover, his financial
problems are recent, frequent, and incapable of assessment since he has provided no
explanation about how he came to be so delinquent on these accounts.  He has not6
documented that the debts were due to circumstances beyond his control, and his
apparent inaction for nearly two years is certainly not responsible.  Applicant has had no7
credit or financial counseling, and there is no evidence any of the debts have been, or
are being, resolved.  Further, his lack of effort cannot constitute a good-faith effort to8
address his debts.  Accordingly, I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.9
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
¶19(a) inability to satisfy debts; (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; (c) a history5
of not meeting financial obligations;
¶20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that6
it is unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and7
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem . . . and there are clear8
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise9
resolve debts.
3
 Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue public trust eligibility for
Applicant. Eligibility for public trust position denied.          
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
4
