1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
)    ISCR Case No. 18-00393 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Kelly M. Folks, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement and 
substance misuse). Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
     Statement of the Case 
On February 15, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines H. Applicant 
timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written record in 
lieu of a hearing.  
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) 
on November 30, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on December 4, 2018, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided a two-page 
response (Response) to the FORM that incorporated by reference his previous Answers 
to the SOR dated April 30, 2018, and May 4, 2018 (and attachments). Applicant included 
a statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and substance misuse subject 
to revocation of his national security eligibility. The Government’s evidence, identified as 
Items 1 through 4, is admitted without objection. Department Counsel requested that I 
03/18/2019
2 
 
take administrative notice of the following: D.C. Code § 48-904.01 (amended in 2015); 
The Facts on Marijuana Laws, from the Metropolitan Police Department website; and a 
Memorandum dated October 25, 2014, entitled Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting 
Marijuana Use, from the Director of National Intelligence. I have taken administrative 
notice of these documents collectively marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. The case was 
assigned to me on March 1, 2019.  
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 38 years old. He graduated from high school in 1999 and obtained his 
bachelor’s degree in 2003. He obtained a master’s degree in 2008. He has been 
employed as an architect for a federal contractor since 2004. He was promoted to 
principal and partner in an architectural firm engaged as a federal contractor in 2018. 
Applicant reports no military service, and he has never married. Applicant previously held 
a security clearance since 2007, without incident.   
 
On May 12, 2017, Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application (SCA), 
and in section 23 (illegal use of drugs or drug activity) he responded “yes” to questions 
about illegal drug use and/or misuse of prescription drugs within the last seven years. He 
estimated his first use of marijuana was in January 2002, and he used marijuana (MJ) 
“once or twice a year, for fun, with friends.”2 He also stated that he used MJ while he 
possessed a security clearance and he did not intend to use any controlled substances 
in the future. In an earlier SCA signed by Applicant on December 21, 2006, he responded 
“yes” to similar questions about any illegal use of drugs or controlled substance in section 
24 (Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity).3 He indicated that he used MJ about 10-15 
times between September 1999 and February 2002. He was granted a security clearance 
in 2007.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR in April 2018, Applicant stated that his most recent use 
of MJ in 2017, was due to a misinterpretation of the change in the law effectively legalizing 
MJ in Washington, D.C. He used the drug only recreationally at social settings where it 
was provided by friends and he never cultivated, sold, or purchased MJ. Since the District 
is a federalized city, he wrongly assumed that the legalization of MJ applied across the 
federal government. Although, he self-reported his use of MJ occurring between 
September 1999 and May 2017, Applicant stated that there was a long lapse of several 
years before he re-offended in 2017. He does not know which years he used MJ, or the 
exact number of usages. He provided a statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement or substance misuse subject to revocation of his national security eligibility.  
 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s May 12, 2017 Security 
Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 3) and his SCA dated December 21, 2006 (item 4).  
 
2 Item 3, p. 35. 
 
3 Item 4, p. 29. 
3 
 
Applicant has never been diagnosed as having a substance-abuse disorder and 
he did not seek treatment. He has now disassociated from friends who use MJ. Applicant 
also attached his resume, detailing his significant experience and accomplishments in his 
profession, several letters of appreciation, and two performance appraisals showing that 
he was rated excellent or outstanding in all categories. He has experience working on 
high visibility, secure, projects. He received year-end bonuses each year from 2014 – 
2017. He also provided four positive character reference letters at Tab E attached to his 
Answer to the SOR, including one from his facility security officer (FSO). All attest to 
Applicant’s integrity, trustworthiness, and reliability.  
 
                                            Policies 
 
 DOD took action in this case under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by 
DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weighing 
of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that 
the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
          The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in AG  
¶ 24:   
 
 The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
          The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
 ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
 (c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
 (f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position.  
 
Applicant used MJ on sporadic social occasions between 1999 and May 2017, 
including after he submitted an SCA in December 2006 and received a clearance. The 
government provided sufficient evidence to establish that the disqualifying conditions 
above are applicable, and the burden shifts to Applicant to show mitigation.  
 
5 
 
            AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
           (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
           (b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
      (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
     (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
     (3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility.  
                                                    
              Applicant continued his sporadic use of MJ until his last use in May 2017, almost 
two years ago. He did not use continuously during the period from 1999-2017. He self-
reported and he provided evidence that he has disassociated from friends who use illegal 
drugs, and a letter of intent to abstain in the future. He misinterpreted the byzantine 
change in the law in Washington, D.C., with respect to legalizing the use of MJ. He is not 
an attorney and there is considerable confusion surrounding the patchwork of state laws 
around the nation, legalizing MJ. Applicant’s use of MJ has been mitigated by the passage 
of time. He self-disclosed his MJ use in his 2006 SCA, and was granted a clearance 
nonetheless. It is unclear whether this was perceived as acquiescence to his recreational 
drug use, or whether Applicant understood that his MJ use conflicted with federal law, 
after completing that SCA. I perceive his voluntary disclosure as candor and cooperation. 
The government would never know about his MJ use but for his own disclosures. In any 
event, he now knows, and he has taken appropriate actions to overcome this 
disqualification. His conduct does not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply and his self-reported drug use is mitigated.  
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
6 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline. Most importantly, Applicant was candid and cooperative. 
He resolved the specific violations alleged in the SOR, and he has unequivocally declared 
his intention to refrain from further use of illegal drugs.  
 
Applicant’s drug involvement no longer remains a security concern. These self-
reported offenses were committed under such unusual circumstances that they are 
unlikely to recur. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant has 
acknowledged the egregiousness of his drug involvement and taken steps to insure that 
such behavior does not recur. He has met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising 
under Guideline H.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:        FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:               For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                           
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
 
