1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE        
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS          
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01815 
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the drug involvement and substance misuse, and 
personal conduct security concerns, related to his use of marijuana while holding a 
security clearance, and his failure to disclose it on his security clearance application. 
Based on the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
History of Case 
On October 20, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On August 31, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AG) effective within the DoD after on June 8, 2017. 
03/26/2019
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant filed an Answer to the SOR in writing on September 19, 2018, and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On November 
19, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), containing five Items. Applicant received the FORM on November 26, 2018. He 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not provide 
a response to the FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. 
Hence, all Items are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on February 
7, 2019.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old and graduated from high school in May 2008. According 
to his SCA, he worked for Federal contractors from May 2008 to June 2017, and then 
started a position in private industry.1 (Items 2, 3) 
 
 Applicant admitted that he used marijuana in late April 2017, and denied that he 
held a security clearance at the time, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. According to his 
investigation and adjudication history, he was granted a security clearance in August 
2008 and held it through at least January 2018. (Item 5) During an April 2018 interview 
with a government investigator, Applicant said that he tried marijuana, one time, while at 
a party. He said he had not smoked it since then and would not again. (Items 2, 4) 
 
 Applicant admitted that on May 23, 2017, he tested positive for marijuana while 
employed by a defense contractor (employer), as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. (Item 1)  
 
 Applicant admitted that he failed to disclose in his October 2017 SCA that he left 
his employer in May 2017, subsequent to testing positive for marijuana, and he denied 
that he left as the result of that incident, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. In his Answer, he said 
that he left for a different reason, (seemingly to start another position with a private 
company. 2) During an April 2018 interview with a government investigator, Applicant said 
he did not disclose information about his marijuana use because he forgot about it. He 
stated that after the May 23, 2017 test, his employer told him he would be suspended for 
a week or two, but Applicant left before that occurred, as he claimed he had previously 
intended to do. He did not disclose on his SCA that his employer told him he was to be 
suspended for one to two weeks for the incident. (Items 2, 4)  
 
 Applicant admitted that he failed to disclose in his October 2017 SCA that he used 
marijuana in April 2017, and tested positive in May 2017 while employed, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 2.b. He denied that he held a security clearance at the time or was terminated as 
a result of using marijuana. He stated that he left, as previously planned, to assume 
another job. (Items 2, 4) 
                                            
1 Applicant has held a Secret or a Top Secret clearance with access to Sensitive Compartment 
Information (SCI) from August 2008 to at least January 2018. (Item 5) 
2 This is based on Applicant’s work history recorded in his SCA. (Item 3) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant admitted that, during the April 2018 interview, he told the investigator 
that he left his employment prior to being suspended for using marijuana, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 2.c. However, he asserted that he did not leave because of his drug abuse or 
pending suspension. (Item 2) In Answer to SOR ¶ 2.d, which reiterated the allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, he again stated: “I admit, but did not leave for this reason,” meaning 
as a result of testing positive for marijuana. (Item 2.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 describes the concerns related to the illegal use of controlled 
substances, to include the misuse of prescription and non-prescription 
drugs, and the use of other substances that cause physical or mental 
impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their intended purpose 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because such behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment 
and because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled substance means any 
"controlled substance" as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is 
the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors 
listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
(b) testing positive for an illegal drug; and 
 
 (f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or holding a 
sensitive position. 
 
 In April 2017, Applicant used marijuana, and in May 2017, he tested positive for 
marijuana. He was working for a Federal contractor at that time and held a security 
clearance. The evidence established the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 26 lists four conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this 
guideline. Three may potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
 
 
 
5 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant did not present evidence to establish mitigation under any of the above 
three conditions. The behavior happened about two years ago, and there is insufficient 
evidence to conclude it happened under unusual circumstances, such that it does not 
cast doubt on his current trustworthiness. He provided no evidence corroborating his 
assertion that he used marijuana only once, before testing positive on a urinalysis 
conducted after he later claimed his single use occurred. He made no mention of receiving 
treatment for substance abuse.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. One may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant did not disclose to the Government his marijuana use or that his previous 
employer intended to suspend him after he tested positive for marijuana in May 2017. 
Applicant asserted that he left that employer before he served a two-week suspension 
because he had found another position that he had intended to start before the 
suspension was imposed. He held a security clearance at the time of the incident. His 
 
 
 
 
6 
statement that he did not disclose his marijuana use because he had forgotten about the 
May 2017 marijuana incident when he completed his October 2017 SCA is not credible, 
especially in light of his contemporaneous employment disruption. The evidence 
establishes the above disqualifying condition, and indicates that he intentionally 
concealed requested relevant information concerning his recent drug abuse. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns and include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant presented insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under any of the 
above conditions. He failed to be candid and forthright when he completed his October 
2017 SCA. He did not disclose his marijuana use until confronted by the investigator a 
year later. He knew his employer intended to suspend him as a result of the positive test 
in May 2017, regardless of the fact he chose to take another position instead of accepting 
this punishment. It is not reasonable to believe that four months later he could not recall 
this information that was required to be disclosed on his October 2017 SCA.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
 
 
7 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines H and E in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a young man who has held a security clearance for about ten years, 
during which time he worked for Federal contractors. His use of marijuana and attempt to 
conceal it on his SCA support independent but equally serious security concerns. He 
failed to demonstrate rehabilitation or significant behavioral changes. Overall, the 
evidence raises doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline H:           AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
                           Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:             Against Applicant 
   
   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:           AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d:          Against Applicant 
     
                                    Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
