 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 18-01868 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 6, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office 
(CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence 
(ASDC3I) entered into a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provide 
trustworthiness determinations for contractor personnel employed in Information 
Systems Positions as defined in DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated January 1987.  (Superseded by DoD Manual 5200.02.) 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on August 26, 2017.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  On July 16, 2018, the 
Department of Defense (DoD), issued an SOR detailing the trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F Financial Considerations regarding Applicant.  The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AG), effective June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 13, 2018.  She requested that her case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.  On 
August 23, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on August 28, 2018, and received by her on September 24, 2018.  
The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant responded to the FORM on October 24, 2018, and the documents are 
marked and admitted into evidence as Applicant’s Exhibit A.  Applicant did not object to 
Items 1 through 5, and they are admitted into evidence, hereinafter referenced as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 5.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, 
eligibility for a public trust position is denied.    
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 50 years old.  She has been divorced three times: 1990, 1999, and 
2009; and has six children, ages 30, 28, 25, 21, 19 and 11.  She has two Master’s 
degrees.  She holds the position of Billing Manager and is seeking access to sensitive 
information in connection with her employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government opposes Applicant’s request for access to sensitive information 
on the basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following 
findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR. 
 
The Government alleges that Applicant is not eligible for a public trust position 
because she is financially overextended and at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds.  The SOR identified fourteen delinquent debts totaling in excess of 
$59,000.  Applicant admitted allegations 1.c., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.i., totaling almost 
$20,000 in debt.  She denied the remaining allegations, or denied them in part, under 
this guideline.  Credit reports of the Applicant dated September 22, 2017; and May 18, 
2018, reflect that the debts are still owing.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 5.)  Applicant 
served in the United Sates Navy from June 1986 to December 1987 when she received 
an honorable discharge.  She has worked for his current employer since May 2017. 
       
 When Applicant started working for her current employer, she states that she had 
every intention of developing a plan to resolve her debts.  Since then, she has 
experienced a series of major life events that have hindered her progress.  Over the last 
year, Applicant learned that her father’s cancer returned.  She took a leave of absence 
in January and again in February to be with him.  He passed away in February 2018.  
Applicant’s own failing heath brought on by grief and stress took a toll on her, and she 
 
3 
 
underwent a surgery in August 2018, and a short period of disability.  Her step mother is 
in her final stages of life, suffering from stage 4 brain cancer.  Applicant states that 
these tragic life events prevented her from focusing on her financial issues.  In her 
response to the FORM, Applicant stated that she has now taken the necessary step to 
rectify her financial delinquencies.  In the way of documentary evidence, Applicant 
provided two pay stubs to show that she is making her child support payments, flight 
and funeral costs relating to her father’s passing, her disability documentation, and two 
credit reports dated October 21, 2018.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
 
 The following debts set forth in the SOR became delinquent and owing: 
 
1.a. Applicant is indebted to a creditor on an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $18,567.  Applicant has satisfied this debt.  (Applicant’s Exhibit 
A, and credit report dated October 21, 2018, pg. 3.)                 
 
1.b.  Applicant is indebted to a county for child support arrears in the approximate 
amount of $15,549.  Applicant stated that she has consistently made her child support 
payments through payroll deductions.  Her arrearage has been reduced some but she 
still owes approximately $13,138.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, and credit report dated 
October 21, 2018, pg. 5.)         
 
1.c.   Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $6,763.  Following her last divorce and custody matter in 2012, 
she could no longer afford the vehicle.  The debt remains owing.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, 
and credit report dated October 21, 2018, pg. 7.)              
 
1.d.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical account that was placed in 
collection in the approximate amount of $3,689.  The debt remains owing.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit A, and credit report dated October 21, 2018, pg.11.)             
 
1.e.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was past due in the 
approximate amount of $3,419.  The debt remains owing.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)          
 
1.f.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the in the approximate amount of $1,689.  The debt remains owing.  (Applicant’s Exhibit 
A, and credit report dated October 21, 2018, pg.6.)     
 
1.g. Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $4,406.  Applicant stated that she disputed the debt and it 
has been removed from her credit report.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)              
 
1.h.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $2,169.    The debt remains owing.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, 
and credit report dated October 21, 2018, pg. 9.)        
 
 
4 
 
1.i.   Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $1,033.  The debt remains owing.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, 
and credit report dated October 21, 2018, pg. 9.)       
 
1.j.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $1,026.  The debt remains owing.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)      
          
1.k.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical account that was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $487.  Applicant stated that the debt has been 
reduced to $136.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, and credit report dated October 21, 2018, pg. 
10.)       
 
1.l.   Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical account that was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $304.  Applicant stated that the debt has been 
reduced to $165.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, and credit report dated October 21, 2018, pg. 
10.)         
 
1.m.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical account that was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $260.  Applicant stated that she has disputed 
the debt, and it has been removed from her credit report.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)    
          
1.n.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $195.  Applicant stated that this debt was paid in full on April 
12, 2016.  Although it still appears on Applicant’s credit reports she plans to dispute the 
debt with the credit bureaus.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)       
 
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
 
5 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial distress.  She is excessively indebted to a 
number of creditors totaling approximately $59,000.  The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations guideline 
are potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and    
   
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
It is acknowledged that Applicant has had a tough year with the serious illness 
and death of her father, her illness, surgery, and related time off work, as well as her 
step mother’s ongoing condition.  These circumstances were admittedly beyond her 
control and obviously caused Applicant to spend more money than she could afford, 
which hindered her ability to pay her delinquent debt.  However, Applicant has been 
working for her current employer since May 2017.  She has done little in the way of 
showing that she can resolve her delinquent debts.  In fact, she has not shown that she 
has even set up payment plans with the creditors that she is following, nor has she 
shown that she has made any effort to contact her creditors to resolve her debt.   
 
Applicant stated that she has reduced a couple of her smaller debts.  However, 
knowing that the Government was concerned about her excessive financial 
indebtedness, she has not demonstrated a good-faith effort to take control of her 
financial affairs.  Most of the delinquent debt set forth in the SOR remains owing.  
Applicant has not demonstrated sufficient responsibility toward her delinquent debt.  
Now, she states that she is going to resolve the debt, but it is too late.   In this case, 
none of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  There is no clear evidence in the 
record that she has acted reasonably and responsibly.  The record fails to establish 
sufficient mitigation of financial trustworthiness concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 
20(a) through 20(g). 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a position of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
     
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a mature adult, 
who has failed to demonstrate that she can live within her means, budget her income 
accordingly, and pay her bills in a timely fashion.  At this point, her financial problems 
continue as there is no evidence that they have been resolved.   
  
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious doubt as to Applicant’s 
judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a public trust position.  She has not met her 
burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue national security 
eligibility for a public trust position for the Applicant. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
