 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00904 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 8, 2019 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 26, 2017, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On April 24, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF was 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. 
 
On May 17, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated July 18, 2018, was provided to her by letter on July 24, 2018. 
Applicant received the FORM on a date unknown. She was afforded a period of 30 days 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
timely submitted additional information.1 On December 20, 2018, the case was 
assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all SOR allegations with explanations. Additional findings of fact 
follow.  
 
Background Information2 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old share point developer employed by a defense 
contractor since August 2015. She seeks a security clearance in conjunction with her 
current employment. She stated that she received secret security clearances in 1980 
and 2005.   
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1978. She served in the U.S. Army from 
1980 to 1988, and was honorably discharged. Following her discharge from the Army, 
she remained in the Army inactive reserve from 1988 to 1992, and was honorably 
discharged. Applicant has been married to her current spouse since 1989. She was 
previously married from 1984 to 1988, and that marriage ended by divorce. Applicant 
has one adult daughter. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s eight delinquent SOR debts, totaling $45,214, are established by her 
2017 and 2018 credit reports as well as by her 2017 Office of Personnel Management 
Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI). (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – l.h; Items 4 - 6) 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems trace back to approximately 2016 when she 
incurred expenses required to repair a collapsed driveway and had an unexpected 
$12,000 annual salary pay cut. (Item 6)  
 
Department Counsel’s FORM noted that Applicant’s SOR answer fell short of 
what was required to mitigate her debts. He reiterated long-standing DOHA case law 
that it is necessary for applicants to provide documentation that debts have been paid or 
resolved to mitigated financial considerations security concerns. He added that even if a 
creditor charged off a debt, it does not relieve the debtor of paying the debt. In short, 
Department Counsel put Applicant on notice that additional corroborating 
documentation was required.    
 
 Applicant addressed these shortcomings in her FORM response. Summarized, 
her debts and mitigation follow. SOR ¶ 1.a – Past-due mortgage account of $11,730 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s post-FORM submission was marked as Item 7, and received into evidence. 
 
2 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was the most 
current information available. 
  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
with a balance of $244,762. Late fees have been paid and the account is current. Debt 
resolved. (Item 7) SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.d – Three student loan collection accounts Applicant 
incurred on behalf of her daughter in the respective amounts of $10,350, $8,721, 
$5,626. Applicant established a Department of Education rehabilitation loan to bring 
accounts current and pay off all late fees and costs by January 2019. Applicant provided 
documentation of same, and accounts are current. Debts resolved. (Items 2, 7) SOR ¶ 
1.e – Past-due credit card account for $3,141 with a total balance of $7,422. 
Documentation submitted reflects a zero balance and “account was in dispute-now 
resolved-reported by subscriber” in 2017. Debt resolved. (Item 7) SOR ¶ 1.f – 
Charged-off consumer account for $2,921. Applicant provided documentation that 
lawsuit to collect debt was dismissed in county court in 2017. Furthermore, she filed 
disputes with credit reporting bureaus to have this debt removed from her credit report. 
Debt resolved. (Item 7) SOR ¶ 1.g – Charged-off credit card account for $1,412. 
Account paid in full in 2018. Debt resolved. (Items 2, 7) SOR ¶ 1.h – Charged-off credit 
card account for $1,313. Settled for lesser amount in 2018. Debt resolved. (Items 2, 7) 
 
 Applicant sought financial counseling in 2016, and she plans to consolidate 
multiple payday loans she amassed following her driveway collapse and salary pay cut. 
(Item 5) 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a clearance favorable 
decision. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” Based on the information in the SOR, the record 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and her financial problems are not isolated. Her debt 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, she receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and her 
behavior does not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.   
 
Application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant could not have predicted that 
her driveway would collapse or that she would incur a substantial pay cut in 2016. AG 
¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are fully applicable. Applicant received financial counseling and her 
debts are resolved. She heeded Department Counsel’s concerns regarding her SOR 
answer documentation shortcomings. Of note, she contacted all of her creditors and has 
regained financial responsibility.3 AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. 
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further comments are 
warranted. 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. Applicant’s Army service and employment with a defense 
contractor weigh heavily in her favor. She is a law-abiding citizen and a productive 
                                                          
3 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
member of society. She is current on her day-to-day expenses, lives within her means, 
and her SOR debts are resolved.  
 
Applicant understands what she needs to do to establish and maintain her 
financial responsibility. Her efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
       Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
                                                     
 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
