       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
     )      
 ----------------------------------        )   ISCR  Case No.  18-00655   
    )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
      For Applicant: Pro se      
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant 
mitigated personal conduct concerns regarding falsification allegations, but failed to
mitigate the security concerns regarding his drug involvement and substance misuse. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of Case
On June 15, 2018, Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent, Directive 4, National Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), effective June 8, 2017.
03/01/2019
       Applicant responded to the SOR on July 2, 2018, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on August 30, 2018, interposed no objections to the materials in the
FORM, and did not supplement the FORM. The case was assigned to me on January 2,
2019. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly used marijuana, with varying frequency,
from about 1975 to at least May 2017. Allegedly, he stated in his response to DOHA
interrogatories that he may continue its use on a very rare basis.
Under Guideline E, the SOR (a) cross-alleges Applicant’s marijuana involvement
covered by Guideline H and (b) alleges that Applicant falsified his electronic
questionnaires for investigations processing (e-QIP) of August 2016 by deliberately
omitting his past marijuana use. Allegedly, he failed to disclose his marijuana use from
about 1975 to at least May 2017.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations covered by
Guideline H with explanations. He claimed that as a private citizen he is free to live his life
within the laws of his state and country and found difficulty in seeing marijuana as an
illegal substance as a resident of a state where recreational marijuana is legal. He
claimed that he could not say with 100% certainty that he will never use marijuana again.
Applicant also claimed that he may use marijuana on a rare basis, but will never use it
during any activity associated with work or job assignments.
Addressing the allegations covered by SOR ¶ 2.b, Applicant admitted the
incorporated allegations of drug involvement and the allegation of omission, but did not
consider marijuana a controlled substance at the time he completed the e-QIP. He
claimed he now knows that marijuana is covered by 21 U.S.C. § 862 and considers
marijuana to be a controlled substance. 
    
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 61-year-old senior project manager for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in February 1980 and divorced in June 1987. (Item 3) He 
remarried in June 1995 and separated from his wife in August 2009. (Items 2-3) He has
no children from either marriage. (Items 2-3) Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in
June 1991. (Items 2-3) He enlisted in the Air Force in August 1976 and served three
years of active duty. He was honorably discharged in February 1979.
2
Since April 2010, Applicant has worked for his current employer. Previously, he
worked for other employers as a software engineer. (Items 2-4). He held a security
clearance while in the Air Force, but not since his discharge in 1979. (Items 2- 3) 
Applicant’s drug use
Applicant was introduced to marijuana at the age of 17 and used it on and off once
or twice a year between 1975 and May 2017. (Item 4) He last used marijuana in May
2017 with a sailing crew partner, but has used it before with a female friend. Both the
sailing partner and friend freely supplied marijuana for his use. (Item 4) He used the drug
to relax, taking two to three puffs at a time. (Item 4)
In an interview with an agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in
June 2017, Applicant told the agent that he will use marijuana in the future whenever he
feels like it and has no intention of stopping his marijuana use. (Item 4) Asked by the
interviewing agent whether he feels he has a drug problem, he answered in the negative.
He assured the agent that he has never needed drug counseling or treatment. (Item 4)
And he acknowledged using marijuana while previously possessing a security clearance
during his Air Force enlistment. Applicant posited that his infrequent marijuana use never
affected his judgment, reliability, or ability to hold the confidence of others he interacts
with.
E-QIP omissions
Asked to complete an e-QIP in August 2016, Applicant omitted his past use of
marijuana when replying to the information requested about his past drug use in section
23 of the e-QIP. He denied making intentional omissions and attributed his e-QIP
omissions to his belief that marijuana use was not illegal in his state of residence. (Item 4)
Acceptance of Applicant’s explanation requires a credibility check. To his credit, he
acknowledged using marijuana between January 2004 and January 2011 in the e-QIP he
completed in January 2011. (Item 2) And when asked about any prior marijuana use in an
interview with an OPM agent in June 2017, he voluntarily  acknowledged his past
marijuana use without being confronted by the interviewing agent about his previous e-
QIP omissions. 
Applicant has continued to deny any deliberate omissions of his past marijuana
use in the e-QIP he completed in 2016. (Item 4) His explanations implicitly reflect
misunderstandings about the disparate rules governing marijuana use in his state of
residence and the federal rules covering marijuana use and drug activity in the United
States. His mistaken understandings, while not fully developed, are plausible enough to
warrant acceptance. To his credit also, he was up-front about his marijuana use when
initially asked about his drug use in his earlier 2011 e-QIP, and when subsequently asked
about his marijuana use in his June 2017 OPM interview. 
3
On balance, Applicant’s omissions of his past marijuana use in his August 2016 do
not reflect knowing and wilful omissions of past marijuana use. Allegations of falsification
of his August 2016 e-QIP are not substantiated. 
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. 
These guidelines include conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the conditions that could
mitigate security concerns. These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether
or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines
is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶
2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a
4
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations 
AG ¶ 24.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure
to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance
process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance
process. . . AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
5
Analysis  
Applicant presents as a senior project manager for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. Principal security issues in this case center on Applicant’s
recurrent use of marijuana (a controlled substance whose use is banned by federal law
and DoD’s anti-drug policy) Additional security concerns are raised over Applicant’s
omissions of his marijuana use in the e-QIP he completed in August 2016. 
Drug involvement and substance misuse concerns
Over a number of years spanning 1975 and May 2017, Applicant used marijuana
recurrently. On the strength of the evidence presented, two disqualifying conditions of
the AGs for drug involvement and substance abuse are applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any
substance misuse,” and DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession of a controlled substance,
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or
possession of drug paraphernalia.”
Applicant claims he complied with state law in using marijuana and cites to no
contradictions with federal law or DoD policy. But his use of marijuana in compliance
with his state’s law not only violated DoD policies mandating drug-free federal work
conditions, but federal law as well. Whether Applicant was ever made aware of federal
law’s preemptive ban of marijuana use in states that authorize its use is unclear.
DNI Memorandum ES 2014-00674, Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting
Marijuana Use (Oct. 25, 2014) addresses changes to state laws and the laws of the
District of Columbia that legalize the use of marijuana. DNI Memorandum ES cautions
that an individual’s disregard of federal law pertaining to th use, sale, or manufacture of
marijuana remains adjudicatively relevant in national security determinations.
Instructive, too, on the reach of federal laws and policies to federal employees, and
implicitly to federal contractor personnel, who require security clearances, is Executive
Order (Exec. Ord) 12564, Drug-Free Federal Workplace (Sept. 15 1986) Noted
concerns stress that “the use of illegal drugs, on or off duty, reflect less than the
complete reliability, stability, and good judgment that is consistent with access to
sensitive information and creates the possibility of coercion, influence, and irresponsible
action under pressure that may pose a serious risk to national security, the piblic safety,
and the effective enforcement of the law.” (Id.)
When the Federal Controlled Substances Act (CSA) has been challenged on
federalism grounds, the courts have consistently extended federal preemption authority
over competing state laws that legalize marijuana use. In Oakland Cannabis Buyers,
532 U.S. 483 (2001), the Supreme Court did not attempt to invalidate the enabling
legislation adopted by the particular state in issue. This legislation was designed to
implement the key enabling provisions of the state’s Proposition 215, under ¶¶ 11362.5
et seq. Proposition 215 (known as the Compassionate Use Act) was passed by this
state’s voters in 1996 to validate the right of residents of the state to possess and use
marijuana for medical purposes, when they have a recommendation from a licensed
6
physician. Proposition 215 gives the patient’s primary caregiver the right to cultivate and
possess marijuana for the patient. But the Supreme Court in Oakland Cannabis Buyers
did affirm continued federal jurisdiction over drug violators covered by the federal law
without regard to the state’s marijuana exception.
More recently, the Supreme Court seized the opportunity to refine and clarify the
reach of its holding in Oakland Cannabis Buyers, supra.  In Raich v. Gonzales, 545 U.S.
1, 8-14 (2005), the Court addressed the claims of two state residents who suffered from
a variety of serious medical conditions and sought to avail themselves of medical
marijuana pursuant to the terms of the state’s Compassionate Use Act. Notwithstanding
that county investigating officials had found that one respondent’s medical use of
marijuana was entirely lawful, federal agents seized and destroyed all six of her
cannabis plants. In Raich v. Gonzales, supra, the Supreme Court held that the
regulation of marijuana under the CSA was fully within Congress’ commerce power
(U.S. Const., art. I, Sec. 8), because marijuana production intended for home production
could have a substantial effect on supply and demand in the national market. The Raich
Court reasoned that federal failure to regulate the intrastate manufacturing and
possession of marijuana would leave a considerable gap in the CSA.  In turn, the Court
vacated the Ninth Circuit’ s judgment. 
So, even though Applicant was legally within his rights to use marijuana in his
state of residence, his recurrent use would not foreclose the Federal Government from
prosecuting marijuana possession charges under the CSA. It is still unclear whether
Applicant understands the reach of the CSA in its preemption of his state’s marijuana
legalization legislation and how it affects the anti-drug policies placed in force by the
DoD.
While Applicant’s recurrent abuse of marijuana has never been resumed since
his admitted last use in May 2017, his hedging on his potential use of the drug in the
makes the likelihood of recurrent use too great to facilitate safe predictions of continued
abstinence. Considering the record as a whole, at this time there is insufficient probative
evidence of sustainable mitigation to make predictable judgments about his ability to
avoid marijuana use in the foreseeable future. Taking into account all of the facts and
circumstances surrounding Applicant’s recurrent use of marijuana over a 44-year
period, he does not mitigate security concerns with respect to the allegations covered
by Guideline H. 
Personal conduct concerns
Allegations of illegal drug use covered by Guideline H are incorporated as well
under Guideline E. Because Applicant’s marijuana use is adequately covered by
Guideline H, it does not require separate consideration under he disqualifying conditions
potentially applicable under Guideline E.  For the same reasons assigned to holding that
Applicant failed to mitigate drug involvement concerns, conclusions are warranted that
Applicant does not mitigate raised personal conduct concerns about his illegal use of
federally l controlled illegal drugs.
7
Security concerns are raised as well over Applicant’s omission of his past
marijuana use in the e-QIP he completed in August 2016. Based on the evidence
produced in the record, the falsification allegation covered by Guideline E is
unsubstantiated. 
Whole-person assessment
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established insufficient 
probative evidence of his overall trustworthiness, and understanding of DoD policy
constraints on the use of illegal substances to merit eligibility to hold a security
clearance or sensitive position. His contributions to the defense industry are worthy of
respect and appreciation and are taken into account in making an overall evaluation of
his clearance eligibility.  
At this time, though, Applicant is at continued risk of recurrence.  Evaluating all of
the facts and circumstances developed in the record, Applicant fails to mitigate security
concerns associated with the allegations covered by Guidelines H and E pertaining to
his illegal use and possession of marijuana. Favorable conclusions are warranted with
respect to the allegation pertaining to falsification of Applicant’s 2016 e-QIP.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE H (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):           AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: Against Applicant
      
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):          AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a:                                   Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b:                       For Applicant 
                     Conclusion
        In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
8
9
