1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-03656
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
January 19, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On February 24, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
F and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On March 17, 2010, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
August 18, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 29, 2010, and the
hearing was convened as scheduled on November 24, 2010. The Government offered
Exhibits 1 through 8, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his
own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through I at the time of hearing. I granted
Applicant’s request to keep the record open until December 8, 2010, to submit an
additional document, which was received, identified as Exhibit J, and entered into
2
evidence without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on
December 10, 2010. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony
of Applicant and his witness, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 50 years old. He is currently unmarried, but was married from 1981
to 1991, and he has one daughter. He served in the United States Air Force from 1979
to 1994, when he retired as a Master Sergeant. Applicant seeks a DoD security
clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 10 allegations (1.a. through 1.j.) regarding financial difficulties
under Adjudicative Guideline F. The allegations will be discussed below in the same
order as they were listed on the SOR: 
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,361 for a
judgement filed against him in December 2006. At the hearing, Applicant testified that at
the time this judgement was entered, he had been deployed outside the United States,
and he had never received the subpoena or notice of the trial for this debt.  He first
learned of the judgement when he reviewed his credit report in 2008. He averred that he
now has an attorney who tried to resolve this out of court, but ultimately he filed an
appeal to have the decision set aside. Applicant testified that he had a court date on
December 10, 2010 to set this verdict aside. (Tr at 34-39.)
Applicant indicated that he is willing to pay the amounts of the judgements listed
on 1.a., 1.c. and1.d., as that is the amount he owes, but the law firm representing the
creditors is seeking many thousands more than the amount of the judgements. Since he
was not given the opportunity to represent himself in court, he is now seeking to have
the judgements set aside. (Tr at 43-46, 69-70.)
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,723. Applicant
testified that several of the debts listed on the SOR were not his debts. On September
17, 2008, he engaged the services of a law firm to dispute these debts. (Exhibit I. ) he
paid the firm $59 a month for many months until the only three debts still listed on his
credit reports were the judgements that he planned to challenge with a different law
firm. (TR at 41-42.) As a result of letters sent by the law firm challenging these debts,
many of them were dropped from his credit report. He averred that this debt has now
been removed from his credit report. (Tr at 39-42.) While this debt was listed on Exhibit
6, the credit report dated December 18, 2009, it is not listed on the two most recent
credit reports, dated May 10, 2010, and November 17, 2010. (Exhibits 7 and 8.)  I find
this debt  has been resolved. 
3
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,433 for a
judgement filed against him in January 2007. Applicant testified that at the time this
judgement was entered, he was deployed outside the United States, and he had never
received the subpoena or notice of the trial for this debt.  Applicant testified that his
attorney will represent him in court on December 9, 2010, to set this verdict aside. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,874 for a
judgement filed against him in May 2007. Applicant testified that when this judgement
was entered, he was deployed outside the United States, and he had never received
the subpoena or notice of the trial for this debt.  Applicant testified that his attorney will
represent him in court on December 29, 2010, to set this verdict aside. (Tr at 46.) 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,317. Applicant
testified that this debt is for the same original debt as 1.a., above, and as a result of his
law firm challenging this debt, it was dropped from his credit report. (Tr at 47-50.) While
a debt to this creditor was listed on Exhibits 6 through 8, it is not for the amount listed on
the SOR, nor does it show that it is overdue. I find this debt  has been resolved. 
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $83. Applicant
testified that he paid $110.66 on July 1, 2009, to resolve this debt. A receipt attached to
his RSOR shows this debt has been resolved. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,317. Applicant
testified that this debt is for the same original debt as 1.a., above, also listed as 1.e.,
above, and as a result of his law firm challenging this debt, it was dropped from his
credit report. (Tr at 51-52.) This debt is not listed on any of the most recent credit
reports. (Exhibits 6 through 8.) I find this debt  has been resolved. 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,758. Applicant
testified that this debt is for the same original debt as 1.d., above, since this creditor
bank purchased the bank that is listed as the creditor in 1.d. As a result of his law firm
challenging this debt, it was dropped from his credit report. (Tr at 52.) This debt is not
listed on any of the most recent credit reports. (Exhibits 6 through 8.) I find this debt
has been resolved. 
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $235.  Applicant
testified that he was not aware of the origin of this debt, and despite his efforts he could
not locate the creditor of this debt.  As a result of his law firm challenging this debt, it
was dropped from his credit report. (Tr at 53.) This debt is not listed on any of the most
recent credit reports. (Exhibits 6 through 8.) I find this debt  has been resolved. 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $147. Applicant
testified that he was not aware of the origin of this debt, and despite his efforts he could
not locate the creditor of this debt.  As a result of his law firm challenging this debt, it
was dropped from his credit report. (Tr at 54.) This debt is not listed on any of the most
recent credit reports. (Exhibits 6 through 8.) I find this debt  has been resolved. 
4
Applicant provided reasons for his financial difficulties. He testified that as a
single father he continued to support his daughter, including paying for her medical care
in the face of three instances of his daughter losing her baby while pregnant. He also
paid for her housing and schooling. Additionally, he continued to support his ex-wife
after they were divorced, and her child, who was not related to him. (Tr at 80-85.)
Paragraph 2 Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Applicant executed a Security Clearance Application (SCA) on September 16,
2008. (Exhibit 1.) The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to provide truthful and candid
answers to Questions 27 and 28. They will be reviewed in the same order as they were
addressed in the SOR:
2.a. Question 27 d. of the SCA asks, “In the last 7 years have you had any
judgements against you that have not been paid?” Applicant answered “No” to this
question subsection. It is alleged in the SOR that he failed to disclose that he had
judgements against him that had not been paid, as set forth in paragraphs 1.a., 1.c.,
and 1.d., as reviewed above.
Applicant testified that he first viewed his credit report three hours before he
completed his SCA, and while he did see the judgements listed on the report, he had
never been aware of them since he was never served, as has been reviewed above, so
he was not sure if the information was accurate.  He stated that since he was set to
deploy shortly, he did not have time to check if the information about his judgements
was correct. Finally, Applicant testified that he had been working for 12 hours at the
time he completed the SCA, and he was told it had to be finished that night, so he did
not take the time to determine what was correct. (Tr at 54-59.)
2.b. Question 28 a. of the SCA asks, “In the last 7 years have you been over 180
days delinquent on any debts(s)?”  Applicant answered “No” to this question subsection.
It is alleged in the SOR that he failed to disclose that he has been delinquent on the
accounts set forth in subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.j., above.
2.c. Question 28 b. of the SCA asks, “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent
on any debts(s)?” Applicant answered “No” to this question subsection. It is alleged in
the SOR that he failed to disclose that at the time he completed the SCA, he was  over
90 days delinquent on the accounts set forth in subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.j., above.  
Applicant testified that when he first viewed his credit report three hours before
he completed his SCA, he saw debts listed that he did not believe were correct, both
because some appeared to be duplicates and because he knew he had resolved some
of them. (Tr at 58-59.)
Applicant wrote the following on the SCA under “Your Financial Delinquencies”
Additional Comments:
5
I answered no to this question because I was not sure if the loans
that were closed out on my credit report as charge offs were considered
delinquent as they show close out several years ago. There are other
items that are showing balances much greater than the actual balance, for
instance my [charge] card has an actual balance of $47 as of 01 September 08 and
shows past due on my credit report of $938. I am using a consumer credit agency to
challenge these items on my report. I have a Beacon score of 622 from Equifax and
they will be addressing the items on my creditor report and using [a law firm], an online
service that handle [sic] the debts that are still owed.
Applicant  testified that by including this information under Additional Comments,
he was giving notice to the Government that he had some debts on his credit report. (Tr
at 64.)  He also noted that he had applied for security clearances before, and he
believed that an investigation would be held which would show the amounts owed on
the credit reports, so he was not attempting to mislead the Government, nor did he think
it would be possible to do so. (Tr at 72-76.)
Mitigation
Applicant submitted 12 extremely positive character letters from a variety of
individuals who have known him in his professional and personal capacities. (Exhibit B.)
The letters included one from a Major in the United States Army, who had overseen
Applicant as part of his command, and described Applicant as the following: “He is
absolutely professional, trustworthy, displays a superior level of technical competence in
all areas of maintenance, and always puts the needs of others ahead of himself to
ensure mission success. . . He is an asset to any company fortunate to have him and it
is my privilege to write this letter on his behalf.” An Operations Officer in the United
States Army wrote, “[Applicant] is a leader, mentor and consummate team player who
can always motivate those he works with.” 
Applicant’s daughter and ex-wife also wrote very laudatory letters, confirming that
Applicant had not only supported his daughter, especially during her medical difficulties,
but he also financially helped his ex-wife and her other daughter, even when he was not
required to do so.    
Exhibit B also included a Certificate of Excellence that Applicant received for his
outstanding service to the United States Army Air Transport Pacific Flight Detachment
from March 19, 2006, to July 2, 2006.  Exhibit C  includes many certificates and other
records of training, establishing that Applicant has continually worked to improve his
employment capability. 
Applicant also introduced his DD 214 confirming that he retired with an
Honorable Discharge as a Master Sargent in October 1994, as part of a Reduction In
Force. Among the awards he received were: Meritorious Service Medal, Air Force
Commendation Medal with two Oak Leaf Clusters, Air Force Longevity Service Award
Ribbon, Air Force Achievement Medal, and the National Defense Service Medal.
(Exhibit D.)   Applicant also submitted the ratings he received during his career in the Air
6
Force from 1979 to 1992. The rating were always Excellent, most of them of the very
highest rating possible.  He was described as having “outstanding leadership, job
knowledge, dedication, and professional skill” and “diligent efforts and unselfish attitude
[that was] an inspiration.” Finally it was written about Applicant, “he has the technical
knowledge and the self-motivation to go to the top.” (Exhibit D.) 
Exhibit E includes a letter from Applicant’s attorney, confirming that he is
representing Applicant regarding the three judgements that have been reviewed above
as 1.a., 1.c., and 1.d. A copy of a payment of $1,500 made by Applicant to a second
attorney representing him for these judgements was also included in Exhibit E. 
Exhibit I includes letters from creditors establishing that Applicant has resolved
four additional debts over the last three years.
Finally, Applicant also submitted a Personal Financial Statement that showed his
monthly income is $4,785, with his monthly expenses $3,533, leaving a monthly net
remainder of $1,252. (Exhibit J.) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[any] doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
7
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19 (a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19 (c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt. 
     AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties: Under AG ¶  20 (b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As noted
above, Applicant testified that his financial problems resulted in part from the support of
his daughter, especially during her medical problems. Also, the judgements all were
8
entered at a time when he was deployed outside of the United States, and he never
received notice. 
I find that Applicant has acted responsibly to resolve his debts. First, he engaged
the services of one law firm to help him contact and try to resolve those debts that were
legitimate, and to dispute those debts that were not. Thereafter, he engaged the
services of another law firm to set aside the judgements entered against him because
he never received notice of the trials for any of these debts.  At the time of the hearing,
he had court dates approaching when he would be attempting to have the judgements
set aside. Therefore, I find that this mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in
this case. 
AG ¶  20(d) is also applicable since Applicant has “initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”  I find that this mitigating condition
is also a factor for consideration in this case.
I conclude that Applicant has significantly reduced or resolved his overdue debt,
and he has shown that he can maintain financial stability. Therefore, he has mitigated
the financial concerns of the Government.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
With respect to Guideline E, I find it credible that Applicant only became aware of
the judgements and the extent of his overdue debts when he reviewed his credit report
shortly before he completed his SCA.  I also considered the following: he had already
worked 12 hours on the day he completed the SCA and he was preparing to deploy
shortly, he was trying to complete the SCA in one day as he was instructed, since he
had been totally unaware of the judgements and the debts were completely different
from what he understood, he was legitimately confused, and finally and most
significantly, that he did inform the Government in his Additional Comments section of
the SCA that he had debts but he was not certain of their status. Because of all of these
factors, together with Applicant’s testimony that he had applied for security clearances
before and he believed that a background investigation would review his credit report
and other financial information, I find that Applicant did not intend to mislead the
Government regarding his financial situation.
 
In reviewing the disqualifying conditions under Guideline E, I conclude that there
was no “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire” by Applicant. Therefore, I find that neither ¶ 16 (a),
nor any other disqualifying condition, applies against Applicant. I resolve Guideline E for
Applicant.
9
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the Mitigating Conditions apply under Guidelines F and E, considered
with his outstanding years of military service and the extremely positive character letters
written on his behalf, I find that the record evidence leaves me with no significant
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance
under the whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a., through 1.j.: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.c.: For Applicant
10
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
