 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-09893 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
         For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On February 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
In a response to the SOR, dated March 3, 2015 (SOR Response), Applicant 
admitted, with comments, five of the 13 allegations raised under Guideline F and the 
sole allegation raised under Guideline E. He also requested a determination based on 
the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 8, 2015, the Government issued a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) containing seven attachments (“Items”). Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM within the 30 days provided. The case was assigned to me on 
September 22, 2015. Based on my review of the case file and submissions, I find 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old network administrator. He served in the United States 
military from 1998 through 2004, when he was discharged at the rank of staff sergeant. 
From 2004 through 2010, he was employed by a defense contractor. He was 
 
 
 
 
2 
unemployed from March 2010 through January 2011. At that time, he was hired for his 
present position. Applicant has held a security clearance most recently since 2007. 
Divorced in mid-2011 and the father of two minor children, he has since remarried. 
 
On February 7, 2012, Applicant completed a security clearance application 
(SCA). In response to SCA Section 26, he denied having had debts turned over to a 
collection agency or been over 120 days delinquent on any debt in the preceding seven 
years. He did so because he was unaware that many of his accounts were actually in 
collections, as they had been assigned to his wife during their divorce proceedings.1 
After Applicant completed the SCA, the Government generated a credit report that 
detailed multiple delinquent debts in Applicant’s name. These debts were not noted in 
Applicant’s SCA, but he later volunteered information about them in a subject interview.  
 
Now at issue are delinquencies from the 2012 credit report and from a credit 
report generated in July 2014. Applicant addressed these accounts in August 2014 
interrogatories, but his comments were deemed insufficient. Consequently, an SOR was 
issued in February 2015. It noted 13 delinquent debts amounting to about $23,680. 
Applicant admitted the debts reflected at SOR allegations 1.a ($3,027), 1.d ($786), 1.g 
($100), 1.i ($50), and 1.m ($180), amounting to around $4,150. His responses to the 
allegations were brief and often incomplete.2  
 
In his Interrogatory Response, Applicant provided narrative comments regarding 
his actions for each enumerated debt and indicated that he had made contact with his 
creditors. He provided no documentary evidence, however, to that effect. In that same 
response, he provided a series of letters he wrote that he had sent to his creditors 
purporting to challenge various credit report entries, a copy of his divorce decree and 
settlement agreement, a copy of some medical bills, a July 2014 credit report from the 
three leading credit reporting bureaus, and court documents regarding child support 
issues. He provided no specific documentary evidence indicating any payments to any 
of the SOR creditors had been made, unless it is otherwise noted as a satisfied debt on 
one of the credit reports he provided. All of the debts that the Government alleges in the 
SOR are listed in FORM, Items 5 and 6, including the debts Applicant denies. Applicant 
has presented no documentary evidence indicating that any of the debts at issue have 
been or are being paid or have otherwise been resolved. (FORM at 4). 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
1 FORM, Item 3, at 2. 
 
2 As noted on pages 15-18 of Applicant’s Interrogatory Response (FORM, Item 7) Interrogatory Debts 
a-j are the same as SOR debts 1.a through 1.j. In addition, Interrogatory Debts 1.m, 1.n, and 1.o are 
the same as SOR debts 1.k, 1.l, 1.m.  
 
 
 
 
3 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). To allay Applicant’s concerns, it is 
stressed that his loyalty is not an issue in this matter. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 
 
 
4 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
acquired a substantial amount of delinquent debt (approximately $23,680) of which 
Applicant admits responsibility for about $4,150. His assertions regarding his actions on 
behalf of the remaining allegedly delinquent accounts often lack a nexus with the 
evidence offered. These facts are sufficient to suggest or invoke two financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
Applicant’s debts are large, ongoing, and unresolved. There are insufficient facts 
to conclude that the delinquent debts at issue were the result of circumstances beyond 
Applicant’s control and that, given the circumstances, he acted responsibly at the time. 
There is no documentary evidence showing Applicant has received financial counseling, 
that progress has been made on the debts at issue, or that Applicant’s financial issues 
are now under control. Consequently, mitigating conditions 20(a)-(c) do not apply. 
 
Based on the scant facts provided, there is insufficient evidence to show that 
Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
his debts. No track record of financial stability has been presented, nor has a pattern of 
commonsense financial maintenance been put forward. Therefore, mitigating condition 
 
 
 
 
5 
20(d) does not apply. In addition, Applicant failed to establish or document a basis to 
dispute any of the debts at issue, obviating application of mitigating condition 20(e).  
 
 Guideline E, Personal Conduct   
 
 AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern relating to personal conduct. It states 
that conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 Here, on his February 2012 SCA, Applicant denied having had any delinquent 
debts turned over to a collection agency or having been over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt in the preceding seven years.  The evidence shows, however, that this answer 
is incorrect. If his answer was intentionally false, or if there is evidence Applicant meant 
to conceal the truth, Guideline E disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a) would apply:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 In the absence of an intent to deceive, as opposed to simple human error or 
mistake, falsity cannot be found. Here, there is no evidence of intentional falsity. A 
merely incorrect answer is not the same as intentional falsity or an attempt to mislead. 
Consequently, no disqualifying condition is raised.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based on consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old network administrator who served in the United States 
military from 1998 through 2004. From 2004 through 2010, he was employed by a 
defense contractor, then unemployed from March 2010 through January 2011. 
 
 
 
 
6 
Applicant has held a security clearance most recently since 2007. Applicant is married 
with two minor children from a prior marriage which ended in divorce in 2011.  
 
The SOR at issue reflects numerous delinquent debts amounting to over 
$23,000. Although Applicant only admits a small percentage of that debt, he submitted 
no documentary evidence showing that any payments or quantifiable progress has been 
made toward addressing the debt at issue. He presented no documentary evidence 
providing a clear nexus between the alleged debts and any circumstances beyond his 
control, or indicating that he acted responsibly at the time. No documentation was 
presented showing a sound basis for disputing the debts at issue. In general, scant 
documentary evidence regarding these debts has been provided showing that Applicant 
has a realistic plan to address his debts and has implemented that plan toward the 
resolution of his financial distress.  
 
The question in this case goes beyond whether the debts at issue are paid or 
otherwise resolved. The issue is whether Applicant’s financial circumstances raise 
concerns about his suitability to hold a security clearance under both the guidelines and 
the whole-person concept. Here, while he supplemented the record with written 
narrative, there is insufficient documentary evidence to mitigate the finance-related 
security concerns raised.  As security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials, I find that Applicant has failed to meet his burden in this case.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a    For Applicant 
 
           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
