 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-09598 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On May 2, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
On June 2, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated September 22, 2015, was provided to him by letter dated 
September 24, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on October 5, 2015. He was 
afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional information within the 
30-day period, which was received without objection.1 On February 17, 2016, the case 
was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations except SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.j, and 1.o, to 
which he admitted.   
 
Background Information2 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor since May 2008. He 
seeks a security clearance in conjunction with his current employment. Applicant was 
initially granted a security clearance when he as on active duty in the U.S. Army, 
discussed below. (Items 2, 4)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1997. During his June 15, 2012 
Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), he stated that 
he had been attending college on-line and in person from September 2010 to present. 
(Item 4) Applicant served on active duty in the Army from February 2002 to February 
2006, and served in the Army National Guard from February 2006 to November 2010. 
(Item 2) 
 
Applicant married in May 2008, and is currently separated, date unknown. (Item 
2; FORM response) He has two stepchildren, a 16-year-old stepson and a 12-year-old 
stepdaughter. (Item 2) 
  
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists 15 delinquent debts that are essentially broken down into 
two categories – 7 medical debts and 8 non-medical debts. The medical debts were 
incurred by his estranged wife and the non-medical debts consist primarily of 
household-related debts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.o; Item 4) Department Counsel noted in his 
FORM that Applicant had failed to provide documentation to support claims made in his 
                                                          
1
 Applicant’s additional information will be referred to as FORM response.  
 
2
 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was 
the most current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
SOR answer that his debts were not valid, were being paid by health care insurance, 
were paid, or that payment arrangements had been made. Applicant, in large part, 
corrected those shortcomings in his FORM response. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began in approximately 2008 when his job as a 
Government contractor required him to deploy to Iraq. While deployed, Applicant’s wife 
assumed responsibility for managing the household finances. However, shortly after 
assuming this responsibility, she went into a deep and debilitating depression. She 
continued to incur debt and not pay bills. Applicant attempted to manage the family 
finances while he was in Iraq to the best of his ability. (Item 4)   
 
Applicant’s wife continues to struggle with depression. Applicant reports that her 
“medical procedures were due to numerous attempted suicides and [his wife’s] refusal 
to seek help.” Applicant has health care insurance to cover his wife’s medical bills; 
however, he claims that the insurance company requires her medical records to process 
payment and his wife refuses to release her medical records. Applicant and his wife are 
no longer on speaking terms.  As of the date of his FORM response, Applicant’s wife 
was in the intensive care unit following a suicide attempt. Applicant’s mother-in-law was 
in the process of having his wife committed to a long-term mental health care facility, as 
well as, assuming custody of her minor grandson. Applicant recognizes the adverse 
impact unpaid bills have on his credit and security clearance process and is committed 
to resolve these medical bills in a timely manner. (Item 4; FORM response) 
 
The first seven SOR debts are for medical bills related to his wife. Two of those 
debts have been resolved and have been removed from Applicant’s credit report. The 
remaining five debts remain unpaid; however, Applicant is working with his health care 
insurance company to resolve these debts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.g; Items 1, 4; FORM 
response)  
 
The remaining eight SOR debts have been resolved or are being resolved. The 
following summarizes their status: SOR ¶ 1.h – $3,418 collection account for property 
management company. Creditor has no record of debt and Applicant is in the process of 
having account removed from his credit reports.  SOR ¶ 1.i - $1,468 collection account 
for cable television. Applicant is making $50 monthly payments by direct debit. SOR ¶ 
1.j - $1,458 collection account for cable television. Applicant is making $50 monthly 
payments by direct debit. SOR ¶ 1.k - $244 collection account for cell phone. Account is 
paid in full. SOR ¶ 1.l - $121 collection account for local municipality. Account is paid in 
full. SOR ¶ 1.m - $272 collection account for utility bill. Account is paid in full. SOR ¶ 1.n 
- $830 charged-off credit card bill. Account is paid in full. SOR ¶ 1.o – $2,990 charged-
off credit card bill. Applicant is making $308 monthly payments by direct debit. (Item 1; 
FORM response) 
 
Applicant has paid, is paying, or is attempting to resolve all of his SOR debts. As 
noted, he has addressed the debts within his control and those debts outside of his 
control, which would be medical bills related to his wife, remain a work in progress. 
There is no record evidence that Applicant sought financial counseling nor does the 
record contain any character evidence. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”   
 
The evidence establishes the validity of the allegations and the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His debt is 
a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and his 
behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgement.   
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. His wife’s medical problem could not 
have been foreseen, and there does not appear to be any short-term resolution for 
Applicant as it pertains to his wife’s condition. His wife’s depression began in 2008 
when he was deployed to Iraq. Her condition deteriorated to the point where she was 
committed to a mental health facility following her latest suicide attempt. 
  
AG ¶¶ 20(c) is partially applicable and 20(d) is fully applicable. Although 
Applicant did not receive formal financial counseling, his debts are being resolved and 
there are clear indications that his financial problems are resolved or under control. As 
noted above, Applicant has made a concerted effort to repay his creditors through a 
series of actions to include contacting his health care insurance and taking responsibility 
for the debts within his control. Given Applicant’s resources, he is approaching his debts 
in a responsible and measured way.3 Applicant disputes the validity of the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.h triggering application of AG ¶ 20(e); however, further action is required by 
Applicant to challenge this debt so it does not appear on his credit report. 
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                                          
3
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guidelines F and E is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further 
comments are warranted. 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. Applicant’s employment with a defense contractor weighs 
heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. He 
is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR debts are 
resolved or are being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the 
whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of 
“‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
(internal citations omitted). 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his 
financial responsibility. His efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident he will resolve the remaining debts on 
his SOR and maintain his financial responsibility.4    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:  For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
                                                          
4
Of course, the Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit 
reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the 
Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the 
security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative 
security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation of a promise 
made in a security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and 
may support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not have “authority to 
grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 
2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or 
probationary security clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a security clearance while she works 
on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this Applicant’s security clearance is 
conditional. 
