 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-09005 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 18, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On March 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F.  The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted or denied.  
 
2 
 
 
On April 17, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On September 9, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On September 28, 2015, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On October 30, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for November 16, 2015. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 5, which were received into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and offered Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A, which was received into evidence without objection.  
 
I held the record open until January 16, 2016, to afford the Applicant an 
opportunity to offer additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE B through AE 
L, which were received into evidence without objection. On November 24, 2015, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.h, and denied SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.i., with are duplicates. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old senior instrumentation technician employed by a 
defense contractor since February 1985. He seeks a secret security clearance which 
is required to work on future projects for his company. He previously held a security 
clearance when he was initially hired by his company, but it was allowed to lapse. (GE 
1, GE 3; Tr. 15-16, 21-22)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1981. He was awarded an associate of 
science degree in engineering electronics in 1983. (GE 1; AE J; Tr. 16-18) Applicant 
was married from 1997 to 2002, and that marriage ended by divorce. He remarried in 
2003 and has a 22-year-old stepson, a 12-year-old son, and a 9-year-old daughter. 
Applicant’s wife is not employed outside the home and homeschools their youngest 
child. (GE 1; Tr. 18-21) Applicant did not serve in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1, GE 3) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists nine debts. Excluding the two duplicate debts (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.i), the remaining seven debts total $21,570. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.i) Applicant’s 
financial difficulties began in 2004 when he purchased a home for $375,000 on a five-
year interest-only loan. His monthly house payment for those five years was $1,200; 
however, at the conclusion of five years, his monthly house payment increased to 
approximately $3,000 in 2009. Applicant’s mother-in-law lived with his family from 
2003 and was contributing $700 a month until she passed away in 2008. When 
Applicant’s payments increased to $3,000 a month in 2009, his father paid his house 
payments for 13 months. (SOR answer; GE 3, Tr. 22-24) 
 
3 
 
 
When Applicant’s father was no longer able to afford to pay his house 
payments, Applicant faced foreclosure. He retained the services of a foreclosure 
attorney, who was able to qualify Applicant for the Home Affordable Refinance 
Program (HARP) in 2014, reducing his monthly house payments to $1,746. However, 
during the time he was unable to pay the higher house payments, he relied on credit 
cards to make ends meet for his family. (Tr. 24-26, 28) 
 
Applicant has been paying down the duplicate debt listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.i, which is a vehicle repossession, through wage garnishment. When Applicant was 
unable to make his payments, his vehicle was repossessed followed by a 2011 
judgment against him for $16,065. As of December 2015, his balance was $5,269. (Tr. 
29; AE A, AE L) In December 2015, Applicant also paid in full the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.f, which is a $51 cable television collection. (AE L)  
 
In December 2016, Applicant enrolled his remaining SOR debts in a reputable 
debt consolidation program. The total amount of his debts enrolled in the program is 
$23,520 and his monthly payments to the program are $581. At the time of enrollment, 
his total estimated payoff time was three years, eight months. A review of his plan 
suggests a measured responsible plan to repay his creditors and included financial 
counseling. Applicant is making monthly payments to the plan through direct debit. 
(AE B, AE L) 
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is approximately $65,000, but with overtime his 
annual salary averages $92,000. (Tr. 26) His post-hearing budget shows a net 
monthly remainder of $1,396. Applicant’s budget further reflects that he is leading a 
modest lifestyle and living within his means. (AE H) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Two witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf – his supervisor (SUP) and his 
wife. SUP has known him for 20 years and supervised him for 15 years. SUP 
described him as “very dependable and hardworking” and as “one of the (company’s) 
best” to complete employer assignments. SUP described Applicant as completely 
trustworthy. SUP committed to ensuring that Applicant would receive whatever 
company resources were available to assist him in resolving his financial problems. 
(Tr. 45-52) Applicant’s wife committed to doing what was necessary to resolve their 
financial difficulties. (Tr. 57-58) 
 
Applicant submitted documentation of several cash awards received in the 
2000 to 2015 timeframe for outstanding performance. (AE C, AE E) He also provided 
documentation of management recognition noting his contribution to his team’s 
success achieved in 2015. (AE D, AE J) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
    
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1.  
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
 
5 
 
 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
6 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Partial application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant chose to finance his 
home on a tempting five-year interest-only home loan anticipating that he would be 
able to refinance or somehow be able to make the payments. However, when 
Applicant lost his mother-in-law’s financial contribution and the interest-free portion of 
his loan expired, he was unable to shore up the deficit. Applicant was forced to rely on 
his credit cards to make ends meet. By the time Applicant was able to reduce his 
mortgage to a manageable payment through HARP, his credit has suffered 
considerably. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are fully applicable. Applicant benefited from financial 
counseling offered through his debt consolidation program. He is paying down his 
2011 repossession judgment through garnishment and has made substantial 
progress. Applicant also paid off a cable television collection account. Applicant’s debt 
consolidation plan is a measured responsible solution he has undertaken to repay his 
remaining creditors. He is making payments to the plan by direct debit and as long as 
he remains employed, he will be able to make those payments. Having heard 
Applicant’s testimony, it is clear that this process has made a substantial impression 
on him. He realizes the importance of maintaining financial responsibility and is 
determined to follow through on his payments. AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
 
7 
 
 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s 31 years of employment in the defense industry and having 
previously held a security clearance weighs heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding 
citizen and a productive member of society. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, 
lives within his means, and his SOR debts have been resolved or are being resolved. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept 
of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant’s debts are being paid through a reputable debt consolidation 
program. Due to circumstances, in part, beyond his control, his debts became 
delinquent. Despite his financial setback, it is clear from Applicant’s actions that he is 
on the road to a full financial recovery. These factors show responsibility, 
rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, his financial recovery, the steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
 
8 
 
 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, his witnesses and 
reference letters, and his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the 
whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns. 1   
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.i:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
1
Of course, the Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through 
credit reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar 
the Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to 
reconsider the security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct 
having negative security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). 
Violation of a promise made in a security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns 
under Guideline E, and may support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge 
does not have “authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-
06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). 
See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority 
to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security clearance to allow him the opportunity to have 
a security clearance while he works on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this 
Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
