 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08141 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the alcohol consumption, drug involvement, and 
personal conduct security concerns.  Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
March 27, 2012.  On December 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR)2 to Applicant detailing security concerns under the 
Guidelines G: Alcohol Consumption; H: Drug Involvement; and E: Personal Conduct.3 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 Item 1.  (SOR) 
 
3 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 31, 2014,4 and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  The Government’s written 
brief with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on May 7, 2015.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit documentary material to refute, extenuate, 
mitigate or explain the security concerns.  Applicant received the FORM on May 28, 
2015.  He did not submit a response to the FORM, nor did he assert any objections to 
the Government’s evidence. 
 
The case was assigned to me on March 1, 2016.  The Government’s exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 1 to 4) are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges five alcohol-related arrests and one arrest involving drug 
possession; two incidents of suspension from work due to alcohol use; three 
opportunities for alcohol and/or drug treatment resulting in diagnoses of alcohol abuser 
and alcohol dependent; use of marijuana over a period of many years, most recently 
between 2012 and 2014 while holding a security clearance; and failure to report recent 
alcohol-related arrests to his facility security officer.   
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except for SOR ¶ 2.a, which 
alleged use of marijuana with varying frequency from about 1970 to about 1995.  He 
denied the allegation, however his denial contradicts a sworn statement he made in 
2001 wherein he stated “I smoke (sic) marijuana from about 1970 to Feb 1995.”5  The 
SOR allegations are supported by Applicant’s SCA, summaries of interviews (PSIs), 
sworn statement, and his responses to the Government’s interrogatories.6  Under 
Guideline E, Applicant failed to answer the cross-alleged allegation, listed as SOR ¶ 
3.a, but admitted the underlying allegation related to use of marijuana while possessing 
a security clearance – alleged in SOR 2.d.7 
 
 No documentary evidence was submitted with Applicant’s Answer or in response 
to the SOR or this FORM, although he supplied several documents with his response to 
Government interrogatories to include some police and court records, and records 
related to his alcohol and drug counseling.8  Since Applicant and Department Counsel 
                                                                                                                                                                           
 
4 Item 1.  (Answer) 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Items 2–4. 
 
7 Item 1. 
 
8 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
elected to proceed with a decision without a hearing, I was unable to evaluate 
Applicant’s credibility and demeanor, or to make further inquiry into his drug and alcohol 
history, and his current status. 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old pipe welder for a defense contractor since 1974.  He 
has not served in the military but has held a security clearance since at least 2002.  He 
earned his GED degree in 2000 and is unmarried.9   
 
The record reflects that Applicant has a long history of alcohol-related arrests, 
from 1985 to 2013.  He has undergone alcohol-related treatment from 1995 to 2014 in 
various forms including inpatient, outpatient, court-ordered counseling, and employer-
provided treatment.  Applicant was twice suspended by his employer after reporting to 
work while under the influence of alcohol.  In 2000, he was ordered to undergo alcohol 
treatment in lieu of termination.10  Applicant checked into a treatment center for a 30-
day detox program, but left on his own without completing the program because he 
believed he had achieved all the benefits he needed.11  As a result of inpatient 
treatment, Applicant was diagnosed an alcohol abuser in 1995, and alcohol dependent 
in 2000.  Up until 2000, Applicant believed he had a significant drinking problem that 
affected his relationships and work performance.12  Despite this, he resumed drinking in 
2010.13   
 
Most recently, he was arrested for driving under the Influence (DUI) in 2011 and 
2013.  He admitted that he did not disclose these arrests to his facility security officer 
(FSO) as required by DoD personnel security regulations,14 however he indicated that 
he was unaware of this requirement.15   
                                                                                                                                                                           
 
9 Items 2 and 3. 
 
10 Item 1. 
 
11 Item 3 (May 8, 2012 PSI). 
 
12 Item 3.  In an interview summarized by an OPM investigator, Applicant acknowledged that he was too 
busy drinking to work on relationships.  He would be hung-over at work and call in sick.  He would not 
save any money but spend it at the bars. 
 
13 Item 3 (May 8, 2012 PSI). 
 
14 Personnel Security Program, DoD 5200.2-R, ¶ C9.1.4–C9.1.4.2.2 (“Individuals must familiarize 
themselves with pertinent security regulations that pertain to their assigned duties.   Further, individuals 
must be aware of the standards of conduct required of persons holding positions of trust in this 
connection, individuals must recognize and avoid the kind of personal behavior that would result in 
rendering one ineligible for continued assignment in a position of trust. In the final analysis, the ultimate 
responsibility for maintaining continued eligibility for a position of trust rests with the individual. . . .  
Moreover, individuals having access to classified information must report promptly to their security office:  
. . .  Any information of the type referred to in paragraph C2.2.1. or Appendix 8.”) 
 
15 Item 3.  No evidence has been offered to show that he knew or should have known of the reporting 
requirement. 
 
4 
 
His last arrest for DUI in August 2013, resulted in a conviction and sentence to 
include the mandatory use of an ignition interlock device along with alcohol counseling.  
In his response to interrogatories, he stated that he stopped drinking in December 2013 
as a result of this DUI arrest.  In April 2014, Applicant checked into outpatient alcohol 
and drug dependence treatment.  At the initiation of treatment in January 2014, he was 
tested for drugs and alcohol.16  This test reported a positive result for THC.17  
Throughout the remainder of his treatment, he tested negative for alcohol and illegal 
substances, and successfully completed the program in April 2014. 
 
The record indicates that Applicant also has a long history of marijuana use.  He 
stated that he used marijuana from about 1970 to February 1995.18  He was arrested 
and charged with possession of marijuana in 1984.19  Applicant used marijuana 
occasionally on weekends from the late 1980s to the late 1990s.20  He stopped use 
from 2000 to 2012.  He again began using in November 2012 to December 2012 to help 
him sleep.21  Most recently, he admitted to use from 2012 to January 2014.22  During 
this period of renewed drug use, he held a DoD security clearance.  Applicant began 
this additional period of marijuana use just eight months after completing his current 
SCA and only six months after being interviewed by an OPM investigator for his 
clearance renewal.23 
 
Applicant now claims that he has no intention of using alcohol or marijuana again 
and is attending Alcoholics Anonymous meetings.24 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                           
   
16 The SOR did not allege a concern for testing positive for illegal drug use.  I am only considering this 
non-alleged conduct, as with all such information, in assessing Applicants mitigation case, credibility and 
whole-person factors. 
 
17 THC is an abbreviation for tetrahydrocannabidinol: the active ingredient in cannabis, giving it its 
narcotic and psychoactive effects.   Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House, Inc. 
http://www.dictionary.com/browse/thc (accessed: March 11, 2016). 
 
18 Item 4. 
 
19 Items 1-4. 
 
20 Item 3. 
 
21 Item 3. 
 
22 Item 1. 
 
23 Items 2-3.  Applicant completed his SCA on March 27, 2012, and was interviewed by an OPM 
investigator in May, 2012.  The SCA and interview included inquiries into illegal drug use.   
 
24 Item 3 (response to drug interrogatories). 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.”  The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.25  In Department of Navy v. Egan26, the Supreme Court stated that the burden 
of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.27 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”   It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.28 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to sensitive and classified information.  Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
                                                     
25 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan.27, 1995). 
 
26 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to 
a security clearance). 
 
27 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
28 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
6 
 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive or classified information.  Such decisions entail 
a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of sensitive or classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21:  
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  
Based on the evidence, I find that the following disqualifying conditions apply: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual 
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
AG ¶ 22(b): alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or 
duty in an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent; 
 
AG ¶ 22(d): diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(f): relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of alcohol-related incidents, including five arrests 
and two suspensions by his employer after reporting to work while under the influence 
of alcohol.  He has undergone alcohol-related treatments to include inpatient, 
outpatient, court-ordered counseling, and employer-provided treatment.  Applicant was 
diagnosed an alcohol abuser in 1995 and alcohol dependent in 2000.  Most recently, he 
was arrested for DUI in 2011 and 2013.   
 
 
7 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
AG ¶ 23(c): the individual is a current employee who is participating in a 
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and 
relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; and  
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program. 
  
 Although Applicant has been offered several alcohol-treatment opportunities,29 
he has a history of returning to alcohol abuse despite diagnoses of alcohol abuser and 
alcohol dependence.  In addition, he failed to complete employer-sponsored treatment 
in 2000, returned to drinking in 2010, and was again arrested for DUI in 2011 and 2013.  
Applicant has provided little documentary evidence of the likelihood of successfully 
conquering his alcohol abuse problems, establishing a pattern of abstinence, and 
eliminating relapses.  Although this may be difficult to prove in the abstract, his past 
behavior weighs heavily against current promises to abstain from drinking and to 
continue participation in an alcohol treatment program.   
 
 Based on the evidence presented, I find Applicant’s long history of treatment and 
relapse, combined with numerous DUI arrests and two suspensions from work, leave 
me with significant doubts about Applicant’s overall ability or willingness to face his 
alcohol dependence problems and remain free from future alcohol-related incidents.  No 
mitigating condition has been fully satisfied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
29 Attending alcohol and drug treatment alone does not suggest a security concern.  E.g., SOR ¶ 1.j. 
 
8 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ Drugs are 
defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, 
stimulants, and hallucinogens).  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  
Based on the evidence, I find that the following disqualifying conditions apply: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction”;  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant has a long history of marijuana use to include an arrest for 
possession of marijuana and testing positive for THC.  More recently, he 
admitted to using marijuana from November 2012 to January 2014 while holding 
a security clearance. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(d): satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment 
program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare 
 
9 
 
requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional. 
 
 Based on the record evidence, no mitigating conditions are applicable.  Applicant 
has a long history of marijuana use, to include periods of abstinence and relapse.  I am 
unable to make a determination as to his current circumstances with regard to 
substance abuse.  Although Applicant claims that he stopped using marijuana after 
completion of his most recent substance abuse treatment program and purportedly 
attends Alcoholics Anonymous, his long history of substance abuse and relatively 
recent drug use, including while holding a security clearance, outweigh his claim of 
abstinence. 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  
Based on the evidence, I find that the following disqualifying condition applies: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant admitted the underlying allegation related to SOR ¶ 3.a (Use of 
marijuana while possessing a security clearance – listed as SOR 2.d).  The remaining 
Guideline E allegation relates to his failure to report his two most recent DUI arrests to 
his facility security officer as required by DoD security regulations for cleared personnel.  
Although Applicant admitted the allegation, he denied knowledge of the reporting 
requirement.  No evidence has been offered that Applicant had knowledge of the 
requirement to report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(b): the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 As a long-standing holder of a security clearance, Applicant is expected to have 
general knowledge of the rules and regulations surrounding his clearance, to include 
recognition of behaviors and incidents that have the potential to impact that clearance.  
These behaviors and incidents are typically the subject of inquiry when applying or 
renewing one’s clearance. The totality of the Applicant’s conduct indicates poor 
judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness.  AG ¶¶ 17(d) and (e) have limited 
applicability to Applicant’s situation in that he has recently completed an alcohol and 
drug counseling program and claims to be abstaining from further drug use.  However, 
little information has been provided to show the extent of Applicant’s efforts to change 
his lifestyle, to live and work without the use of illegal drugs and alcohol, and the current 
results of those efforts.  Without more evidence, full mitigation credit is not appropriate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  I have incorporated the evidence, my findings of 
fact and comments under Guidelines G, H, and E in this whole-person analysis. 
 
 Because of the broad scope and serious nature of the Applicant’s conduct over a 
period of years, I conclude that Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in 
rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government’s 
concerns.  His behavior casts doubts on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  I conclude Applicant did 
not mitigate the Government’s security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   Against Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 3.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
