 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02091 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established financial responsibility by paying some of his delinquent 
debts, although not the two debts alleged in the SOR. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
October 13, 2014. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative 
decision to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On May 18, 2015, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 Applicant answered the 
SOR on June 18, 2015 (Answer), and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Attached to his Answer, he submitted documents disputing the SOR allegations. 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
The case was assigned to me on October 28, 2015. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 2, 2015, 
scheduling a hearing for November 20, 2015. At the hearing, the Government offered 
six exhibits (GE 1 through 6). Applicant testified and submitted four exhibits (AE 1 
through 4). All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on December 2, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the SOR allegations. After a 
thorough review of the evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, 
I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old technologist working for a federal contractor. He 
graduated from high school and attended college during 2000 and 2003, but did not 
earn a degree. He enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in 1987, where he served on active 
duty until he was honorably discharged in March 2001. At the time of his discharge, he 
held the rank of staff sergeant (E-5). He then joined the Active Reserve where he 
served until he was honorably discharged in May 2007. He married his first wife in 1987 
and divorced in 1991. He married his second wife in 1996 and divorced in 2003. He is 
currently single, and he has no children. 
 
Applicant has about 29 years of combined service and work for government 
contractors. After his discharge from the Air Force in 2001, he has worked for six 
different federal contractors in technology-related positions. He held a security 
clearance in the Air Force, which was continued to present because of his work for 
federal contractors. Applicant has held a top secret security clearance since 2007. 
There is no evidence of any security infractions or concerns. He has been working for 
his current employer, a federal contractor, since September 2014. Applicant testified 
that he would never do anything to harm the United States. He has always worked 
diligently to fulfil his work requirements and legal obligations. He believes that he is 
considered to be a valuable employee. 
 
In October 2014, Applicant submitted his most recent SCA requesting the 
continuation of his clearance. In his response to Section 26 (Financial Record), he 
disclosed no financial problems. The subsequent security background investigation 
revealed the two delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR, totaling approximately 
$117,000. 
 
Applicant explained that he purchased a home in 2003 and sold it for $535,000 in 
2006 (property B). He then purchased a second home in 2006-2007, for about $800,000 
(property A). His financial problems started around 2007-2008. His mother was taking 
care of his grandmother, when his mother was diagnosed with cancer. He helped them 
both financially by paying some of their medical and living expenses. Apparently, he 
took a second mortgage on one of his properties to help his mother and grandmother 
financially. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant stated that he worked a second full-time job to increase his earnings 
and be able to pay his mortgages and other debts. Between his two jobs, he was 
earning about $120,000 a year. The contract for his primary job ended, and he had a 
pay cut of about $22,000. With his reduced earnings, he no longer had the income 
required to pay the mortgages. At about the same time, a tenant in another of his 
properties stopped paying the rent, and that home also fell behind on the mortgage. 
Applicant realized that it had been foolish on his part to purchase a second home and 
then have to take a second job to pay the mortgages. While his mother was sick, 
Applicant was unable to work two jobs, because he traveled frequently to another state 
to visit and care for his mother. (GE 1, Tr. 36) 
 
Applicant testified that when he could not afford the mortgage, he contacted the 
mortgage creditor and asked for a loan modification, but the bank refused and started 
foreclosure proceedings. Because of the downturn of the real estate market, a short 
sale of the property was not possible, and the home was foreclosed in 2009.  
 
The status of the alleged SOR delinquent accounts follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleged a past-due second mortgage in the amount of about $12,582, 
with a total balance of $100,708. This was a second mortgage (on property A) that 
Applicant took either to purchase his home or to use the money to support his mother. 
This debt is unresolved. At his hearing, Applicant presented documents showing that he 
sold property B and paid the mortgage balance. At his hearing, Applicant appeared to 
be confused about his properties, and claimed that the settlement documents for 
property B applied to property A. However, it is clear from the record documents that 
property A was foreclosed in 2009, the second mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a 
concerned property A, and it is outstanding. In his January 2012 interview with a 
government investigator, Applicant admitted that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was for 
a second mortgage for property A.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleged a $16,000 charged-off credit-card account. Applicant disputed 
this debt and claimed he did not open the credit-card account, and that it was not his 
debt. Notwithstanding his present claims and dispute, during his January 2012 
statement to a government investigator, Applicant admitted that the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.b was his credit-card debt. At the time of the interview, Applicant promised to 
contact the creditor and establish a payment plan. 
 
I note that at the time of his January 2012 interview, Applicant was questioned 
about nine delinquent accounts, some of which were also reflected in the 2014 credit 
report. (GE 4) The 2015 credit report shows that Applicant paid six of those delinquent 
debts, except for a $1,600 delinquent debt dating back to 2009; a $277 delinquent debt 
dating back to 2012; and the two delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant disclosed that he withdrew money from his TSP 
account, and now he owes the IRS about $25,000. He testified that he has been in 
contact with the IRS and they are in negotiations to establish a payment plan. It is not 
 
4 
 
 
clear whether the TSP money was withdrawn to help his mother or to try to prevent the 
foreclosure of his home. 
 
Applicant believes that his work history and past behavior show that he has been 
a reliable, trustworthy, and responsible federal contractor and employee. There is no 
evidence to show that he has any other outstanding IRS debts, or that he has failed to 
timely file his tax returns. Applicant expressed remorse for his financial situation. He 
believes he has learned a valuable lesson. He understands that he is required to 
maintain financial responsibility to remain eligible for a security clearance and to retain 
his job. Applicant highlighted his years in the service, and his many years working for 
government contractors while possessing access to classified information without any 
security concerns, except for those alleged in the current SOR. 
 
Applicant testified that he has worked hard to fix his financial problems. He pays 
his debts on time, eliminated all unnecessary expenses, and his income is sufficient to 
pay his living expenses. He has been applying for part-time jobs to supplement his 
income and pay his debts quickly. He believes that his financial situation has improved 
substantially. He believes he is not in a position that would make him susceptible to 
blackmail, coercion, or undue influence. He promised to maintain his financial 
responsibility.  
 
Applicant testified that he no longer uses any credit cards. He has been earning 
around $90,000 a year since June-July 2015. Before his recent pay increase, he was 
making about $70,000 a year. His monthly take home pay is around $4,800. He has the 
following monthly expenses: rent - $1,800; car payment - $580; car insurance - $170; 
and utilities - $380. Applicant has about $1,500 left over at the end of the month. (Tr. 
61) 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
5 
 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s two delinquent debts raise the applicability of the following financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns:  
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies, but does not fully mitigate the concerns. Applicant’s 
financial problems are recent and ongoing.  
 
 I considered that Applicant may have been negligent when he purchased a home 
above his financial means. However, he had two jobs and was able to make his 
mortgage payments for some time until his employer lost one of Applicant’s contracts 
and his earnings were reduced by about $22,000. Additional circumstances beyond his 
control contributed to his financial problems – the downturn of the real estate market, 
his inability to modify his mortgage, and his mother’s illness.  
 
 Applicant has two delinquent accounts that have been delinquent since around 
2009. Nevertheless, when Applicant was interviewed in 2012, he had nine delinquent 
accounts. The 2015 credit report (GE 5) shows that Applicant resolved six of those 
delinquent accounts. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find Applicant has shown 
sufficient financial responsibility for AG ¶ 20(b) to apply.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) apply, in part. There is no evidence Applicant participated in 
financial counseling. However, Applicant has been making efforts to resolve his 
delinquent debts. He has gained a better grasp of his financial situation and his finances 
appear to be under control. With his current job earnings, Applicant will be able to 
establish viable payment plans to address the remaining debts alleged in the SOR. 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant has shown financial responsibility and 
sufficient progress in the resolution of his debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
 
7 
 
 
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, 
but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a federal contractor. His financial 
problems were caused, in part, by circumstances beyond his control: the reduction of 
his pay; the downturn of the real estate market; and his mother’s terminal illness. He 
established financial responsibility by maintaining contact with his creditors and paying 
some of the debts he acquired at the time of his home foreclosure in 2009. He 
understands that he is required to maintain financial responsibility to remain eligible for 
a security clearance. For all these reasons, I believe that Applicant will continue to 
responsibly pay his debts and maintain his financial responsibilities. 
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:  
 
[T]he concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment, and I believe he will maintain his financial responsibility.2 
                                            
2The Government has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s finances. 
The Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, 
investigation, and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from 
subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security 
significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security 
significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation of a promise made in a 
security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E (personal 
conduct), and may support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not 
have “authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 
(App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR 
Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant 
[a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security clearance to allow [the applicant] the opportunity to have 
 
8 
 
 
On balance, and considering the facts and circumstances in the context of the 
whole person, I find that Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                            
a security clearance while [the applicant] works on [his or] her financial problems.”). This footnote does 
not imply that this decision to grant Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
