 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
                                                              
           
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11795 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: S. Ricardo Narvaiz, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate his history of alcohol abuse and criminal behavior. His 
contradictory statements raise questions about his credibility and the validity of his 
favorable evidence. On balance, I find that not enough time has passed for me to 
conclude that Applicant has overcome his alcohol dependence, that he is living sober, 
and that he has made permanent lifestyle changes to prevent any future alcohol 
relapses and criminal behavior. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 6, 2011. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant or 
deny Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On February 6, 2015, the DOD Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol consumption) and Guideline E (personal 
conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on March 4, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2015. 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
On August 10, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a notice of hearing, scheduling Applicant’s hearing for September 30, 2015. Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered eight exhibits into 
evidence (GE 1 through 8), and Applicant offered one exhibit into evidence (AE A, 
comprised of Tabs 1 through 3). Applicant testified and presented the testimony of three 
witnesses. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on October 8, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a through 1.g, and 2.b through 2.d, with explanations. He denied the factual 
allegations in SOR ¶ 2.a. His admissions to the SOR and at his hearing are 
incorporated as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence, 
and having observed Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old security event monitor working for a federal contractor. 
He attended college from 2002 to 2008, and received a bachelor’s degree in Information 
Science and Systems. He has never been married and has no children. Applicant has 
been working for his current employer, a federal contractor, since October 2010. This is 
his first security clearance application.  
 
In May 2005, Applicant was driving while intoxicated and was involved in an 
accident. He was charged with hit and run. Applicant stated that the charge was later 
dismissed. In November 2006, Applicant was charged with driving with a suspended 
license. The charge was not prosecuted. (GE 7, Tr. 111) 
 
In July 2007, Applicant drove while intoxicated and hit some cars on the side of 
the road. He was charged with driving-attempting to drive a vehicle while impaired by 
alcohol. He claimed he did not realize he had hit the cars and drove home. The police 
arrested him at his home. In January 2008, he was given probation before judgment, 
placed on one-year supervised probation, paid a fine, and required to attend substance 
abuse counseling. (GE 5) 
 
In his January 2011 SCA, Applicant disclosed that in 2006 he tested positive 
during a drug-screening test and was terminated from his job. In response to questions 
on Section 22 (Police Record), Applicant disclosed several criminal offenses. In 
November 2009, he was charged with reckless driving. He pled guilty to a reduced 
charge of speeding and paid a fine.  
 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In response to Section 23 (Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity) of his 2011 SCA, 
Applicant disclosed that he illegally used marijuana with varying frequency between July 
2002 and July 2007. While in college, he occasionally smoked marijuana for 
recreational purposes. He disclosed his use of marijuana during his court-ordered 
alcohol abuse counseling after his 2007 DUI, and he was treated for both alcohol and 
marijuana. Applicant claimed that he has not used marijuana since 2007. (GE 3) 
 
In July 2012, Applicant was interviewed by a government background 
investigator. During the interview, Applicant discussed the criminal incidents he 
disclosed in his 2011 SCA, and his alcohol consumption. He stated that he started 
drinking at age 17. His average alcohol consumption was three glasses of vodka or 
brandy. The average amount of alcohol consumed to intoxication was a bottle of vodka 
or brandy.  
 
During the interview, Applicant disclosed one additional incident, that in 
December 2011, he was arrested and charged with DWI. The subsequent investigation 
disclosed the following charges from his December 2011 incident: driving while under 
the influence of alcohol (DUI); failure to control vehicle speed in highway to avoid 
collision; following closer than reasonable and prudent; and negligent driving in careless 
and imprudent manner endangering property, life, and person. Applicant pled guilty to 
the last three charges and the first two charges were Nolle Prosequi. (GE 3 and 4) 
 
In January 2012, Applicant was required to enroll in a 26-session intensive, 
outpatient treatment program. He was discharged from the program in October 2012. 
The discharge document indicates that at the time of his admission, Applicant had a 
three-year history or pathological use of alcohol. He was prescribed Antabuse and 
Doxepin.  
 
In 2012, Applicant twice violated the Interlock system installed in his vehicle. He 
claimed that one violation was due to the food he consumed, and the second violation 
was because he used a face wipe to clean his face. He claimed he never consumed 
alcohol while he had the Interlock system in his car. During the substance abuse 
treatment program, Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol dependence. He completed 
the mandated 26-session treatment program, but he did not complete the 
recommended continuing care rehabilitation plan. Applicant suddenly stopped attending 
the continuing care treatment program and attempts to contact him were unsuccessful. 
(GE 2) In his answer to the SOR, and at his hearing, Applicant explained that he 
stopped attending the aftercare program because he no longer needed it.  
 
In his answer to the SOR (certified in March 2015), and in his response to DOHA 
interrogatories (certified in January 2014), Applicant admitted that he had continued 
consuming alcohol after he was diagnosed with alcohol dependence in 2012. He stated 
his intent to continue consuming alcohol in moderation. At his hearing, Applicant 
claimed that nobody informed him about his alcohol dependence diagnosis, and he did 
not know about it. Applicant further claimed that he had not consumed any alcohol since 
December 2011 – “I have not touch a drink since.” (Tr. 100) He testified that he did not 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
intend to consume alcoholic beverages in the future. (Tr. 100) He disclosed; however, 
that he received another speeding ticket in August 2015. 
 
I do not find Applicant’s hearing statements to be credible. Applicant’s Facebook 
post of June 20, 2014, shows that at least on or about June 20, 2014, he consumed 
alcoholic beverages to intoxication. Considering the evidence as a whole (including 
Applicant’s answers to DOHA interrogatories and his answers to the SOR), I find that he 
continued to consume alcoholic beverages after his 2012 alcohol dependence 
diagnosis. I also find that up until the day of his hearing, he had stated his intent to 
continue consuming alcohol in moderation.  
 
Applicant expressed remorse and regret for his alcohol-related and criminal 
behavior. He explained that many of the incidents occurred when he was young and 
immature (around 21 years old). He is now 31 years old and believes that he has 
matured and learned from his mistakes. Applicant claimed he refrained from alcohol 
consumption for one year after his 2007 DWI. He started consuming alcohol in 2008, 
but in moderation. He acknowledged he made a mistake by drinking and driving in 
2011. He did not believe he was intoxicated and refused a breathalyzer test.  
 
Applicant claimed that he voluntarily enrolled in the 2012 substance abuse 
treatment program. He wanted to take every step necessary to prevent jeopardizing his 
future. He also wanted help to ensure he never engages in similar criminal behavior. 
Applicant testified that the judge only ordered him to complete the program he had 
started. Applicant averred he started his rehabilitation efforts in earnest after his 2011 
DWI charge and substance abuse treatment program. He considers that treatment his 
turning point. He realized he needed to control his alcohol consumption to take control 
of his life and protect his future. Applicant acknowledged that in the past he consumed 
alcoholic beverages to excess; however, he does not believe that he has a drinking 
problem. 
 
Applicant believes that he has made significant changes in his lifestyle to avoid 
consuming alcohol to excess and to prevent any future alcohol-related misconduct. He 
claimed that he is now more conscious of his health and what he eats. He attends the 
gym three times a week. He uses the gym to release stress and frustration, and to 
prevent consuming alcohol. He claimed he is now in a stable relationship and he is 
dedicated to his live-in girlfriend. They have been together for six years, and living 
together during the last two and one-half years. He is also dedicated to his family and 
his work. 
 
Applicant presented three witnesses (two supervisors and a coworker) and a 
statement from another supervisor. He is considered by all to be a valuable employee 
who displays excellent performance and always meets or exceeds his job requirements. 
Applicant pursues advanced training and certifications, increasing his technical 
expertise and value to his employer. His references believe that Applicant demonstrates 
integrity, deals well with ethical issues, and is responsive and well-liked by his 
customers.  
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s excellent performance was recognized by his peers with nominations 
as employee of the month in May, June, and October 2014. His managers also 
recognized his performance and awarded him pay bonuses in July 2014 and August 
2015, and an appreciation award in November 2014. All of his references lauded 
Applicant’s judgment, character, and trustworthiness. He is trusted to provide services 
and to communicate with senior clients. Applicant’s references strongly recommended 
his eligibility for a clearance. 
 
Applicant’s supervisors testified that they have never observed any signs that 
would make them believe Applicant has an alcohol consumption problem. He is always 
at work on time, never calls in sick, and he is always available and willing to work 
overtime or during emergency situations.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G the Government’s concern is that excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess, from 2005 to at least December 
2011. He exercised questionable judgment by consuming alcohol to excess and 
engaging in criminal misconduct on two occasions (2007 and 2011). He was diagnosed 
with alcohol dependence in 2012. Despite his diagnosis, Applicant has continued to 
consume alcoholic beverages, and stated his intention to do so in the future, at least up 
to the day of his hearing. 
 
Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 22(a): “alcohol-related incidents away from work, 
such as driving while under the influence, . . . or other incidents of concern, regardless 
of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;” AG ¶ 
22(c): “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent;” and AG ¶ 22(d): “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional . . . of 
alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence,” apply.  
 
  Four of the Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 (c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
  All of the above mitigating conditions partially apply, but do not fully mitigate the 
alcohol consumption concerns. Applicant has been consuming alcoholic beverages 
since age 17. He has a history of abusing alcohol and exercising poor judgment. 
Between 2005 and 2011, he was involved in three driving while intoxicated offenses, 
two of them involved accidents with other cars. He received extensive alcohol 
counseling in 2007 and 2012. Notwithstanding his 2011 diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence, Applicant continued to consume alcoholic beverages and stated his intent 
to do so in the future, at least up to the day of his hearing.  
 
  I note that Applicant was not convicted of any of the DWI violations. However, he 
admitted that he drove while intoxicated and was involved in two accidents (2005 and 
2011). There is no evidence to show that Applicant has been involved in any further 
alcohol-related misconduct since December 2011. However, the evidence suggests that 
he consumed alcohol twice while he had the Interlock system on his car. Furthermore, 
Applicant’s Facebook post of June 20, 2014, indicates that at least on or about June 20, 
2014, he consumed alcoholic beverages to intoxication. 
 
  At his hearing, Applicant repeatedly claimed that he has been abstinent since 
2011. His testimony is in contradiction with his sworn answer to the DOHA 
interrogatories, and with his answer to the SOR, wherein he admitted to consuming 
alcoholic beverages, albeit in moderation. Moreover, in his answer to DOHA 
interrogatories he expressed his intent to continue consuming alcoholic beverages in 
the future. At his hearing, he claimed he no longer intends to consume alcohol in the 
future.  
 
  Applicant testified that since 2011, he has been dedicating himself to living a life 
of sobriety. He noted his dedication to his health, girlfriend, family, and his work. When 
asked why he stopped attending his aftercare treatment program, he stated that he did 
not need it anymore. He presented no evidence to show that he is participating in any 
substance abuse counseling. He also failed to submit a current favorable diagnosis and 
prognosis from a duly qualified medical professional.  
 
  Notwithstanding Applicant’s steps in the right direction, his contradictory 
statements concerning his use of alcohol since 2011, raise questions as to Applicant’s 
ability or willingness to remain sober. I find that not enough time has passed since his 
last alcohol-related incident for me to conclude that Applicant has overcome his alcohol 
dependence, that he is living sober, and that he has made permanent lifestyle changes 
to prevent any future relapses.  
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The personal conduct security concerns are based, primarily, on the same 
conduct that led to the alcohol consumption security concerns. Additionally, in 2009, 
Applicant was charged with reckless driving (pled guilty to speeding); in 2006, he was 
charged with driving with a suspended license (Nolle Prossed); he illegally used 
marijuana between July 2002 and July 2007; in 2006, he tested positive during a drug 
screening test and was terminated from his job; and in 2005, he was charged with hit 
and run (Nolle Prossed). Applicant’s conduct triggers the applicability of the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . .  
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists three conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 For the same reasons discussed under Guideline G, incorporated herein, I find 
that none of the above personal conduct mitigating conditions fully apply. I carefully 
considered Applicant’s claims of lifestyle changes and evidence of rehabilitation and 
mitigation. Notwithstanding, his contradictory statements concerning his use of alcohol 
since 2011, his expressed intent to consume alcohol in the future, and the Interlock 
violations raise questions about his credibility. His lack of credibility in turn raises 
questions about his testimony concerning lifestyle changes and other favorable 
evidence.  
 
 On balance, I find that not enough time has passed for me to conclude that 
Applicant has overcome his alcohol dependence, that he is living sober, and that he has 
made permanent lifestyle changes to prevent any future alcohol relapses or criminal 
behavior. Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse and criminal behavior continues to cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines G and E in my 
whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has been working 
for his current employer since 2010. Applicant’s supervisors consider him to be a 
valuable employee who displays excellent performance. He was commended for his 
desire to continue learning to increase his technical expertise and value to his employer. 
His references believe that he demonstrates integrity, deals well with ethical issues, and 
is responsive and well-liked by his customers.  
 
Applicant’s excellent performance was recognized by his peers and by his 
managers. All of his references lauded Applicant’s judgment, character, and 
trustworthiness. They recommended his eligibility for a clearance. His supervisors have 
no reason to believe Applicant has an alcohol consumption problem.  
 
Notwithstanding, once a security concern arises regarding an Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
renewal of a security clearance. Unmitigated alcohol consumption and personal conduct 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that granting or reinstatement of a 
security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be 
construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform 
necessary to justify the award of a security clearance in the future. Applicant’s alcohol 
consumption and personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. His access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c,    Against Applicant 
  1.f, and 1.g: 
 
Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b, and 2.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
