 
 1
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 12-10260 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations.)  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on May 30, 2012. 
On May 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
 The SOR was sent to Applicant on May 15, 2015. He received the SOR and on 
June 15, 2015, answered it and requested a decision on the record without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on September 14, 2015. 
On September 17, 2015, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM,) which 
included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5, was sent to Applicant, who was given 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
 2
Government’s evidence. She received the FORM and her Response was received by 
DOHA on December 23, 2015.  Department Counsel made no objections to Applicant’s 
Response.1 I have admitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through F. The case was 
assigned to me on February 23, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges a Chapter 7 bankruptcy and five delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $20,719. In her Answer, Applicant admitted each of the allegations, but 
qualified each admission of SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.f with the repayment status of each debt. 
Her admissions in her Answer are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old assembly technician employed by a defense contractor 
since June 1985. She attended community college from January 2008 until at least April 
2012. She has held a DOD security clearance since 1985. (GX 2.) She has lived at the 
same residence since 2005 and currently resides with her domestic partner. (GX 2.)   
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1998, which was dismissed in 2000.  
She states that she filed bankruptcy after extricating herself from an abusive 
relationship which left her with substantial debt and without assets. (GX 1.) Several 
years later, she again experienced financial difficulties when her partner left her, taking 
her money and leaving her liable for their mutual financial obligations. She began using 
credit cards for living expenses, got financially overextended and, by 2010, became 
delinquent on multiple accounts. (GX 3.)  In an effort to resolve her delinquent debts, 
she contracted with a credit-consolidation company and made numerous payments, 
which she erroneously thought were being applied to her debts.  When she realized that 
the credit-consolidation company was not actually making the payments, she canceled 
their services.  She then contacted each of her creditors and, prior to her Personal 
Subject Interview (PSI) in 2012, had entered payment agreements with each of them. 
(GX 1; GX 3.) 
 
The delinquent debts are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) 
dated June 2012, and November 2014. (GX 4; GX 5.) She disclosed the bankruptcy in 
her Personal Subject Interview (PSI) (GX 3.)  The debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 
1.e have been settled in full. (AX A; AX B; AX C.)  
 
Applicant and the creditor for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f entered a “Covenant 
to Forbear Collection” agreement effective September 2014, the terms of which require 
her to pay 71 monthly payments of $125 for a total of $8,960. She has paid 
approximately $2,250 and continues to make the required payments. (AX D.) 
 
Applicant was an authorized user, not the primary account holder or joint account 
holder, on the delinquent credit-card account of $1,327, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. (GX 4; 
                                                          
1 Applicant attached five documents to her Answer and submitted an additional document with her Response. 
For the purpose of clarity of the record, I admitted these documents as Applicant’s Exhibits A through F.  Applicant’s 
response also included a copy of the FORM and copies of several administrative documents.  I put these in the 
correspondence file.  
 
 3
AX F.) The account was charged off to profit and loss and was closed in 2010. (AX B.) 
There is no record evidence that Applicant is contractually liable for this debt, nor is 
there any evidence that this creditor has attempted to collect this debt from her. 
 
 Applicant has not incurred any delinquent debt since approximately 2010.  The 
November 2014 CBR lists five previously delinquent accounts that have been either 
paid or settled in full.  It also shows 14 accounts that were paid off without any 
delinquencies, seven of which have been closed by her request.  She is current on all 
her ongoing financial obligations. (GX 4.)   
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
 
 4
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her CBRs, e-QIP, and PSI, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The 
following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
 5
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is established. Applicant’s bankruptcy was discharged in 2000, over 
15 years ago, and the concern is mitigated by time.  She also has not incurred any 
delinquencies since approximately 2010.  Her conduct which resulted in her prior 
financial difficulties “does not cast doubt on [her] current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.”  
  
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant experienced circumstances largely beyond 
her control when her two relationships ended.  After the first relationship ended, she 
acted responsibly by resolving her debts through bankruptcy. After the second 
relationship ended, she again acted responsibly. First, she contracted with a credit- 
consolidation company.  Then, after realizing that the company was not resolving her 
debts, she contacted her creditors, and, prior to her 2012 PSI, entered payment plans 
with each of them. She has fully resolved all but one of her debts and has been in 
repayment of that debt since approximately September 2014.   
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is established. She has resolved or is resolving her delinquent debts 
and has not incurred any additional delinquencies since about 2010.  Thus, there are 
“clear indications” that her financial problems are under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Of the four delinquent debts totaling $19,392 alleged 
in the SOR for which Applicant is liable, she has settled in full three accounts totaling 
$9,951.  She has been in a repayment plan for the remaining debt of $9,441 since 
approximately September 2014, with payments totaling about $2,250. “Good faith” 
means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence 
to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 
12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
 
 6
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish resolution of every 
debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to resolve financial 
problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The adjudicative guidelines 
do not require that an individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, 
nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 
07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is established.  The record evidence shows that Applicant was an 
authorized user, not the primary account holder or joint account holder, of the 
delinquent credit-card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. There is no evidence that the 
creditor attempted to collect this debt from her or that she is contractually liable on this 
account.  Therefore, she has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of this debt 
and has provided documents which show she was merely an authorized user and that 
the account was charged off to profit and loss and closed in 2010. (AX B; AX F.)  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant clearly recognized the importance of resolving her financial issues by 
proactively entering into repayment agreements with each of her creditors before 
receiving the SOR.  She has been living within her means while repaying her creditors 
for several years.  She voluntarily closed a number of her credit accounts, thus reducing 
her vulnerability to become overextended.  Such actions are indicative of an individual 
who is reliable and trustworthy and who exercises good judgment.  I am confident that 
Applicant will continue her good-faith effort to resolve her remaining delinquent debt. 
 
 7
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has  
mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.f:    For Applicant. 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
