 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10391 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 15, 2015, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. She later changed her request to a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 4, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on November 12, 2015, scheduling the hearing for December 7, 2015. The hearing was 
 
2 
 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through I, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on December 22, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 2007. She seeks to retain a security clearance, which she 
has held since about 2002. She has a bachelor’s degree. She is married with two infant 
children.1 
 
Applicant bought a condominium in an expensive area of the country in 2006. 
The purchase price was $430,000, which was financed through a mortgage loan of 
$344,000 and a second mortgage loan of $86,000. Applicant could not afford the 
mortgage-loan payments on her income alone, and she relied on rent from roommates 
to supplement her income.2  
 
Applicant’s roommates did not pay rent on a consistent basis, and they moved 
out in 2008. Applicant used credit cards to help with the mortgage-loan payments. The 
real estate market crashed, and Applicant owed more on the mortgage loans than the 
property was worth. She wanted to obtain a mortgage-loan modification, but she was 
advised that the holder of her mortgage would not consider a modification unless she 
was delinquent. She intentionally missed a few payments, and she obtained a 
modification of her first mortgage loan. She mistakenly believed that the second 
mortgage loan was consolidated into the first loan.3 
 
Applicant continued to struggle to pay her bills. She was advised that bankruptcy 
was her best option. She filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in 2010, and about $72,000 
in unsecured nonpriority debts were discharged the same year. Applicant reaffirmed 
that she would retain her condominium and continue to make payments on the 
mortgage loans.4 
 
Applicant continued to pay the primary mortgage loan, but she did not pay the 
second mortgage loan, which she thought was discharged in the bankruptcy. The debt 
was charged off. She knew there was a lien on the property and that the debt would 
have to be eventually paid. In March 2015, the holder of the second mortgage loan sent 
Applicant a letter stating that she did not owe anything on the account because of her 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 15-17, 54, 61-62; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-21, 30, 54-55, 63-64; GE 2; AE G. 
 
3 Tr. at 21-26, 31-33; GE 2; AE G. 
 
4 Tr. at 23, 26-29, 59; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
bankruptcy discharge,5 but a valid lien remained on her property. The creditor sought a 
settlement of the lien. Applicant borrowed $25,000 and settled the second mortgage 
loan in November 2015.6 
 
 Applicant is prepared to address any tax consequences resulting from the 
settlement of her second mortgage loan. Her current finances are sound. She is able to 
pay her bills without accruing new delinquent debt. She admitted a certain amount of 
financial ignorance. She received financial counseling as a requirement of her 
bankruptcy, and she has taken additional financial counseling courses to improve her 
financial aptitude.7 
 
 Applicant submitted documents and letters attesting to her excellent job 
performance, dependability, honesty, work ethic, trustworthiness, professionalism, 
conscientiousness, and integrity.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
5 The second mortgage loan was likely not discharged in bankruptcy because Applicant certified that she 
would retain her condominium and continue to make payments on the mortgage loans, including the 
second mortgage loan. 
 
6 Tr. at 33-49, 56; AE A, G-I. 
 
7 Tr. at 29-30, 46-53, 62, 72; AE B, C. 
 
8 AE E, F. 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
Applicant’s financial history is far from perfect. She admitted a certain amount of 
financial ignorance. Her unsecured nonpriority debts were discharged through Chapter 
7 bankruptcy in 2010. The holder of her second mortgage loan believed the loan was 
discharged in bankruptcy. That was likely a mistaken belief. In any event, Applicant 
settled the account for $25,000. Her current finances are sound. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) 
are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
