 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10528 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established financial responsibility by maintaining contact with his 
creditors and paying all the debts alleged in the SOR. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 7, 2012. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On May 19, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on July 1, 2015, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Attached to his answer, he 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
included five documents that were marked as exhibits (AE) A through E and were made 
part of the record. 
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on September 17, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
October 14, 2015, scheduling a hearing for October 29, 2015. The case was reassigned 
to me on October 28, 2015. At the hearing, the Government offered four exhibits (GE 1 
through 4). Applicant testified and submitted three additional exhibits (AE 1 through 3). 
All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on November 5, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.e. He admitted the factual allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f, with explanations. Applicant’s 
admission to the SOR, and his admissions at his hearing, are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, including his testimony and 
demeanor while testifying, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old information technology (IT) system administrator 
working for a federal contractor. He graduated from high school and completed over 
three years of college between 1978 and 1982, but did not earn a degree. He married 
his wife in 1987, and they have two adult children.  
 
Applicant has held a secret level security clearance since 1997, resulting from his 
employment with federal contractors. His employment history shows that he was 
employed from May 2001 to May 2002; unemployed from May 2002 to October 2002; 
part-time employed and self-employed from March 2002 to August 2008; and 
unemployed during September 2008. He was hired by his current employer, a federal 
contractor, in October 2008.  
 
In February 2012, Applicant submitted an SCA requesting an upgrade of his 
clearance. In his response to Section 26 (Financial Record), he disclosed that he failed 
to timely file and pay his federal and state taxes for tax years 2005, 2007, and 2010. 
 
Applicant explained that between 2004 and 2007, he operated his own IT 
company and provided services to federal and state governments. He concentrated in 
the technical aspects of his business and neglected his federal taxes and other 
business-related administrative responsibilities. (Tr. 13-15) He did not timely file his 
income tax returns for tax years 2005 and 2007, because he believed he was owed a 
small refund, and he would face no penalties for filing late. He acknowledged that he 
and his wife were not organized and that contributed to their financial problems. 
Applicant stated that as of the day he submitted his 2012 SCA, he had filed his late 
income tax returns, and had paid or was paying his debt to the IRS. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant also disclosed on his 2020 SCA that he had been over 120 days 
delinquent on some debts, including his mortgage, and that his mortgage was 
foreclosed. Applicant explained that the proceeds of the foreclosure sale were sufficient 
to satisfy his mortgage and leave him a $200,000 profit.  
 
The status of the alleged SOR delinquent accounts follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleged a $236,150 deficiency balance on a foreclosed mortgage. 
This allegation is not substantiated. Applicant’s property sold in auction and he netted a 
$200,000 profit on October 15, 2010. The mortgage balance was paid with the proceeds 
of the auction. (AE A and AE 1) This debt is resolved for Applicant. 
 
Applicant explained that he purchased a home with a 15-year mortgage and the 
payment was above his financial means. At the time of the purchase, he was making 
about $150,000 a year and he believed he would be able to afford the mortgage 
payments. In 2008, Applicant changed jobs and was unemployed for a period. His 
income decreased, and when he realized they could not afford the mortgage payments, 
he contacted the creditor and asked for a mortgage modification or loan restructuring. 
His efforts were unsuccessful, apparently because of the creditor’s failure to process the 
loan modification-restructuring properly.  
 
Applicant testified that the U.S. Comptroller of the Currency and the State’s 
Attorney General Office brought class action suits against the mortgage holder for 
improperly processing Applicant and other peoples’ mortgages. Applicant received two 
small payments as a result of settlements on the class action suits. (Tr. 31-32) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleged a $595 charged-off account. Applicant explained the he was 
selling merchandise on the Internet and a dispute arose with a buyer. The dispute was 
resolved against him, and he settled for less than what he owed sometime in 2009-
2010. Applicant paid the debt in 2011-2012. AE 2, dated June 2015, indicates the debt 
was paid and that the account balance is “0.”  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleged a $180,000 IRS tax lien entered against Applicant in March 
2011, for unpaid income taxes for tax years 2004 and 2005. Applicant explained that 
due to an accounting error, the IRS believed he had made twice the income he earned 
during those years. The problem was compounded by Applicant’s failure to timely file 
his income tax returns. After filing his income tax returns, Applicant convinced the IRS 
of the accounting mistake. The IRS reduced the tax owed, Applicant paid the debt, and 
the IRS released the tax lien on June 3, 2015. (AE B)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleged Applicant failed to file his income tax returns for tax years 
2005, 2007, and 2010. Applicant’s documentary evidence shows he filed his 2004 and 
2005 income tax returns late. His 2007 income tax returns were filed in December 2011; 
and his 2010 income tax returns were filed in November 2011.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant started working with the IRS to resolve his 2004, 2005 and 2007 
delinquent income tax returns and to pay his tax debt in 2010. Concerning his 2010 
income tax return, Applicant explained that because his home was foreclosed in 
October 2010, his documents were placed in storage. He applied for an extension to 
file; however, he was negligent and filed the income tax return one month late.  
 
Applicant claimed that he owed about $10,000 for tax year 2004. He entered into 
a payment plan with the IRS and the debt was paid in 2015. He owed $2,000 for tax 
year 2011. He established a payment agreement with the IRS and anticipated the debt 
would be paid in 2015. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleged Applicant owed $962 for a judgment filed against him by his 
homeowners’ association in March 2011. This allegation is not substantiated. AE A 
shows that the homeowners’ association debt was paid with the proceeds of the 
foreclosure sale. (AE A) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleged Applicant owed $3,825 for a judgment filed against him by a 
bank in June 2012. Applicant settled the debt in April 2015, for less than what he owed, 
and paid it. He was supposed to receive an IRS Form 1099-C for the cancelled debt. 
(AE 3, dated September 2015) 
 
Applicant believes that his work history and past behavior show that he has been 
a reliable, trustworthy, and responsible federal contractor and employee. There is no 
evidence to show that he has any other outstanding IRS debts, or that he has failed to 
timely file his taxes, except for the SOR allegations. Applicant believes he has learned a 
valuable lesson. He promised never to file his income tax returns late again, or to fail to 
pay his income taxes.  
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his financial situation and accepted 
responsibility for his financial problems. He believes that he has been truthful and 
forthcoming during the security clearance process. He has learned a valuable lesson by 
going through the security clearance process. He understands that he is required to 
maintain financial responsibility to remain eligible for a security clearance.  
 
Applicant testified that during the last three or four years, he and his wife have 
worked very hard to fix their financial problems with their creditors and the IRS. He 
believes that their financial situation has improved substantially. They are now 
financially stable, paying their obligations on time, and have sufficient funds to pay their 
living expenses. Their current income is sufficient for them to live the lifestyle they want, 
and they are not in a position that would make them susceptible to blackmail, coercion, 
or undue influence. He promised to maintain his financial responsibility. (Tr. 16) 
 
Applicant purchased another home outright with the $200,000 he received from 
the sale of his foreclosed home. His adjusted gross income is $150,000 a year, he has 
no mortgage payment, and only about $1,200 of monthly expenses. He testified that he 
has 401(k) and IRA accounts, and $20,000 in a savings bank account. Applicant noted 
 
5 
 
 
his many years working for government contractors while possessing access to 
classified information without any security concerns, except for those raised in the 
current SOR. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant failed to timely file and to pay his federal and state income tax returns 
for tax years 2005, 2007, and 2010, and  acquired a significant debt to the IRS. 
Additionally, he had a home mortgage foreclosed, and at least three delinquent 
accounts. Financial considerations disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(g): “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns as required of the fraudulent filing of the same;” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 All of the above mitigating conditions apply and mitigate the financial 
considerations concerns. Applicant’s documentary evidence show that he has paid, or is 
in the process of paying, all the accounts alleged in the SOR.  
 
 I considered that Applicant may have been negligent when he purchased a home 
above his financial means. He also failed to timely file and pay his income taxes, and he 
failed to timely pay other creditors. However, it appears that Applicant had some periods 
of unemployment, and his earnings diminished as a result of a change of employment.  
 
 Applicant should have been more diligent in addressing his delinquent income 
tax returns and other financial obligations. Nevertheless, by 2010, Applicant was 
already in contact with his creditors, established payment plans, and started the process 
to resolve his delinquent accounts. As of the hearing date, Applicant’s documentary 
evidence shows he resolved all the SOR accounts. Considering the evidence as a 
whole, I find Applicant has shown sufficient financial responsibility for AG ¶ 20(b) to 
apply.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) apply. Applicant’s efforts to resolve the debts started in 
2010. Applicant has gained a better grasp of his financial situation and his finances are 
under control. With his current job earnings, Applicant will be able to establish viable 
payment plans to address any remaining debts. Considering the evidence as a whole, 
Applicant has shown financial responsibility and sufficient progress in the resolution of 
his debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, 
but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a federal contractor. His financial 
problems were caused, in part, by circumstances beyond his control. He established 
financial responsibility by maintaining contact with his creditors, addressing his legal 
obligations, filing his late income tax returns, and paying all the debts alleged in the 
SOR. He understands that he is required to maintain financial responsibility to remain 
eligible for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I believe that Applicant will 
continue to responsibly pay his debts and maintain his financial responsibilities. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 
8 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
