                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-12149
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 9, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on July 5, 2012.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  On June 10, 2015, the Department of
Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992 (as amended), issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the DoD could not
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance
should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on July 1, 2015, and elected to have
the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on or about
November 3, 2015.  Applicant received the FORM on November 15, 2015.  Applicant
was instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days
of receipt.  Applicant did not submit a reply to the FORM.  This case was assigned to
the undersigned on February 19, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.   
2
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 50 years old, and is divorced.  He is employed for a defense
contractor as an Electronic Technician. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in
connection with this employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
There are six delinquent debts set forth in the SOR totaling approximately
$29,000.  Applicant admitted the allegations, except 1.b., 1.c., and 1.e. under this
guideline.  Credit reports of the Applicant dated December 8, 2014; and July 25, 2012,
which includes information from all three credit reporting agencies, indicates that
Applicant is indebted to each of the creditors listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 4
and 5.)       
     
Applicant attributes his financial problems to being laid off on three separate
occasions in the past, and being unemployed for long periods of time.  Since November
2011 he has been working full time for his current employer.  
At the time of his background interview in August 2012, Applicant’s financial
situation was strained.  He explained that he tries to pay all of his current monthly bills
on time, but does not have much money left over at the end of the month to put toward
his delinquent debt.  His wife only works part-time.  He is currently working to get back
on his feet and attempt to resolve his delinquent debts.  His ultimate goal is to contact
each of the creditors and set up a payment plan to resolve the debt.  
At this time, however, the following delinquent debts are overdue and owing: 
1.a., a delinquent credit card debt owed to a bank for an account that was
charged off in the approximate amount of $10,812.  Applicant admits the debt.  
1.b., a delinquent credit card debt owed to a bank for an account that was
charged off in the approximate amount of $6,232.  Applicant denies the debt, but the
debt is reflected as owing on his most recent credit report.  (Government Exhibit 4.)
1.c., a delinquent credit card debt owed to a bank for an account that was
charged off in the approximate amount of $3,957.  Applicant denies the debt, but the
debt is reflected as owing on his most recent credit report.  (Government Exhibit 4.)
3
1.d., a delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for
collection in the amount of $136.  Applicant admits the debt. 
1.e., a delinquent debt owed to a bank for an account that was charged off in the
approximate amount of $8,241.  Applicant failed to admit or deny the debt.  The debt
appears on his most recent credit report as owing.  (Government Exhibit 4.)         
1.f., a delinquent debt owed to a department store for an account that has been
charged off in the approximate amount of $265.  Applicant admits the debt. 
There is no evidence in the record to show that Applicant has done anything to
address any of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR, even the smallest debt owed
in the amount of $265.  Based upon the evidence presented, each of the delinquent
debts listed in the SOR remain owing.
 POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
4
b. the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  the frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  the extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  the motivation for the conduct; 
h. the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and
 i.  the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence that is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
5
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of Applicant.  Because of the scope and
nature of Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security
clearance eligibility.
The evidence presented shows that Applicant incurred a number of delinquent
debts that he cannot afford to pay.  He states that he was laid off from work and
unemployed for an extended period and could not pay his debts.  Since November 2011
he has been working full time without interruption.  Despite this fact, he has not
addressed even one of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  Without compelling
documentation showing that Applicant has made financial arrangements and followed
these arrangements to meet his past-due financial obligations, he has not shown the
requisite good judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness that is necessary in order to be
eligible for access to classified information. 
Under the particular circumstances of this case, Applicant has not met his burden
of proving that he is worthy of a security clearance.  He does not have a concrete
understanding of his financial responsibilities and has not addressed any of his
delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  Thus, it cannot be said that he has made a good-
faith effort to resolve his past-due indebtedness.  He has not shown that he is or has
been reasonably, responsibly, or prudently addressing his financial situation.  Thus,
Applicant has not demonstrated that he can properly handle his financial affairs.  He
must demonstrate a history and pattern of financial responsibility, including the fact he
has not acquired any new debt that he is unable to pay.  Considering all of the
evidence, Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or
mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Applicant has been
working for his current employer since 2011.  He has not made even one payment
toward resolving any of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  He not shown efforts
to obtain financial counseling.  In fact, there is no evidence to show a sufficient ratio of
current income to debt and expenses to avoid future financial delinquencies.  He has not
made a good-faith effort to satisfy his delinquent debts.  In fact, he has shown that he is
not financially responsible.  Accordingly, I find against Applicant under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).    
6
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his history of financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his
ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that Applicant
has failed to overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security
clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the
factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
    FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:  Against Applicant.
    Subpara.    1.a. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.b. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.c. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.d. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.e. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.f. Against Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
7
