 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10944 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 5, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 13, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 8, 2015. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-6 (Items 1 and 2 include pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on January 
2, 2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit any additional evidence nor did 
he object to any of the Government’s evidence. Items 3-6 are admitted into evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on February 17, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the SOR allegations, except for 
SOR ¶ 1.e, which he denied. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a 
careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He is married and has three children. He has worked 
for a federal contractor since 2008. Before September 2008, he worked in the private 
sector as a self-employed painter. He was unemployed for approximately eight months 
in 2008. He is a high school graduate. He has never held a security clearance.1  
  
 The SOR lists five delinquent debts totaling approximately $14,160. The debts 
include three collection accounts and two charged-off accounts. The debts are 
supported by credit reports from July 2012 and November 2014, Applicant’s statement 
to a defense investigator in August 2012, and by Applicant’s admissions.2 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his period of unemployment in 2008 
and having to pay his mother’s final expenses upon her death. He stated that he paid 
these bills in lieu of his other obligations. He did not provide supporting documentation.3 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – (charged-off account $8,406): 
 
 Applicant admitted he owed this charged-off account for a recreational vehicle 
(RV). When he could not make the payments he turned the vehicle into the dealership. 
The RV was sold and Applicant was responsible for the deficiency. He claims he talked 
to the company about working out a payment plan, but no plan was presented in 
evidence. There is no evidence of payment or settlement. This debt is unresolved.4 
 
 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 6. 
 
2 Items 2, 4-6. 
 
3 Item 6. 
 
4 Items 2, 4-6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.c (a collection and a charged-off account: $2,552; $2,175): 
 
 Applicant admitted that he owed these debts. He has not paid the debts or set up 
any payment plans. He claims that SOR ¶ 1.b went to a judgment and that a monthly 
garnishment of $50 was established. He did not present documentation supporting this 
assertion. He failed to present evidence of any payment plan or payments made on 
SOR ¶ 1.c. These debts are unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – (collection account $748): 
 
 Applicant admitted owing this collection account. He claims to have contacted the 
creditor about setting up a payment plan, but he failed to produce documentation of 
such an established plan. This debt is unresolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – (collection account $279): 
 
 Applicant denied owing this collection account. He failed to produce 
documentation supporting a dispute of this debt. This debt is unresolved.7 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about his current financial status or a 
budget. There is no evidence that he sought financial counseling.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 4-6. 
 
6 Items 2, 4-6. 
 
7 Items 2, 5-6. 
 
8 Items 2, 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant presented some evidence that the debts were due to circumstances 
beyond his control (unemployment in 2008 and paying his mother’s final expenses), but 
he failed to provide documentation showing that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. He did not provide documentation 
showing that the debts had been paid or that he established payment plans. There is no 
evidence of financial counseling. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. He did not 
produce documentary evidence to support his dispute of SOR ¶ 1.e. AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his period of 
unemployment. Applicant has not established a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
