 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10141  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant has a delinquent mortgage loan for a 
property that is now in foreclosure. He also deliberately omitted the delinquent mortgage 
loan from his security clearance application. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 9, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on August 5, 2015. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant. He received the 
FORM on September 3, 2015, and did not respond. The case was assigned to me on 
November 10, 2015. The documents appended to the FORM are admitted as 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 45, has worked for a federal contractor as a mechanic since 2008. 
Although he served in the Army Reserve from 1989 to 1994, this is his first application 
for a security clearance. He completed his security clearance application in May 2012. 
The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant owes a mortgage loan on a property 
that fell delinquent in approximately March 2012. He did not disclose the delinquent 
mortgage on his security clearance application.3 
 
 Applicant purchased a home in 2006. Initially, the home served as his primary 
residence. Applicant claims that he began having difficulty paying the mortgage in 2007 
after experiencing a decrease in income when both he and his wife lost hours at work 
they had come to rely upon. He lived in the property until 2009, when it became a rental 
property. At an unspecified time, Applicant discovered that his tenants were not taking 
care of the property and he evicted them. Without the rental income, Applicant could not 
afford the mortgage and the loan became delinquent in March 2012. He discussed the 
property during his June 2012 interview with a background investigator, indicating that 
he was in the process of executing a short sale on the property. At the time of the 
interview, Applicant did not have buyer for the property. According to the most recent 
credit report in the record, dated October 2014, the property has a delinquent balance of 
$112,000 and is in foreclosure.4  
 
 After discussing the details of the property, the investigator asked Applicant 
about his failure to disclose the delinquent mortgage and $85,000 in other delinquent 
accounts5 on his security clearance application. Applicant responded that he considered 
his financial information to be private and he did not feel that he should have to disclose 
his personal information on the application.6  
      
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 4-6. 
 
4 GE 5-7. 
 
5 These debts are not alleged in the SOR.  
 
6 GE 7.  
 
3 
 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”7  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $112,000 on a delinquent 
mortgage loan. Applicant admits that he has struggled to pay the mortgage since at 
least 2007. The record supports a prima facie case that Applicant has a history of not 
meeting his financial obligations and that he has demonstrated an inability to do so.8  
 
None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant did not 
provide sufficient evidence to establish that his inability to pay his mortgage was caused 
by events beyond his control. He reported a decrease in income five years before the 
property fell delinquent, but very few details about the state of his finances between 
                                                          
7  AG ¶ 18. 
 
8 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
4 
 
2008 and 2012. Applicant also failed to provide evidence that he has made a good-faith 
effort to resolve his delinquent debt. Although he indicated that he was the process of 
executing a short sale on the property during his June 2012 interview, his most recent 
credit report shows that the property is now in foreclosure. Applicant has not offered any 
information on the current status of the property or the mortgage loan.  
 
Personal Conduct 
  
 Conduct involving a lack of candor or dishonesty,  particularly, a failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security process, raises questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.9 The 
SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose a delinquent mortgage loan on 
his security clearance application. Proof of omission alone does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when he completed the application. Here, the 
Applicant provided direct evidence of his intent to withhold his derogatory financial 
information from the government. Applicant admitted that he chose not to disclose his 
financial information because he considered it private. This is sufficient to support a 
finding that Applicant deliberately falsified his May 2012 security clearance application.10   
 
 Applicant did not provide any evidence to mitigate the concerns raised by his 
deliberate omission of facts from his security clearance application. None of the 
personal conduct mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Accordingly, doubts remain about Applicant’s security worthiness. In reaching 
this decision, I have considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. Ultimately, 
Applicant failed to meet his burdens of production and persuasion. Because the security 
concerns raised in the SOR remain, following Egan11 and the clearly-consistent 
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
                                                          
9 AG ¶ 15. 
 
10 AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
11 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
