 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-07030  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. While Applicant’s financial records shows some 
derogatory information, it does not reflect negatively on his current security worthiness. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 30, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance. 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on September 2, 2015. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant. He 
received the FORM on September 25, 2015, and provided documents in response. The 
case was assigned to me on November 13, 2015.  The documents appended to the 
FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, without objection. The 
document identified as GE 6 is excluded for the reasons explained below. The 
documents provided by the Applicant are admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through G, without objection. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 GE 6 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing the interview Applicant had 
with a background investigator during his June 2014 investigation. The interview is not 
authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Footnote 1 of the FORM 
advises Applicant of that fact and further cautions Applicant that if he fails to object to 
the admission of the interview summary in his response to the FORM that his failure 
may be taken as a waiver of the authentication requirement. Applicant’s failure to 
respond to the FORM does not demonstrate that he understands the concepts of 
authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not establish that he understands 
the implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the interview. Accordingly, 
GE 6 is inadmissible and I have not considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 62, has worked for a federal contractor since 2002 as an aviation 
mechanic. He served in the U.S. Navy from 1974 to 1978. He completed his security 
clearance application in May 2014, disclosing that he failed to pay or file his state taxes 
in 2012. The ensuing investigation revealed some other derogatory information.3  
 
 Specifically, the SOR alleges Applicant failed to file, as required, his 2012 and 
2013 federal and state tax returns. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided copies 
of the returns, which were filed in February 2014 and October 2014, respectively. For 
reasons that are unclear from the record, Applicant, who has resided in State 1 since 
2002, was required to file state income tax returns in State 2 as well as State 1 for the 
tax year 2012. He received a $3,000 federal tax refund, which offset his $3,000 income 
tax liability for State 2 that year. The following year, he was only required to file an 
income tax return in State 1. He owed a federal tax liability of $130 and received a $966 
refund from State 1. He filed his 2014 federal and State 1 income tax returns in May 
2015. He received refunds of $1,600 and $1,000, respectively.4  
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 4-5. 
 
4 GE 3-5. 
 
3 
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant owes $1,500 on six delinquent debts.5 
Applicant admits to owing four of the alleged debts, SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d and 1.g, 
and claims to have paid them.6 He provided documentation corroborating the resolution 
of SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d, totaling $700.7 Applicant earns approximately $70,000 
annually. Aside from GE 5, a June 2014 credit report, the record contains no other 
evidence about Applicant’s financial history.  
      
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
                                                          
5 GE 5, the only credit report in the record, only supports three of the SOR allegations, SOR ¶¶ 1.c – 1.e. 
The basis for the SOR allegations in  ¶¶ 1.b, 1.f, and 1.g is unclear. 
 
6 GE 3. 
 
7 Applicant provided other financial documentation with his responses to the SOR and the FORM 
including receipts from medical providers, billings statements from utility companies, and bank statements 
from August and September 2015. However, he did not provide any explanation as to the relevance of 
the documents. (GE 3, AE C, F-H)  
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”8  
 
The SOR alleges Applicant failed to file his 2012 and 2013 tax returns as 
required. While he did not file the returns timely, he filed them before the issuance of the 
SOR. The record does not contain any evidence to suggest that Applicant has any other 
outstanding federal or state tax returns or unpaid liabilities. He does not appear to have 
engaged in any behavior to suggest tax evasion. Although he owed a tax liability to 
State 2 in 2012, that appears to be an aberration. There is no indication that Applicant is 
improperly managing his federal or state tax obligations. Applicant’s late filing of his 
2012 and 2013 tax returns does not reflect negatively on his current security worthiness.  
 
The SOR also alleges Applicant owes $1,500 on six delinquent accounts. At a 
minimum, the existence of the delinquent accounts suggests that Applicant has 
demonstrated an unwillingness to pay his bills.9 He has provided sufficient 
documentation to show that he has resolved the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 
1.d. The amount of the remaining unresolved delinquent debt, around $800, is not likely 
to be a source of exploitation or vulnerability for Applicant. Even with these three 
remaining delinquent accounts it appears that his finances are otherwise under 
control.10 
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s security worthiness. In 
reaching this decision, I have considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. While 
those granted access to classified information are held to a high standard of conduct, 
they are not held to a standard of perfection. Applicant’s finances may not be perfect, 
but the blemishes on his credit record do not suggest that Applicant is irresponsible or 
incapable of following the rules related to the safeguarding and handling classified 
information.  
 
                                                          
8  AG ¶ 18. 
 
9 AG ¶ 19(a). 
 
10 AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (c).  
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
