 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03945 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Jacob T. Ranish, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about drug involvement and criminal 
conduct. He failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns raised by his 
omissions from his 2013 security clearance application (SCA) of his illegal drug-related 
history and criminal misconduct. Clearance denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an SCA on April 25, 2013. After reviewing it and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant or deny Applicant’s eligibility 
for a clearance. On December 16, 2014, the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline H (drug involvement), Guideline J (criminal conduct), and Guideline E 
(personal conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on January 12, 2015, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2015. 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on August 3, 2015, scheduling a hearing for September 15, 2015. The hearing was 
postponed due to the unavailability of court reporters. A second hearing notice was 
issued on September 18, 2015, scheduling a hearing for October 16, 2015. The hearing 
was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant 
objected to GE 4 because it was an unauthenticated report of an interview (obtained in 
June 2013) that was provided to Applicant the day before the hearing. I sustained the 
objection. GE 4 was marked and included in the record, but it was not admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted 
eight exhibits (AE 1 through 8). All exhibits (except GE 4) were admitted into evidence. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 27, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his response to the SOR, and at his hearing, Applicant admitted all the factual 
allegations in the SOR, with explanations. Although he admitted to omitting material 
information from his 2013 SCA, he claimed that his omissions were not intentional. I 
considered SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b denied. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR and at his 
hearing are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence, and having observed Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I 
make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old information technology (IT) specialist employed by a 
federal contractor. He graduated from high school in 2002. He married his wife in April 
2015, and he has no children.  
 
Applicant’s job history shows that he started working in IT related positions with 
different employers in September 2001. He has worked for his current employer, a 
federal contractor, since June 2011. This is not his first security clearance application. 
He submitted at least three other SCAs; however, he believes that those investigations 
were not completed. 
 
Applicant submitted an SCA on June 7, 2011. In response to Section 21 (Use of 
Illegal Drugs) asking whether in the last year, he had illegally used any controlled 
substances, Applicant answered “no.” (Tr. 68-69) Applicant was interviewed by a 
government investigator on July 11, 2011. During the interview, Applicant disclosed that 
in 2009-2010, he was charged with reckless driving (115 MPH in a 55 MPH zone). He 
was convicted and fined $500, sentenced to six days jail (three suspended), and his 
license was suspended for six months. 
 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in April 2013. Section 22 (Police 
Record), required Applicant to disclose whether in the last seven years he had been: 
issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding; 
arrested; charged, convicted, or sentenced of a crime; placed on probation or parole; 
and whether he was on trial or awaiting trial on criminal charges. 
 
In his response, Applicant disclosed that he was charged with illegal possession 
of marijuana in October 2012. He claimed that the final disposition of the charge was 
pending, and that he believed that the charge would be dismissed after completion of 
court-ordered requirements. Applicant failed to disclose that he was arrested, charged, 
and convicted of public intoxication in June 2012. He also failed to disclose the he was 
charged with possession of marijuana in February 2012, and that he pled guilty to 
possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
Section 23 (Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity), required Applicant to disclose 
whether in the last seven years he had: illegally used drugs or controlled substances 
(including marijuana); purchase, possessed, or handled any illegal drugs; and whether 
he had ever been ordered to attend or seek counseling or treatment as a result of his 
illegal use of drugs or controlled substances. Applicant answered “no,” and failed to 
disclose that he illegally used marijuana from high school to at least January 2013, and 
that he purchased approximately $1,000 worth of marijuana per year. 
 
In January 2014, Applicant answered a set of interrogatories from DOD 
adjudicators. In his answers, he disclosed that:  
 
On February 28, 2012, he was charged with possession of marijuana. The 
charge was later amended to possession of paraphernalia, and Applicant pled guilty to 
the lesser charge. (GE 1) Apparently, he was stopped by a police officer for a traffic 
violation and after a search of his car the officer found marijuana. (AE 1) Applicant failed 
to disclose this charge in his 2013 SCA. 
 
In June 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with public intoxication. He 
explained that a neighbor filed a noise complaint and alleged that he was smoking 
marijuana in his apartment. Applicant denied both allegations and averred he was 
burning incense. The police officers who responded to the complaint asked Applicant to 
come out of his apartment. When he stepped outside, he was arrested and charged 
with public intoxication. He contested the charge and was found guilty. (AE 1) Applicant 
failed to disclose this charge in his 2013 SCA.  
 
On October 10, 2012, Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana with 
intent to distribute. He claimed that he was pulled over by a police officer for no valid 
reason. A search of his car revealed marijuana in the glove compartment. (AE 1) The 
original charge was amended to possession of marijuana and he pled guilty to the 
charge.  
 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
As a result of the above conviction, Applicant was ordered to attend an alcohol 
and substance abuse program around May-June of 2013. Although Applicant claimed 
that his last use of marijuana was in October 2012, when he reported to the substance 
abuse program, he failed the first drug screening and tested positive for marijuana. 
(Tr.46) He testified that he took a second drug screen the following day and he tested 
negative for drugs. He also was required to perform 24 hours of community service, to 
pay a $500 fine, and his driver’s license was suspended. Applicant believed that after 
his completion of the court requirements, the charge would be expunged and removed 
from his records. (GE 2, AE 5, Tr. 45) 
 
In August 2015, Applicant participated in a biopsychosocial substance abuse 
assessment prepared with a view toward his security clearance hearing. According to 
the assessment report, Applicant started his illegal use of marijuana while in high 
school. He believes that his use of marijuana resulted from his unstructured upbringing 
caused by his parents’ divorce, being homeless, and his mother having little income or 
support from his father. Applicant denied any other illegal drug use. He and his friends 
purchased marijuana together for their personal consumption. He estimated they 
purchased about $1,000 worth of marijuana a year. He denied ever selling marijuana for 
profit. Applicant expressed remorse and regret for his illegal drug use. The substance 
abuse professional concluded that Applicant has a strong prognosis for continued 
sobriety because he has abstained from using drugs for three years. (AE 1) 
 
Applicant claimed his last use of marijuana was in October 2012. Around that 
same time, he started to date his now wife and she motivated him to stop using 
marijuana. She is against the use of illegal drugs, and she is not big on the use of 
alcohol either. There is no evidence to show that Applicant has been involved in any 
criminal behavior, use of illegal drugs, or incidents involving law enforcement since 
October 2012, except for his positive test for marijuana in May-June 2013. Applicant 
promised to never use illegal drugs in the future. To show his commitment, he submitted 
a written statement of intent to abstain from any illegal drug-related behavior with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. (AE 4) 
 
Applicant believes that stopping his marijuana use in October 2012 allowed him 
to establish a better relationship with his wife. He is now involved in sports and runs and 
exercises to release stress. Since stopping his use of marijuana, Applicant has had no 
asthma problems and he believes he is now more focused in advancing his career and 
having more initiative at work. 
 
Applicant also believes he has matured and started to grow up as a person. He 
wants to be a better person, establish a career, have a family, and to strive to meet his 
potential. He has been moving up on his career during the last three years. Initially, he 
was a desktop support person. Now he is more technically oriented, works on projects, 
and manages people. He has received high scores on his annual performance reviews. 
Applicant likes his current job and believes that he is a valuable asset to his employer. 
(AE 6) 
 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Applicant’s supervisors consider him to be a good employee and person. He 
displays a positive attitude, has a strong work ethic, and is dependable. Applicant’s 
supervisors have been impressed with Applicant’s professionalism, integrity, and 
technical proficiency. He is considered to be the “go-to” guy for the supervisors, and the 
“guru” among his peers. His supervisors trust Applicant and they favorably 
recommended Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant illegally purchased and used marijuana from around 2000 until at least 
January 2013. He purchased approximately $1,000 worth or marijuana per year. He 
was charged with possession of marijuana, and convicted of the lesser offense of 
possession of drug paraphernalia in February 2012. He was charged with possession-
sale-distribution of marijuana, and convicted of possession of marijuana in October 
2012. Applicant claimed he stopped using marijuana in October 2012 and that his last 
use or marijuana was around January 2013. Notwithstanding, when he reported for his 
substance abuse counseling in May-June 2013, he tested positive for marijuana. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug abuse” and “(b) 
testing positive for illegal drug use.” AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (b) apply.  
  
  AG ¶ 26 provides potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Drug-involvement mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 26(a), (b), and (d) apply, and 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s most recent drug-related behavior occurred 
in January 2013, and as such it is not recent. I considered that Applicant expressed 
remorse and regret for his illegal drug use. The substance abuse professional that 
evaluated Applicant concluded that he has a strong prognosis for continued sobriety 
because he has abstained from using drugs for three years. There is no evidence of any 
additional criminal misconduct or law-enforcement involvement. 
 
Applicant has made positive lifestyle changes. He is now married and his wife 
motivated him to stop using marijuana. There is no evidence to show that Applicant has 
been involved in any further criminal behavior, use of illegal drugs, or incidents involving 
law enforcement since October 2012. Applicant promised to never use illegal drugs in 
the future. To show his commitment, he submitted a written statement of intent to 
abstain from any illegal drug-related behavior with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation.  
 
Applicant’s references’ statements and his performance reviews speak well of his 
performance. Taken together they show Applicant is on the right path to rehabilitate 
himself. He is now dedicated to his wife and his work. On balance, Applicant’s evidence 
is sufficient to establish that his drug-related behavior is unlikely to recur. Guideline H is 
decided for Applicant. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt about a 
person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 Between February and October 2012, Applicant was convicted of three criminal 
offenses – possession of drug paraphernalia in February 2012; public intoxication in 
June 2012, and possession of marijuana in October 2012. Applicant’s criminal behavior 
raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) “a single serious crime or multiple lesser 
offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists two conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 For the same reasons discussed under Guideline H, incorporated herein, I find 
that the above mitigating conditions apply. There is no evidence of Applicant being 
involved in any criminal conduct after October 2012. Applicant has made lifestyle 
changes that show he is more mature and has become a responsible adult. Guideline J 
is decided for Applicant. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant omitted relevant and material information from his 2013 SCA when he 
failed to disclose that he was charged and convicted of public intoxication, and charged 
with possession of marijuana (convicted of possession of drug paraphernalia) in 2012. 
Moreover, Applicant failed to disclose his history of illegal purchase and use of 
marijuana from his days in high school (2000) to at least January 2013. 
 
  Although not alleged in the SOR, I note that Applicant also failed to disclose his 
illegal drug-related behavior in his 2011 SCA. I considered this information solely for the 
purpose of assessing Applicant’s credibility and his claims of mistake, inadvertent 
behavior, or lack of intent to mislead the Government.  
 
  Applicant’s falsification of his 2013 SCA triggers the applicability the following 
disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 Applicant submitted several explanations for his failure to disclose the 
required information, such as: he believed the offenses were misdemeanors or 
traffic offenses with fines of less than $300 and not required to be disclosed; the 
SCA instructions were confusing and he did not understand them; and that he 
never intended to falsify or mislead the Government.  
 Notwithstanding, I find the questions were plain and simple to understand, 
and that Applicant deliberately omitted relevant information. (Section 23 – “In the 
last seven years have you illegally used any drug or controlled substance?,” and 
“In the last seven years have you been involved in the illegal purchase  . . . . of 
any drug or controlled substance?”)  
 Considering the evidence as a whole, including his demeanor while 
testifying, I find that the above mitigating conditions are not sufficiently raised by 
the facts and circumstances of this case and are not applicable. Personal 
conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Whole-Person Concept 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H, J, and E in 
my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under 
those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 34, has been working for his employer since 2011. He has made 
positive lifestyle changes since he started dating his wife in 2012. He is now motivated 
to be a good husband, have a family, become a productive member of society, and be a 
productive employee. Applicant promised to never use illegal drugs in the future and 
submitted a statement of intent to abstain from any illegal drug-related behavior with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. Applicant’s references’ statements 
and his performance reviews taken together show Applicant is on the right path to 
rehabilitate himself. He mitigated the security concerns pertaining to drug involvement 
and criminal conduct. 
 
Notwithstanding, after weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and 
all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. His falsification of the 2013 
SCA is a serious offense in violation of federal law.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
