 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02754 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
public trust position to work in the defense industry. Applicant has an unpaid $14,000 
judgment outstanding since July 2012. He also deliberately omitted the judgement from 
his December 2013 application for a position of public trust. Applicant’s eligibility to 
occupy a position of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations 
and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive 
information and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust 
position.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on September 2, 2015. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant. He 
received the FORM on September 25, 2015, and did not respond. The case was 
assigned to me on November 10, 2015. The documents appended to the FORM are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and 7, without objection.  GE 6 is 
omitted for the reasons explained below.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 GE 6 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing the interview Applicant had 
with a background investigator during his January 2014 investigation. The interview is 
not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Footnote 1 of the FORM 
advises Applicant of that fact and further cautions Applicant that if he fails to object to 
the admission of the interview summary in his response to the FORM that his failure 
may be taken as a waiver of the authentication requirement. Applicant’s failure to 
respond to the FORM does not demonstrate that he understands the concepts of 
authentication, or waiver and admissibility. It also does not establish that he 
understands the implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the interview. 
Accordingly, GE 6 is inadmissible and I have not considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 50, has worked for a federal contractor since January 2006. In his 
position as a customer service representative, Applicant has access to personally 
identifiable information (PII), which requires him to seek eligibility to occupy a position of 
trust. On his December 2013 application for eligibility, Applicant disclosed a 2003 
conviction for driving under the influence. He did not disclose any other derogatory 
information. The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant had an outstanding 
$14,000 judgment issued against him in July 2012. The judgment is the only allegation 
under the financial considerations guideline.3  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the he was responsible for the 
judgment, which was obtained by an insurance company. With the exception of the 
judgment, the credit reports in the record show that Applicant has a limited, but positive 
credit history dating back to 1998. The SOR also alleges that Applicant deliberately 
failed to disclose the judgment on his position of trust application in response to 
questions about derogatory financial information. Applicant explained the omission in 
his answer to the SOR:4  
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 4,5. 
 
4 GE 3,5,7.  
 
3 
 
I apologize for providing misinformation. I did not feel there was a need for 
my employer to know my legal proceeding. Having read Guidelines E 
[Personal Conduct] and F [Financial Considerations,] I now understand 
the significance of my error. I am happy to answer any additional 
questions and provide information in order to be granted this automated 
data processing security clearance.5 
 
Applicant did not provide any additional information about the circumstances of the 
judgment or its current status.  
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”6 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.”7 Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to 
the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made.8 An administrative judge’s objective is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision that embraces all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 GE 3. 
 
6 DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation) ¶¶ 
C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
7 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
8 See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”9  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $14,000 on an unpaid 
judgment issued against him in 2012. The record supports a prima facie case that 
Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations and that he has 
demonstrated an unwillingness to do so.10 Applicant did not submit any evidence to 
merit the application of the any of the financial considerations mitigating conditions.  
 
Personal Conduct 
  
 Conduct involving a lack of candor or dishonesty,  particularly, a failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security process, raises questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.11 The 
SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the 2012 judgment on his 
position of trust application. Proof of omission alone does not establish or prove an 
applicant’s intent or state of mind when he completed the application. Here, the 
Applicant provided direct evidence of his intent to withhold his derogatory financial 
information from the government. Applicant admitted that he chose not to disclose his 
financial information because he did not want his employer to know about the legal 
action taken against him. This is sufficient to support a finding that Applicant deliberately 
falsified his December 2013 position of trust application.12   
 
 An applicant is expected to provide full, frank, and candid responses to inquiries 
from the government at all phases of the adjudication process. Applicant did not provide 
any evidence to mitigate the concerns raised by his omission. None of the personal 
conduct mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Accordingly, doubts remain about Applicant’s security worthiness. In reaching 
this decision, I have considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. Ultimately, 
Applicant failed to meet his burdens of production and persuasion. Because the security 
                                                          
9  AG ¶ 18. 
 
10 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
11 AG ¶ 15. 
 
12 AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 
5 
 
concerns raised in the SOR remain, following Egan13 and the clearly-consistent 
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
13 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
