1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-05839
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 8, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On January 23, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD)  issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F  for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On March 10, 2015, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1.)
On June 26, 2015, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered six documentary exhibits. (Items 1-6.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due by September 19, 2015. Applicant did
not submit a response or any additional evidence. The case was assigned to this
2
Administrative Judge on October 13, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 39 years old, and he is married. He served in the United States Air
Force from 1996 to 2009, when he was Honorably Discharged for medical reasons.
Applicant seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the
defense sector. (Items 2,3.)
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists four allegations (1.a. through 1.d.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically failure to file Federal income tax returns and delinquent debts, under
Adjudicative Guideline F. The allegations will be discussed below in the same order as
they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant failed to file, as required by law,
Federal income tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2012. In his RSOR, Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation, and he wrote,
I have contacted H&R Block and am working to remedy the situation for all
years. I didn’t file as I was trying to amend my 2009 Tax return which was
filed and received on [sic]. My severance check from the United States
Military was taxed. The income has to be paid back by with my disability
money. This money is untaxable income and would have returned roughly
$17,000 dollars [sic] to me and place me back down in the correct tax
bracket so I didn’t have to pay roughly $1200 more dollars and would
allowed [sic] me to clear out all debt. I had not filed the others as I was
researching and scared it would mess up the amendment process but I am
in the process of correcting it now. (Item 1.) 
No evidence was introduced to establish that the Federal income tax returns for tax
years 2009 through 2012 have been filed or that Applicant has contacted the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) to resolve his failure to file tax returns for the years in question. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a charged-off account in the amount
of $3,266.  In his RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation, and he wrote that when
he was removed from the military, because of an injury he received while in the military,
he only had his severance pay to support him, and his income was reduced from
approximately $4,000 a month to $0 a month. This debt was for a loan for his vehicle,
which he could not afford to pay. (Item 1.) No evidence was introduced to establish that
this delinquent debt has been resolved or reduced. 
3
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $757.  In his RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation, and he wrote that this
debt arose from college classes that he was unable to attend or complete. He
acknowledged that he still has to pay off this debt. (Item 1.) No evidence was introduced
to establish that this delinquent debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a charged-off account in the amount
of $391.  In his RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation, and he wrote that this
debt was for a motorcycle that he purchased, but he contended that he had a bill of sale
showing this debt had been paid in full. (Item 1.) However, Applicant failed to introduce
any evidence to establish that this delinquent debt has been resolved or reduced. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
4
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt several years ago.  
The evidence has also shown that Applicant failed to timely file his Federal
income tax returns as required for several years, and the returns still have not been filed.
I find that AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of same,” is also applicable to Applicant.
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As reviewed
above, some of Applicant’s financial difficulties occurred as a result of his periods of
unemployment. However, I cannot find that Applicant has acted responsibly since these
debts have been overdue for many years, and Applicant has taken no steps to resolve
them. Also as reviewed above, no evidence has been introduced to show Applicant has
filed his past Federal tax returns, which were within his control.  Accordingly, I find that
this mitigating condition is not applicable in this case. 
5
Also, ¶ 20(d) could not be argued to be applicable, since Applicant has not taken
any action to “initiate a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts,” Finally, I do not find any of the other mitigating conditions applicable.
Therefore, until Applicant can reduce or resolve a significant amount of his overdue
debts, and until he files his past-due Federal tax returns, I find Guideline F against
Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited above
as to why the disqualifying conditions apply and why there are no applicable mitigating
conditions, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-
person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1d.: Against  Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
