 There are typographical errors in the alphabetical order of the allegations in the SOR.  The alphabetical order has1
been corrected to reflect thirteen allegations under Guideline F, beginning with  allegation 1.a., and continuing
through 1.m.
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04290
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 17, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on January 28, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  On January 20, 2015, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992 (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR)  to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the DoD1
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on May 28, 2015, and elected to have
the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on
September 3, 2015.  Applicant received the FORM on September 14, 2015.  Applicant
was instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days
2
of receipt.  Applicant  did not submit a response to the FORM.  This case was assigned
to the undersigned on November 10, 2015.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 39 years old, and single.  He has a high school diploma and a
culinary certificate.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a janitor and is
seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
There are thirteen delinquent debts set forth in the SOR totaling approximately
$20,000.  Applicant denied allegations 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., and 1.j.,
under this guideline.  He admits allegations 1.i., 1.k., 1.l., and 1.m.  Credit reports of
Applicant dated February 26, 2014; and August 28, 2015, which include information
from all three credit reporting agencies, indicate that Applicant is indebted to each of the
creditors listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 5.)  Applicant has been
employed with his current employer since December 2013.            
     
During his security clearance background investigation, Applicant was asked if he
had any delinquent debts.  Applicant stated, “NO”, and was then confronted with his
credit report that revealed the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  Applicant
professes little knowledge of his financial record and states that he has disputed many
of the debts.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  He has provided no documentation to support
that he has  done anything in regard to the debts, whether it be to dispute them, set up
a payment plan, or pay them.  Applicant failed to submit any documentation to establish
that he has acted responsibly to address his delinquent debts.  The following debts
remain owing:
1.a., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $55.  Applicant states that this account is in dispute.    
1.b., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $417.  Applicant states that this account is in dispute.
1.c., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $1,118.  Applicant states that he has no knowledge of the
account. 
3
1.d., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $69.  Applicant states that this account is in dispute.  
1.e., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $140.  Applicant states that this account is in dispute.    
1.f., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $1,210.  Applicant states that this account is in dispute.
1.g., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $348.  Applicant states that this account is in dispute.
1.h., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $6,310.  Applicant states that this account is in dispute.  
1.i., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $418.  Applicant states that he has contacted the creditor and
intends to pay the debt.
1.j., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $478.  Applicant states that this account is in dispute.
1.k., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $735.  Applicant states that he has contacted the creditor and
was told to pay as he can.   
1.j., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $556.  Applicant states that this account is in dispute.
1.k., a debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $13,772.  Applicant was cosigner on a car loan account.  The
car was repossessed for failure to pay the loan.  Applicant states that he owes the
creditor no money, as the account is in dispute.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR)  
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.  
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
dated January 28, 2014, and answered, “NO,” to a series of questions concerning his
police record.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  Section 22 asked, (a) “Have you EVER been
convicted in any court of the United States of a crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a
term exceeding 1 year for that crime, and incarcerated as a result of that sentence for
4
not less than 1 year? (b) Have you EVER been charged with any felony offense? (c)
Have you EVER been convicted of an offense involving domestic violence or a crime of
violence against your child, dependent, cohabitant, spouse, former spouse, or someone
with whom you share a child in common?  (d) Have you EVER been charged with an
offense involving firearms or explosive?  (e) Have you EVER been charged with an
offense involving alcohol or drugs.”  (Emphasis in original.)  Applicant answered, “NO,”
to each question.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  These were false responses.  He
deliberately omitted that he had been charged with Trespassing, a 1  degree felony inst
April 2004.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  
Section 26 of the same questionnaire also asked, “In the past seven years, (a)
have you defaulted on any type of loan? (b) have you had bills or debts turned over to a
collection agency? (c) have you had any account or credit card suspended, charged off,
or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?  (d) are you or have you been currently over
120 days delinquent on any debt?”  The Applicant answered, “NO,” to the question.
This was a false response.  He deliberately failed to list the delinquent debts set forth in
the SOR above.  (Government Exhibit 1.)   
Applicant states that he was confused by the question regarding his police
record.  In regard to the questions regarding his financial history he states that he never
owned a credit card.  The questions on the application are clear and simple.  Applicant
knew or should have known how to answer them correctly.  He did not.  Thus, it cannot
be said that he has shown the requisite good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness
to meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.      
 POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
5
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the administrative judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  the frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  the extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  the motivation for the conduct; 
6
h.  the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The administrative
judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility and dishonesty,
which demonstrate poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope
and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his
security clearance eligibility.
7
The evidence shows that Applicant remains indebted to each of the creditors
listed in the SOR in an amount totaling approximately $20,000.  He claims that the
debts are in dispute, but he provides no documentary evidence to support this claim.
This history of excessive indebtedness demonstrates a pattern of unreliability, and poor
judgment.  He has not provided any documentary evidence to show that he had done
anything with respect to resolving these debts.  Furthermore, there is no evidence that
he has received credit counseling to help him set a budget and learn to live within it, or
that his finances are under control.  Without more, Applicant has failed to establish that
he is financially responsible. 
Under the particular circumstances of this case, Applicant has not met his burden
of proving that he is worthy of a security clearance.  He does not have a concrete
understanding of his financial responsibilities, and has not sufficiently addressed his
delinquent debts in the SOR.  Thus, it cannot be said that he has made a good-faith
effort to resolve his past due indebtedness.  He has not shown that he is or has been
reasonably, responsibly, or prudently addressing his financial situation.  Applicant has
not demonstrated that he can properly handle his financial affairs.  His indebtedness is
significant.  Assuming that he demonstrates a history and pattern of financial
responsibility, including the fact he has not acquired any new debt that he is unable to
pay, he may be eligible for a security clearance sometime in the future.  However, he is
not eligible now.  Considering all of the evidence,  Applicant has not introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome
the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Applicant has been
irresponsible.  Applicant could benefit from intense financial counseling. In this case,
none of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the
Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
In regard to his personal conduct, Applicant was not truthful and candid with the
Government on his security clearance application when he intentionally omitted relevant
information concerning his police record and his finances.  At the time he completed the
application in 2013, he knew or should have known that he had a large number of
delinquent debts, within the past seven years.  He also should have known to reveal the
Felony Tresspassing conviction in April 2004.  The only reasonable conclusion for not
revealing the truth concerning his delinquent debts and his police record was that he did
not want the Government to know about them.  There is no excuse for this misconduct.  
Under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Disqualifying Condition 16.(a) deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
8
responsibilities applies.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I
find against the Applicant under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his history of financial indebtedness, dishonesty and the effects that it can
have on his ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that
Applicant has not overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security
clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the
factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.  
    FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:  Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.    1.a. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.b. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.c. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.d. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.e. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.f. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.g. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.h. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.i. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.j. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.k. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.l. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    1.m. Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2:  Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.    2.a. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.    2.b. Against the Applicant.
9
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
