 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05803 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 28, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on June 25, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on July 22, 2015.  
 
Applicant responded to the FORM with an undated letter, which I have marked 
Applicant’s Exhibit (Ex.) A. In the letter, Applicant wrote he was “open to any 
suggestions on how to report or display this evidence better so that it is sufficient to 
overcome the prima facie case against [him].” He also wrote that he was “wondering if it 
would be possible to get assistance with preparing this information to better 
demonstrate these qualities and prove [his] situation as requested.” 
 
The case was assigned to me on September 1, 2015. Because of the above 
comments, I sent Applicant an e-mail on September 24, 2015, explaining his rights, and 
providing him with additional options, which included changing his request to a hearing 
or providing additional documentary evidence. I did not hear back from him, so I had a 
conference call with Applicant and Department Counsel on October 15, 2015. Applicant 
stated that he did not receive the e-mail. I explained his rights and options, and I 
forwarded the e-mail to him. Applicant elected the option to submit additional 
documentary evidence. The record was held open until November 20, 2015, and 
extended to December 2, 2015. Applicant submitted e-mails and attached documents, 
which were marked Ex. B through J. The Government exhibits included in the FORM 
and Ex. A through J are admitted in evidence without objection. E-mail correspondence 
has been marked Administrative Exhibit (AE) I. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He worked for a 
different defense contractor from 2000 until shortly before he obtained his current job in 
2011. He seeks to retain his security clearance. He has a bachelor’ degree. As of 2012 
when he submitted his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), he had 
never married and he had no children.1   
 
In about 2007, Applicant sought to invest in the growing real estate market. He 
took online classes in real estate investing. He purchased a rental property in another 
state for $125,000. He was contacted by a company that offered him an opportunity to 
invest in real estate transactions. The company would use Applicant’s credit to 
purchase properties and pay Applicant 9% of the transaction. Applicant estimated that 
the company took out about $200,000 from 20 to 30 credit card accounts that were 
opened in his name. The company paid the accounts for a period and then disappeared 
in about 2008. Applicant and the credit card companies were swindled.2   
 
                                                          
1 Items 5.  
 
2 Items 4-6; AE A, B. 
 
 
3 
 
The company and individual were investigated by the U.S. Postal Inspection 
Service for the Department of Justice. About 60 individuals, including Applicant, were 
identified as victims of the scam.3   
 
Applicant retained a debt-settlement company and began addressing his 
accounts long before he submitted his SF 86 in 2012 and before the SOR was issued in 
2015. He paid the company $1,100 per month. It is unclear whether he is still utilizing 
the company. Several of the creditors obtained judgments against Applicant and 
garnished his wages. A credit report obtained for his background investigation in 
January 2012 listed multiple accounts that had been paid or settled.4   
 
The SOR alleges a mortgage loan of $137,278 that was $15,000 past due, nine 
delinquent debts totaling about $75,000, and four unpaid judgments totaling about 
$33,700. However, three of the judgments appear to be based on three underlying 
delinquent debts that are also alleged in the SOR: SOR ¶ 1.h ($8,529 debt) and SOR ¶ 
1.b ($7,783 judgment to same credit card company); SOR ¶ 1.f ($8,857 debt) and SOR 
¶ 1.c ($12,032 judgment to same bank); and SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,827 debt) and SOR ¶ 1.n 
($1,667 judgment to same credit card company).5    
 
Applicant had about a six-month gap between the first and second renters of his 
investment property. The second renters moved out without paying all their rent and left 
the house in a shambles. Applicant could not afford the amount it would cost to repair 
the house and return it to a rentable condition. He could not afford the mortgage loan 
payments without receiving rent. The house was lost to foreclosure. There is no 
indication that Applicant owes any deficiency on the loan. The loan does not appear on 
the two most recent credit reports in evidence.6   
 
Applicant paid and settled additional accounts after 2012. In January 2013, he 
made payments toward two debts owed to the creditor identified in SOR ¶ 1.a ($4,997 
debt alleged). The law firm representing the creditor indicated that both debts were paid 
in full. The creditor later wrote that the law firm was mistaken, and that the accounts had 
not been paid in full. However, the creditor indicated it was not pursuing additional 
collection actions.7 
 
Court records show that eight payments were made by garnishment toward the 
$7,783 judgment identified in SOR ¶ 1.b. Court records show that four payments were 
                                                          
3 Items 4-6; AE A.  
 
4 Items 4-7; AE A, B, G.  
 
5 Items 4, 5, 7-12.  
 
6 Items 4-7, 10; AE H.  
 
7 Items 4-7; AE B, E, G.  
 
 
4 
 
made by garnishment toward the $12,032 judgment identified in SOR ¶ 1.c. The judge 
released the garnishment in October 2012.8   
 
In December 2015, Applicant and the bank agreed to settle the $12,210 
judgment ($15,434 current balance) identified in SOR ¶ 1.k for $10,787, payable by 30 
monthly payments of $360.9   
 
None of the remaining SOR debts and judgments are reflected on Applicant’s 
most recent credit reports. They were successfully disputed, removed voluntarily by the 
creditor because of Applicant’s circumstances, or fell off because they went past the 
seven-year reporting window. Applicant’s current finances are sound. He is able to pay 
his older debts and judgments without accruing new delinquent debt.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
8 Items 8, 10; AE D.  
 
9 Items 4, 6, 10, 11; AE I, J.  
 
10 Items 7, 10; AE A-C, H.  
 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s enthusiasm for real estate investing led him to poor choices. His 
rental property was vacant for a period, and his last renters did not pay all their rent and 
left the home in shambles. His other decision was worse. He ignored the old adage, “if it 
sounds too good to be true, it probably is,” and he let individuals who turned out to be 
criminals have access to his credit. He estimated that 20 to 30 credit cards were opened 
in his name with balances around $200,000 when they absconded with the cash. 
Applicant and the credit card companies were left holding the bag. Applicant chose not 
to take the route that would have been pursued by many in his circumstances – filing 
bankruptcy. Instead, he retained a debt-settlement company and set about attempting 
to resolve his financial problems.  
 
What must be remembered is that Applicant is a victim, a foolish victim under the 
circumstances, but a victim nonetheless. His path has not been perfect. There are 
accounts that have not been paid. However, he is continuing in his efforts. 
 
I find that Applicant established a plan to resolve his financial problems, and he 
took significant action to implement that plan. He acted responsibly under the 
circumstances, and he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. There are clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are under control. They 
occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are 
applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) are partially applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s stable 
work history. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
