 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 14-04076 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 18, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On January 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 Item 4 (e-QIP, dated February 18, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on January 12, 2015. On February 2, 2015, 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have her case decided on 
the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant on June 24, 2015, and she was 
afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the 
FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the Guidelines 
applicable to her case. Applicant received the FORM on June 29, 2015. A response 
was due by July 29, 2015. Applicant timely submitted information in response to the 
FORM, to which Department Counsel did not object, and they have been marked as 
Applicant Items (AI) A through C. The case was assigned to me on August 14, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d., 1.f. through 1.i., and 1.o.). 
The remaining allegations were denied (¶¶ 1.e., and 1.j. through 1.n.). Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been an 
analyst with her current employer since June 2008. She previously held a similar 
position with a different defense contractor further away from her residence from 
November 2001 until June 2008.2 She received her bachelor’s degree by on-line 
distance learning in information systems in June 2008.3 She has never served with the 
U.S. military.4 She has held a secret security clearance since February 1998.5 Applicant 
was married to her first husband in 1982 and divorced in 1986. She married her second 
husband in 1998.6 She has no children. 
 
  
                                                          
2
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 10-12. 
 
3
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 9; Item 7 (Personal Subject Interview, dated April 16, 2013), at 1. 
 
4
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
5
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 27-28. 
 
6
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 15-17. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations7 
 
 It is unclear when Applicant first experienced substantial financial difficulties, but 
in reviewing her credit reports, as well as her comments to the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator, it appears that several delinquent accounts existed as 
far back as 2007-2010, with additional ones entering that status over the ensuing years.   
Although she does not specifically attribute any one particular cause to her initial 
financial problems, she did mention that her husband was injured on the job in 1998. 
Because of his injuries, he was unable to continue in his line of work for any length of 
time. He was laid off from his construction job in 2010, and remained unemployed until 
sometime in early 2013. Their home was damaged by a hurricane in August 2011, but 
insurance covered most of the damage. Their adjusted gross income dropped from 
$93,910 in 2011 to $67,544 in 2013, due in large part to her husband’s loss of income. 
They had to defend a lawsuit from a contractor that was eventually dismissed. 
Applicant’s wages were garnished in 2013.  
 
As a result of her purported inability to maintain her monthly payments over a 
substantial multi-year period, a number of accounts were placed for collection, charged 
off, or went to judgment. Applicant had delinquent mortgage loans, home equity loans, 
student loan accounts, medical accounts, automobile loans, cellular telephone 
accounts, and credit card accounts.  
 
The SOR identified 14 purportedly continuing delinquent accounts, totaling 
approximately $74,811, which had been placed for collection or charged off, as well as 
a past-due mortgage of $201,244 and a garnishment in the amount of $75,154.55. 
Although Applicant offered comments regarding some of the accounts, with the 
exception of two accounts, she failed to submit any documentation to support her 
contentions pertaining to her actions or activities to resolve them. Those debts which 
Applicant has already either resolved, or is in the process of resolving, are described as 
follows: a second mortgage in the amount of $65,687 that had been charged off (SOR ¶ 
1.b.) but was forgiven, and the lien released by the mortgage holder;8 a first mortgage 
with a high credit of $174,000, a past-due balance of $2,647, and a remaining balance 
of $201,244 (SOR ¶ 1.c.) for which Applicant submitted a loss mitigation application to 
her mortgage lender to execute a Deed in Lieu of Foreclosure in January 2015, but 
which has not yet been approved;9 and her defaulted combined student loan accounts 
with a high credit of $59,665 and a past-due balance of $74,482 (SOR ¶ 1.d.), for which 
a wage garnishment was filed with her employer in 2013 for $75,154.55, and $320.61 is 
taken from her salary every two weeks.10 
                                                          
7
 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: Item 5 Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated March 22, 2013); Item 8 
(Equifax Credit Report, dated March 21, 2014); Item 9 (Equifax Credit Report, dated December 22, 2014); Item 7, 
supra note 3. More recent information can be found in the exhibits furnished and individually identified. 
 
8
 Item 9, supra note 7, at 2; AI A (Applicant’s Response to the FORM, undated); AI B (Letter, dated March 
26, 2015). 
 
9
 Item 9, supra note 7, at 2; Item 5, supra note 7, at 7; AI A, supra note 8; AI C (Letter and Loss Mitigation 
Application, dated January 20, 2015. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
Although Applicant failed to disclose in her e-QIP any delinquent accounts other 
than her defaulted student loans, when confronted with information pertaining to her 
delinquent accounts, she generally indicated little, if any, knowledge regarding them, 
and disputed many of them. She claimed to have requested deferment status for the 
student loans, but acknowledged those requests were denied. She did not claim that 
she had contacted any of her other creditors. There is no evidence to indicate that 
Applicant made any payments on any of the remaining SOR-related delinquent 
accounts, including two accounts with minimal balances of $59 and $60.  
 
Those unaddressed, unresolved, delinquent accounts are as follows: a bank 
credit card with an unpaid balance of $702 (SOR ¶ 1.a.); a cellular telephone account 
with an unpaid balance of $848 (SOR ¶ 1.e.); a bank credit card with a past-due 
balance of $525 that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.f.); a bank credit card with a past-due 
balance of $429 that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.g.); a bank credit card with an unpaid 
balance of $588 that was charged off and sold to a debt purchaser (SOR ¶ 1.h.); a bank 
credit card with an unpaid balance of $631 that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.i.); an 
unspecified type of account with a past-due balance of $721 that was purchased by a 
company claiming to be a factoring company (SOR ¶ 1.j.); an unspecified type of 
account with an unpaid balance of $611 that was charged off in 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.k.); an 
unspecified type of account with an unpaid balance of $159 (SOR ¶ 1.l.); a medical 
account with an unpaid balance of $60 (SOR ¶ 1.m.); a medical account with an unpaid 
balance of $59 (SOR ¶ 1.n.); and an unspecified type of account with a past-due 
balance of $1,155 that was purchased by a company claiming to be a factoring 
company (SOR ¶ 1.o.). While Applicant contended, without documentation to support 
her contention, that the accounts referred to in SOR ¶¶ 1.l. and 1.n. are the same 
account, a closer inspection of the credit reports reveals that there are two different 
account numbers and two different amounts. 
 
Although Applicant disputed several of the accounts discussed with the OPM 
investigator in April 2013, to date, nearly three years later, she failed to submit any 
documentation to support her contentions or disputes. In April 2013, Applicant stated 
her monthly net income, combined with her husband’s net income, was approximately 
$4,213; her monthly household expenses, including her mortgage, were approximately 
$2,230; and after making certain required debt payments, her monthly remainder was 
approximately $847 available for savings or discretionary spending.11 In January 2015, 
when she submitted her loss mitigation application, referred to above, she listed the 
family monthly gross income as approximately $6,821; and her monthly expenses, of all 
types, as approximately $6,802.12 That leaves $19 available for savings or discretionary 
spending. During the same interview, Applicant indicated that she hoped to have her 
delinquent accounts current by the end of 2013. She missed her stated goal.  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
10
 Item 9, supra note 7, at 2; Item 5, supra note 7, at 7; Item 7, supra note 3, at 2-3; Item 6 (Incident History, 
dated June 17, 2015); Item 4, supra note 1, at 31. 
 
11
 Item 7, supra note 3, at 5-6. 
 
12
 AI C, supra note 9, at 3. 
 
5 
                                      
 
There is no evidence that Applicant ever sought the services of a financial 
advisor, or that Applicant ever received financial counseling. As of the date of her OPM 
interview, she had not done either. There is a paucity of evidence to indicate that her 
financial problems are now under control. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”13 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”14   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”15 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
                                                          
13
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
14
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
15
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.16  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”17 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”18 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
                                                          
16
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
17
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
18
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant has had a long-standing problem with her finances which 
existed as far back as 2007-2010. A variety of mortgage loans, home equity loans, 
student loans, medical accounts, automobile loans, cellular telephone accounts, and 
credit card accounts became delinquent and were placed for collection and, in some 
instances, were charged off. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”19 Under AG ¶ 20(e) it is potentially mitigating if “the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since 
about 2007 ˗  2010 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so 
infrequent.” Although she does not specifically attribute any one particular cause to her 
initial financial problems, she did mention that her husband was injured on the job in 
1998, and because of his injuries, he had been unable to continue in his line of work for 
any length of time. He was laid off from his construction job in 2010, and remained 
unemployed until sometime in early 2013. Their home was damaged by a hurricane in 
                                                          
19
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
August 2011, but insurance covered most of the damage. Their adjusted gross income 
dropped from $93,910 in 2011 to $67,544 in 2013, due in large part to her husband’s 
loss of income. They had to defend a lawsuit from a contractor that was eventually 
dismissed. Applicant’s wages were garnished in 2013.  
 
Those factors were largely beyond Applicant’s control, but the specific impact of 
them individually or collectively, were not discussed. Applicant failed to demonstrate 
what actions she has taken to address her delinquent debts, and she has offered no 
documentary evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve any of them. With the exception 
of her first mortgage and her home equity line, she essentially ignored her delinquent 
accounts, many of which date to 2007 – 2010. Her defaulted student loans are being 
resolved by garnishment of her wages, not her positive efforts. She has failed to 
address any other delinquent accounts, including the ones with minimal balances of $59 
or $60.  
 
There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received financial 
counseling. With approximately $19 available each month for discretionary savings or 
spending, the overwhelming evidence leads to the conclusion that Applicant’s financial 
problems are not under control. Applicant has not acted responsibly by failing to 
address her delinquent accounts and by failing to make limited, if any, efforts of working 
with her creditors.20 Applicant’s actions under the circumstances confronting her cast 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.21 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
20
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
21
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
9 
                                      
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.22   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. She has been 
an analyst with her current employer since June 2008, and was previously in a similar 
position with a different defense contractor from November 2001 until June 2008. She 
received her bachelor’s degree by on-line distance learning in information systems in 
June 2008. She has held a secret security clearance since February 1998. 
 
The disqualifying evidence is more substantial. Applicant has repeatedly 
declared her intentions of bringing certain accounts current and repaying them. 
However, to date, she has failed to do so. Instead, she has attempted to extricate 
herself from the financial responsibilities of her first mortgage (the decision is still 
pending after 12 months) and the home equity line (the loan was forgiven and the lien 
released). Her large unpaid balance of defaulted student loans is being addressed by 
garnishment of her wages. Applicant has seemingly continued to ignore her remaining 
delinquent accounts. Applicant offered no evidence as to her reputation for reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant’s long-standing failure over the years to 
voluntarily repay her creditors, even in the smallest amounts, or to arrange even the 
most reasonable payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about her fitness to 
hold a security clearance. There are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems 
are not under control. Applicant’s actions under the circumstances cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Considering the absence of 
confirmed debt resolution and elimination efforts, Applicant’s financial issues are likely 
to remain. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:23 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘“meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
                                                          
22
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
23
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially negative track record of voluntary 
debt reduction and elimination efforts, generally ignoring her delinquent debts. Overall, 
the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations concerns. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b & 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.m:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
