 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01505 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of unmitigated alcohol abuse and alcohol-related criminal 
misconduct. Moreover, he deliberately falsified his 2012 security clearance application 
(SCA) to hide his alcohol-related criminal misconduct and employment termination. 
Criminal conduct, alcohol consumption, and personal conduct security concerns are not 
mitigated. Access to classified information is denied.  
  
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted an SCA on October 11, 2012. After reviewing it and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a 
clearance. On October 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guidelines G (alcohol consumption), J (criminal conduct), and 
E (personal conduct).1  
 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 21, 2014. , Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on July 2, 2015. The case was assigned to me on July 18, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
August 10, 2015, setting the hearing for September 29, 2015. Applicant’s hearing was 
held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits (GE 1-5), 
and Applicant offered six exhibits (AE 1-6), all of which were admitted into evidence 
without objection.  
 
AE 2 is comprised of three summaries of Applicant’s Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) interviews conducted in November 2012, November 2013, and 
December 2013. At the hearing, Applicant provided some corrections to the interviews, 
adopted his statements, and then they were admitted into evidence. (Tr. 36-49; GE 2) 
DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing on October 7, 2015.   
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 At the hearing, the Government moved to amend SOR ¶ 2.a to include the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.e as an additional allegation of criminal conduct under SOR ¶ 2.a. 
Applicant did not object and I granted the motion. (Tr. 14-15) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-
1.e. He denied the remaining SOR allegations. Applicant’s SOR and hearing 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence, and having observed Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a federal contractor, who has worked as a 
warehouse specialist since October 2012. He graduated from high school in 1983. He 
served on active duty in the U.S. Army from 1986 to 1990. He was discharged as a 
specialist, and received an honorable discharge. He then served 18 months in the Army 
National Guard. Applicant married in 1990, and divorced in 2000. He has a 25-year-old 
daughter from this marriage. Applicant married in 2008, and divorced in 2010. He 
married his current wife in August 2011. Applicant has three stepchildren from this 
relationship, ages 34, 28, and 24. 
 
Applicant’s employment history shows that he was unemployed between January 
and March 2009; employed as material handler from March 2009 to September 2010; 
unemployed between September 2010 and February 2012; employed as a fork lift 
operator from February to March 2012; and unemployed between February and 
October 2012. Applicant was hired by his current employer, a federal contractor, in 
October 2012.   
 
As part of his background investigation, Applicant was interviewed three times by 
government investigators. On his November 7, 2012 interview, Applicant disclosed that 
he made a false statement in his 2012 SCA. He failed to disclose that he was 
terminated from his job as a forklift operator in March 2012, because he was involved in 
 
3 
                                         
 
an accident. Applicant wrote on his 2012 SCA that in 2009 he left his forklift 
employment because of “forklift brake failure.” (GE 1 at 11) 
 
Applicant’s second interview was on November 25, 2013. During the interview, 
he disclosed that in June 11, 2013, he was arrested and charged with an alcohol–
related second degree assault on his wife. She later refused to testify against him and 
the charge was dismissed. (Additional facts about this incident are outlined in page 4, 
infra.) 
 
Applicant told the investigator that there was no likelihood of a similar event 
reoccurring because he was voluntarily attending Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) meetings, 
a spouse abuse intervention program, marriage counseling at church, and he had been 
alcohol free for six months. Applicant informed the investigator that he was involved in a 
similar incident in September 2008 with his ex-wife. The charge was later expunged. 
(AE 5) Applicant described himself to the investigator as a functional drunk. 
 
Applicant’s third interview took place on December 31, 2013. During the 
interview, he was confronted with a February 24, 2006 arrest and conviction for driving 
while impaired (DWI) that he failed to disclose in his 2012 SCA. Applicant was placed 
on supervised probation for one year and required to attend substance abuse 
counseling. Applicant explained that he did not disclose his DWI conviction because it 
had been expunged. 
 
Applicant testified that he started drinking alcohol when he was 13 years old. (Tr. 
46) In July 1986, his alcohol consumption increased and it became a problem. He 
believed he had some alcohol-related altercations prior to 2006. He had one arrest for 
driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) in the 1986 to 1990 timeframe. (Tr. 46-61) 
 
In February 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. In April 2006, 
he pleaded guilty to driving or attempting to drive while impaired by alcohol. He was 
sentenced to one year of probation before judgment and a $307 fine. (SOR ¶ 1.a) He 
did not remember whether he received any alcohol-related counseling or therapy after 
the 2006 DUI.  
 
In 2008, Applicant drank five to eight beers at his residence. He and his spouse 
were arguing, and his stepdaughter called the police. Applicant threw his wife on the 
bed, and he left “thumb prints on her.” Applicant was arrested for domestic violence and 
assault. The charges were later dismissed.  
 
In 2009, Applicant was arrested for DUI. He does not remember much about the 
DUI incident; however, it was dismissed when he went to court. The 2009 DUI and the 
pre-1990 DUI are not alleged on the SOR.2 
                                            
2Applicant’s SOR does not allege that he had a DUI arrest before 1990 and one in 2009, and that 
he failed to disclose his 2009 DUI on his October 11, 2012 SCA. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR 
may be considered stating:  
 
 
4 
                                         
 
  
In 2010, Applicant was arrested for disorderly conduct, fighting, harassment, and 
simple assault. Applicant consumed alcohol, and he passed out in his camper. He woke 
up; he observed his spouse with another man; and he “lost control.” He could not 
remember what happened. He pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct and paid a $287 
fine.  
 
In June 2013, Applicant consumed 18 to 25 beers over an 8 to 10 hour period at 
his residence. He stated that he could not remember what happened. Applicant’s 
spouse was drinking alcohol with him. Applicant and his spouse engaged in a physical 
altercation with each other. She received a cut to her lip, and she called the police. 
Applicant’s wife stated to the police officer that Applicant threatened to shoot her with a 
rifle, and then himself, because she called the police. Applicant went to his basement 
and obtained his rifle. When the police arrived; Applicant put the rifle away; he 
surrendered to the police, and he was arrested and charged with assault. He spent 
three days in jail, and his spouse posted his $20,000 bond. She later refused to testify 
against Applicant and the charge was dismissed. (Tr. 70) 
 
In June 2013 after his arrest, Applicant began attending Alcoholics Anonymous 
(AA) meetings. Applicant was sober from June 2013 to March 2014. In March 2014, he 
drank five beers. Applicant claimed that he resumed his sobriety, and that at the time of 
his hearing, he had been sober for 18 months. He attends at least two AA meetings a 
week. (Applicant’s spouse also attends AA, and she has been sober for 15 months). 
Applicant has committed to remaining sober; he acknowledged the severe negative 
consequences for him of continued alcohol consumption; and he assured that now that 
he is sober he is a conscientious and reliable person.  
 
Applicant’s AA sponsor has known Applicant for about nine months. His sponsor 
has attended AA meetings for 25 years. He described Applicant as sincere and making 
progress in his maintenance of sobriety, in the 12 AA steps, and in his recovery.  
 
Section 13A of Applicant’s 2012 SCA asked whether in the last seven years of 
employment he had received a written warning, been officially reprimanded, suspended, 
or disciplined for misconduct in the workplace, such as a violation of security policy. 
Applicant answered “no.” Section 13C asked Applicant whether in the last seven years 
he had been fired from a job. Applicant also responded “no” to the question.   
 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). Applicant’s non-SOR conduct will not be considered for disqualification purposes, and 
consideration will be limited to the five circumstances outlined by the appeal board.   
 
5 
                                         
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose that he was fired from employment in the 
previous seven years. He admitted he lied on his SCA. (Tr. 59) Applicant lost three jobs 
because of alcohol abuse. (Tr. 64) In 2009, he was fired from his employment as a 
forklift operator because he was in jail for a DUI. (Tr. 60) He explained his false answer 
on his SCA as follows, “Oh, I probably lied about it.” (Tr. 59) Department Counsel 
responded, “So would it be fair to say that you lied a great deal while you were 
drinking?” Applicant conceded, “That’s all I know how to do, ma’am.” (Tr. 60) He 
attributed his poor decisions, such as false statements and arrests, to the effects on his 
life of his addiction to and consumption of alcohol. (Tr. 59-65, 71-75) 
 
Section 22 (Police Record) of Applicant’s 2012 SCA asked him to disclose 
whether in the last seven years he had been: issued a summons, citation, or ticket to 
appear in court in a criminal proceeding; arrested; charged, convicted, or sentenced of a 
crime; placed on probation or parole; and whether he was on trial or awaiting trial on 
criminal charges. In his response, Applicant answered “no,” and failed to disclose his 
arrests, charges, and conviction as outlined above. 
 
 Applicant claimed he believed that he did not have to disclose his arrests on his 
2012 SCA if he was not convicted. (Tr. 65) For the 2006 DUI arrest, which resulted in a 
conviction, he did not disclose it because he “didn’t think anybody would find out” about 
his conviction. (Tr. 66) 
 
Section 24 (Use of Alcohol) asked Applicant whether in the last seven years his 
use of alcohol had a negative impact on his work performance, professional or personal 
relationships, finances, or resulted in intervention by law enforcement personnel. It also 
asked him whether he ever had been ordered, asked to, or voluntarily sought 
counselling or treatment as a result of his use of alcohol. Applicant answered “no” to all 
the above questions. He deliberately failed to disclose his long history of alcohol abuse, 
alcohol-related misconduct, and the alcohol counseling he had received. 
 
  The SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified Section 24 when he failed to 
disclose his alcohol-related history, criminal behavior, and counseling in his 2012 SCA. 
As explained in Footnote 2, supra, I considered this information solely for the purpose of 
assessing Applicant’s credibility and his claims of mistake, inadvertent behavior, or lack 
of intent to mislead the Government.  
 
 Applicant’s human resource manager since October 2012, wrote a letter (dated 
August 5, 2013) recommending Applicant for employment and a security clearance. (AE 
1) She described Applicant as an outstanding employee with unmatched energy, 
competence, flexibility, a calm demeanor, and an understanding of teamwork. (AE 1)  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
 
6 
                                         
 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
   
  AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) provide two alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions 
that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
 
7 
                                         
 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply. Applicant has a long history of excessive alcohol 
consumption. He engaged in binge-alcohol consumption to the extent of impaired 
judgment.3 He was involved in four alcohol-related incidents involving law enforcement 
and the courts, which include a DUI conviction in 2006, a disorderly conduct conviction 
in 2010, and he was arrested, but not convicted, for alcohol-related assaults in 2008 
and 2013.  
  
  Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-23(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. The record establishes the four 
alcohol-related incidents involving the police and courts, and a history of excessive 
                                            
3The term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Directive. The generally accepted definition of 
binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours. It
 
was approved by 
the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) National Advisory Council in February 
2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, NIAAA Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 No. 3), 
http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/ winter2004/NewsletterNumber3.pdf. 
 
8 
                                         
 
alcohol consumption. Applicant had at least one additional DUI arrest, which was not 
included in the SOR. 
 
Applicant claimed that he attended and continues to attend an AA alcohol 
rehabilitation or counseling program. He also testified that he has abstained from 
alcohol consumption for 18 months. However, he failed to provide corroborating 
evidence to establish permanent lifestyle changes to ensure that similar behavior will 
not recur. Applicant received alcohol counseling in 2006 and 2008, and that did not help 
him to prevent subsequent alcohol-related misconduct. 
 
Applicant explained that in 2010 and 2013 he had very limited or no memories of 
what occurred before he was arrested for alcohol-related assaults and disorderly 
conduct. Applicant’s lack of memory could be caused by an alcohol-related blackout. 
During an alcohol-related blackout, a person may still engage in voluntary behavior and 
thought processes. They might make decisions, for example, to drive home from a bar, 
or engage in other activities which require complex cognitive abilities, but the individual 
might not remember the next day and might regret it. 
 
A person who consumes alcohol to a blacked-out state may not remember that 
they violated national security. While there is no evidence Applicant violated national 
security, the potential risk of such an occurrence is increased by excessive alcohol 
consumption, especially to the extent of a memory black out. 
 
After careful consideration of Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption, and his 
recent rehabilitation efforts, I have continuing doubts about the risk of his resumption of 
alcohol consumption. Considering the period during which Applicant has abused 
alcohol, the number of alcohol-related incidents, his prior alcohol counselling, and the 
lack of a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional, I find that it is too 
soon to conclude that Applicant has been rehabilitated and that further alcohol-related 
incidents are unlikely to recur. Not enough time has elapsed without alcohol 
consumption to eliminate doubt about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Alcohol consumption concerns are not mitigated.   
   
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
The criminal conduct allegations cross-alleged the same facts and circumstances 
alleged under SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e. AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and “(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted.” 
  
 
9 
                                         
 
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply. Applicant had a DUI conviction in 2006. He was 
found guilty of disorderly conduct in 2010. In 2008 and 2013, he was arrested, but not 
convicted of alcohol-related assaults. He admitted he was drunk and disorderly in 2008 
and 2013. He lacked a complete memory of his behavior on those occasions. These 
four alcohol-related offenses are misdemeanor-level criminal conduct.     
  
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. For the reasons stated in the 
Guideline G discussion, incorporated herein, I find that more time without criminal 
conduct must elapse before criminal conduct concerns will be mitigated.      
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The personal conduct security concerns are based, in part, on the same conduct 
that led to the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security concerns. More 
importantly, Applicant deliberately omitted relevant and material information from his 
2012 SCA when he failed to disclose in his response to Section 22 all the arrest and 
charges set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d, and in Section 13C that he had been fired 
from a job. 
 
Applicant’s conduct triggers the applicability of the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
10 
                                         
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant admitted he lied on his 2012 
SCA, and he attributed his false statement to the effects of his addiction to alcohol. The 
 
11 
                                         
 
protection of national security relies upon the honesty of security clearance holders, and 
their willingness to self-report information, even when disclosure reflects poorly on the 
security clearance holder. Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines G, H, and J in 
my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under 
those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant provided some evidence supporting continuation of his security 
clearance. He is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who has worked as a 
warehouse specialist since October 2012. He served honorably in the Army on active 
duty for six years, and 18 months in the Army National Guard. Applicant’s manager from 
2012 to 2013 described him as an outstanding employee with unmatched energy, 
competence, flexibility, calm demeanor, and an understanding of teamwork. He testified 
that he attends AA meetings. He claimed that he has abstained from alcohol 
consumption for 18 months, and he intends to continue to remain sober.  
 
The factors weighing against continuation of his security clearance are more 
substantial than the mitigating circumstances. Applicant has a history of consuming 
alcohol, at times to excess, that spans from 1981 to at least 2013. He had a DUI 
conviction in 2006. He had a DUI arrest in 2009; however, he was not convicted. He 
was found guilty of an alcohol-related disorderly conduct in 2010. In 2008 and 2013, he 
was arrested, but not convicted of alcohol-related assaults. In 2013, he consumed 
alcohol to excess and was involved in a serious incident with law enforcement, that 
included an injury to his spouse (a cut to her lip), and a threat with a firearm.  
 
Moreover, Applicant falsified his October 11, 2012 SCA when he failed to 
disclose his history of excessive alcohol consumption, alcohol-related criminal behavior, 
and employment terminations. Applicant knew the information he was providing to 
security officials was false.   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Alcohol consumption, criminal conduct, and personal conduct security concerns 
are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 
12 
                                         
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
