 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05526 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 26, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 4, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 13, 2015, scheduling the hearing for December 10, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through F, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted an e-mail and attached 
documents that were marked AE G through L and admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 17, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the 
U.S. military from 1982 through 1986 and from 1991 until he retired as an E-7 with an 
honorable discharge in 2007. He deployed to Kuwait or Iraq four times while in the 
military. He started work for his current employer two months after he retired from the 
military. He seeks to retain a security clearance. He is a high school graduate. He is 
married for the third time after his first two marriages ended in divorce in 1998 and 
2008.1 He has an adult child from his first marriage and four minor children from his 
second marriage.2 
 
Applicant’s second wife was awarded custody of their four children in their 
divorce. Applicant was ordered to pay $1,426 per month in child support, which equates 
to $17,112 annually. He was also ordered to pay an additional $200 per month until 
$2,865 in child support arrearages was paid. The child support was ordered to be paid 
by garnishment. The garnishment order states that “no more than 50% of the 
disposable earnings” can be garnished.3 
 
Applicant’s civilian salary and military retirement pay have both been subjected to 
the same garnishment order. His civilian pay has been garnished $573.80 every two 
weeks, or $14,918.80 garnished annually from his civilian pay. Because the child 
support order exceeds 50% of the disposable earnings from his civilian salary, his 
military retirement pay is also being garnished.4 
 
Applicant’s military retirement pay is not being garnished for the difference 
between the amount ordered and the amount collected from his civilian pay. It is being 
garnished for the full amount of the child support order, subject to the 50% limitation on 
his disposable earnings. His retiree account statement shows that his military retirement 
pay has been subject to monthly garnishments of $1,421 and $200, which means the 
arrearages are still being collected long after they have been paid. The monthly amount 
actually deducted has been $916.70. That equals $11,000.40 garnished annually from 
his retirement pay.5 
                                                          
1 The divorce was apparently effective in December 2008, but the order was not signed until January 
2009. 
 
2 Tr. at 9, 20, 27-29, 43, 47; GE 1, 2; AE C. 
 
3 Tr. at 24; GE 1, 2; AE C. 
 
4 Tr. at 20-22; AE A-E. 
 
5 Tr. at 20-23; AE B, C, E. 
 
3 
 
With $14,918.80 collected from his civilian pay and $11,000.40 collected from his 
military retirement pay, $25,919.20 has been garnished annually, which is $8,807.20 
more than the $17,112 that should have been garnished annually after the arrearages 
were paid. Applicant was unable to pay all his bills on his reduced income, and a 
number of debts became delinquent.6 
 
The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling $48,119; however, for reasons 
discussed below, the SOR appears to have overstated the amount owed. The SOR 
alleges an unpaid $2,363 debt to Applicant’s divorce attorney, a $4,993 credit card debt, 
three medical debts totaling $278, and six debts totaling $40,485 owed to the same 
credit union.  
 
Applicant denied owing the three delinquent medical debts totaling $272, which 
were alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f. The debts are listed on the January 2014 
combined credit report, but not the August 2014 and April 2015 Equifax reports. 
Applicant’s documentation supports his assertion that the debts were paid in 2014.7 
 
 Applicant had multiple accounts with the credit union in the SOR. Several 
accounts were reported as paid. Applicant admitted owing four of the six debts alleged 
in the SOR. He admitted owing the $8,912 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. That debt is listed 
on several credit reports. He admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($10,000), 
1.j ($10,000), and 1.k ($8,000), but he did not admit to the amounts owed, which appear 
to have been overstated in the SOR. Those debts were listed on the credit reports in 
evidence as charged off, but with $0 balances. The amounts in the SOR are reflected 
on the credit reports as the high credit on the accounts. The actual amounts that were 
charged off were not reported.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a $467 debt to the credit union. Applicant denied owing this 
debt, stating that the debt was paid. An exact match to this debt is not listed on the 
January 2014 combined credit report. A debt with this balance is listed on the August 
2014 Equifax credit report, but not the April 2015 Equifax report. That report lists six 
accounts with the credit union as paid or closed. The partial account numbers used in 
the credit reports make it difficult to differentiate between accounts. Applicant has been 
paying the credit union without attributing the payments to a specific account for some 
time. It appears the credit union attributes the payments to a specific account until the 
account is paid, and then moves to a different account.9 
 
Applicant denied owing the delinquent second mortgage loan with the credit 
union, which is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h as $3,106 past due. The credit reports list this as a 
joint account. Applicant’s second wife was awarded their home in the divorce, and she 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 32. 
 
7 Tr. at 36-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5; AE L. 
 
8 Tr. at 19, 34, 38-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE F, J. 
 
9 Tr. at 19-20, 34-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE F, I, J. 
 
 
4 
 
was obligated to pay the mortgage loans, but she did not. The house was lost to 
foreclosure. There is no indication that the credit union sought any deficiency on the 
second mortgage loan from Applicant.10 
 
Applicant contacted the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) about 
the double garnishment. He was told that they were following the court order. He 
attempted to have his company decrease the amount garnished for child support. The 
company informed him that the company could not change or stop the garnishment 
without a court order. Applicant did not seek assistance from his divorce attorney 
because he still owed the attorney $2,363 (down from $8,000). He went to the attorney 
after the hearing. The attorney advised him that he will help Applicant after the 
attorney’s fees are paid. Applicant has resumed paying the attorney.11 
 
Applicant received financial counseling. He is making payments toward his debts, 
but his progress is hampered by being garnished twice for the same child support order. 
He credibly testified that it will take time, but he will continue to address his debts to the 
best of his ability.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 29-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
11 Tr. at 22-26, 33-36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE G, H, K. 
 
12 Tr. at 17-20, 45-46. 
 
 
5 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant has been in a bureaucratic nightmare for years. His civilian salary and 
military retirement pay have both been subjected to the same garnishment order, 
resulting in him annually overpaying $8,807.20. He has been unable to get the order 
modified. His best option appears to be working with his attorney who would like to be 
paid the fees that he has been owed for years. Applicant paid three of the debts alleged 
in the SOR, and he has been paying the credit union. Applicant’s financial problems 
resulted from conditions beyond his control, and he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. It will take time, but I believe that Applicant will increase his payments 
and eventually pay his debts once his child support muddle is resolved.13 AG ¶ 20(b) is 
applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are partially applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
                                                          
13 The Appeal Board reversed a case where the applicant’s security clearance was denied, and held that 
the administrative judge’s “decision does not explain why, under the facts of this case, if Applicant had 
been reasonable in addressing problems rooted in causes beyond his control, the mere fact that it might 
take him a long time to complete the process was a reason to deny him a clearance.” ISCR Case No. 06-
25584 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2008); See also ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009) and 
ISCR Case No. 09-08462 at 4 (App. Bd. May. 31, 2011): “Depending on the facts of a given case, the fact 
that an applicant’s debts will not be paid off for a long time, in and of itself, may be of limited security 
concern.” 
 
7 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and particularly his multiple 
deployments to Kuwait and Iraq. I found Applicant to be honest but overwhelmed by the 
bureaucracy. I believe he has found the path to reaching his financial goals, which is to 
pay his lawyer, who will seek to stop the double garnishments. Applicant will then use 
the extra income, which he should have had for years, to pay his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
