 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05177 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s foreclosure was resolved via a short sale of the property in 2008. 
There is no evidence of any further financial problems or delinquencies. His good credit 
and payment record establishes a track record of financial responsibility. He mitigated 
the Guideline F security concerns.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 21, 
2014. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On June 16, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on September 2, 2015, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record, in lieu of a hearing.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated October 31, 
2015, was provided to him by transmittal letter dated November 5, 2015. Applicant 
received the FORM on November 16, 2015. He was allowed 30 days to respond to the 
FORM and submit any objections, corrections, and to provide material in extenuation 
and mitigation. Applicant’s response was received by DOHA on January 28, 2016. It 
included Applicant’s one-page statement and seven documents. The response was 
marked as Applicant exhibit (AE) 1 and included in the record. The case was assigned 
to me on March 3, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the only factual allegation in the SOR. After a review of the 
record evidence, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He received his 
General Education Development (GED) certificate in 1998. He has never been married, 
but has been residing with a cohabitant since 2005. Applicant was hired by his current 
employer, a federal contractor, in August 2003.  
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of the 2014 SCA asked Applicant to disclose 
whether during the last seven years he had any financial problems, including delinquent 
or in-collection debts; loan defaults; credit cards or accounts suspended, charged off, or 
cancelled; and whether he was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt, or had 
been over 120 days delinquent on any debts. Applicant answered “yes” and disclosed 
that in 2008, he became delinquent on his mortgage because he could no longer make 
his payments. The mortgage went into foreclosure proceedings, but ultimately the 
property was sold on a short sale. 
 
Applicant also disclosed that the creditors alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a attempted to 
collect the money owed for the second mortgage on his property. He claimed that he 
successfully disputed the collection because the property was sold on a short sale. 
 
Applicant explained that in 2004, he sold his townhome and made a $30,000 
profit. He then purchased a property for $710,000 with a first and second mortgage held 
by the same creditor. He needed a larger property to house his father, sister, and older 
brother, all of whom he brought to the United States from the Philippines. Applicant 
believed that with his income, and the help of his father and brother, he would be able to 
afford the new home mortgage. However, his brother married and moved out of the 
house, and his father never got a job. Applicant rented out rooms, but the renters also 
moved out. He worked overtime to increase his earnings and maxed out his credit cards 
making mortgage payments. In the end, he was unable to make the $4,800 monthly 
mortgage payments. 
 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant contacted the creditor and asked for a reduction in the mortgage 
payments, but his request was denied. At the time he stopped making the payments in 
April 2008, the property was $300,000 upside down. After the foreclosure proceeding 
started, the creditor allowed for the short sale of the property.  
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant submitted his Home Sale Worksheets and 
IRS Form 4549 (Income Tax Examination Changes). The IRS FORM 4549 notified 
Applicant that he had an income tax deficiency for 2008. It indicated that Applicant’s 
2008 income tax return was amended to show a $142,987 debt that was cancelled (the 
second mortgage).  
 
After the short sale of the property, Applicant took steps to resolve his financial 
problems. He moved with his girlfriend into a rental property. He continued to work 
overtime and has paid about $62,000 of his accumulated credit card debt. Applicant 
stated that between 2009 and 2013 he worked an average of 470 overtime hours. He 
used the additional earnings to pay his credit card debt. Applicant also stated that he 
has been promoted twice and his current supervisor salary is about $75,000 annually.  
 
Applicant claimed that he has always been proud of his financial responsibility. 
He believes that he has done everything within his ability to fix his financial problems. 
He submitted extracts from an August 2012 Experian credit report showing that in April 
2012, Applicant paid off a $22,259 auto loan he opened in April 2008. Also, the 2012 
credit report shows three credit card accounts that Applicant had paid or was timely 
paying after having had high balances on those accounts ($5,000 high balance – paid 
as of July 2012; $21,000 high balance - $4,888 balance as of August 2012; and 
$13,000 high balance - $650 balance as of July 2012). (AE 1) 
 
Applicant also submitted W-2 Forms (Wage and Tax Statement) for 2009, 2010, 
and 2012 indicating his base pay salary and the overtime hours he worked during those 
years to address his financial obligations. Applicant’s June 2015 credit report only 
shows the debt alleged in the SOR as delinquent. There are no other delinquent or in 
collection debts reflected in the credit report. (FORM Item 5)  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
 
4 
 
 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
In 2006, Applicant bought a home beyond his financial means. When he was 
unable to make the mortgage payments, the property went into foreclosure and it was 
ultimately sold on a short sale. His failure to pay the mortgage raise the applicability of 
 
5 
 
 
the following financial considerations disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.”  
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 I find that most of the above financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. 
Applicant’s financial problems date back to 2006 – 2008, during the period when he 
bought a property above his financial means. His financial problems were resolved 
legally with the short sale of the property in October 2008, and by him paying his other 
financial obligations. There is no evidence to show that Applicant had or currently has 
other delinquent accounts. I find Applicant has control of his financial situation. I also 
believe that Applicant has learned his lesson and that it is unlikely for him to repeat the 
same mistake. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) does not fully apply. Although there was a downturn of the U.S. real 
estate market around 2007-2008, Applicant’s inability to pay the mortgage was likely 
due to his negligence for buying a property above his financial means. Applicant 
mistakenly believed that his father and brother would have the financial ability to help 
him pay the mortgage. When that did not happened, he was unable to pay the 
mortgage. 
 
 The Government argued that Applicant made a “strategic election to default his 
loan” – that he willfully defaulted on his loan and walked away from his legal obligation 
 
6 
 
 
to pay the mortgage because of the downturn in the real estate market. Applicant 
placing his personal interests over his legal obligations would show lack of 
responsibility. That, in turn, would call into question his willingness to follow the rules for 
handling classified information if doing so might conflict with is personal interests. ISCR 
Case No. 11-07747 (App. Bd. Feb. 27, 2013) 
 
 As stated above, Applicant’s wages and earnings show that he did not have the 
financial means to purchase the property or to pay the $4,800 monthly mortgage. He 
mistakenly relied on his father and brother’s assistance to pay the mortgage. When they 
went on their own way, Applicant had no other choice but to default and pursue a short 
sale of the property. The evidence is insufficient to show that Applicant was speculating 
or investing on real estate. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant does not have a current financial 
problem and his finances are under control. The short sale took place in 2008. It has 
been eight years since Applicant’s most recent financial problem. His credit report 
shows no current delinquent debts. I find that Applicant has established a track record 
of financial responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant receives credit for his years working for a federal contractor. His recent 
promotion to a supervisory position show he is considered to be a valuable employee. 
His most recent financial problem occurred in 2008, and was resolved via a short sale of 
the property. There is no evidence of any further financial problems or delinquencies. 
His good credit and payment record show a track record of financial responsibility. He 
mitigated the Guideline F security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
