 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-04416 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On November 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
In a response dated December 11, 2014, Applicant admitted five of the 
allegations raised under Guideline F and denied all allegations raised under Guideline 
E. She also requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The matter was set as ready to proceed on 
September 18, 2015. I was assigned the case on October 28, 2015. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on November 2, 2015, setting the hearing for December 1, 2015. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
The Government offered four documents, which were accepted without objection 
as exhibits (Exs.) 1-4. Applicant offered testimony, but no documents. The transcript 
(Tr.) was received on December 9, 2015. The record was then closed. After review of 
the record as a whole, I find that Applicant mitigated personal conduct security 
concerns, but failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old administrative assistant who has worked in the same 
position for eight years. She has taken some college classes and is a well-regarded 
employee. She is married and has three children. She has not received financial 
counseling. Applicant was diagnosed with Multiple Sclerosis (MS) in 2004, a condition 
that quickly added to some growing financial distress and ultimately to a 2005 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy petition, discussed below. Little more was presented regarding her personal 
life or finances. The SOR sets forth numerous allegations regarding financial issues 
(1.a-1.r).  
 
Allegations 1.a-1.b cite to Applicant’s failure to timely file both Federal and state 
tax returns for tax year 2013. She was issued W-2 Forms which were incomplete. (Tr. 
16) The mistake was discovered after she tendered her tax materials to her tax 
preparer. She made arrangements to get amended forms for the tax preparer, yet the 
returns were still filed late. No written documentation was introduced regarding the 
preparer or these efforts. (Tr. 25) Applicant testified she is in repayment on her debt to 
the state. (Tr. 16-18) Applicant did not provide copies of either the inaccurate W-2 
Forms, documentary evidence of the eventual filing of Federal and state returns for 
2013, or tangible proof of a repayment plan.  
 
Allegations 1.c-1.p. relate to delinquent account balances ranging from $94 to 
$3,731, and amounting to just under $12,000. Applicant produced a document 
indicating the debt at 1.h for $335 was recently paid. (Tr. 41) She believes that the 
$2,480 owed a hospital noted at 1.d is related to an accident in which her car was rear-
ended and she required medical care. (Tr. 42) Applicant gave the provider the claim 
adjuster’s contact information, but Applicant has not heard more from either. (Tr. 43)  
 
No action was shown with regard to the other debts at issue. No accounts have 
been formally disputed. Disagreements she may have about some of the accounts or 
balances (e.g., 1.o discussed at Tr. 23-24) were not substantiated by documentary 
evidence. Applicant testified that she has addressed or paid the debts at 1.d (Tr. 21) 
and 1.h (Tr. 21-22), but no documentary evidence was presented showing this was the 
case. She is unable to identify whether any of the remaining debts noted are related to 
her medical needs. (Tr. 44) 
 
Allegation 1.q concerns a 2005 voluntary petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy that 
was ultimately discharged in Applicant’s favor. On her March 2014 security clearance 
application (SCA), Applicant denied having had any debts or accounts turned over to a 
collection agency, suspended, charged off, or cancelled in the preceding seven years, 
 
 
 
 
3 
despite the above referenced delinquent debts. Any argument that the debts now at 
issue are older than the seven-year time frame noted in the SCA was not presented 
with documentary support. Only credit reports from 2014 and 2015 reflect the accounts 
at issue. No documentary evidence was offered showing any of the accounts at issue 
should have been dismissed in bankruptcy in 2005, nor was any documentation related 
to the bankruptcy petition presented. 
 
Applicant recently was granted a $7,000 loan to use to address her delinquent 
debts. She stated that she paid the debt at 1.h, discussed above, and some of her 
hospital bills, including high bills for MRI co-payments. (Tr. 31, 39)  A single MRI co-
payment can be as high as $1,000 to $1,250 under her insurance plan. (Tr. 39) When 
the total loan balance is used, Applicant expects a remaining delinquent debt balance of 
just under $5,000.  
 
The final allegation at issue is 1.r for approximately $2,444. It represents an 
adverse judgment from 2005. (Tr. 26-27) Learning of this judgment helped Applicant 
decide to file for bankruptcy in 2005. It is no longer shown on her credit reports. 
 
Applicant’s neglect of the debts at issue was not part of an attempt to deceive or 
hope they would be overlooked. She genuinely was flummoxed as to how to approach 
her debt, and was fearful that loans and loan programs were either fraudulent or 
unhelpful. Not having had financial counseling, she is also unaware as to how to read a 
credit report. (Tr. 34) She testified credibly that she has spoken with multiple creditors 
by telephone, but conceded she had no documentation to evidence these efforts. She is 
presently on time with her current and ongoing bills, but, in light of her continuous 
medical obligations, she basically lives paycheck to paycheck. (Tr. 37) Her eldest 
daughter now lives with Applicant’s mother and works while she finishes college, which 
frees up some money for Applicant.   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence purporting to show Applicant 
was delinquent on multiple debts and late in timely filing Federal and state tax returns. 
This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,   
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
  
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 
 
 
5 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
In 2004, Applicant had some debt which slowly grew the following year after she 
was diagnosed with MS. She filed for, and was discharged from, Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
in 2005. A decade later, it was noted she had about $14,000 in new delinquent debt and 
that she belatedly filed her Federal and state tax returns in 2013.  
 
Applicant testified that some of her debt that was based on circumstances 
beyond her control, such as her declining health and large medical co-payments. She 
showed she has paid one debt and, through a loan, now has the resources to satisfy 
about half of the debt at issue. Lacking financial counseling or an understanding as to 
how she should best organize and address her delinquent debts, however, those debts 
remain mostly unaddressed. Therefore, it cannot be concluded that she acted 
reasonably in the face of her financial distress or that there has been clear progress on 
addressing her delinquent debt. As for her delinquent tax filings, she testified that they 
were ultimately filed. However, she provided no documentary evidence to that effect. In 
short, lacking financial counseling or assistance, Applicant has made scant progress on 
the issues set forth in the SOR. None of the financial considerations mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, where the 
significance of conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations is defined ([p]ersonal conduct can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
 
 
 
6 
classified information). Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process.  
 
Applicant failed to enumerate the delinquent debts attributed to her in her recent 
credit reports. The SOR alleges that her failure to provide such details in the SCA 
reflects dishonesty and willful falsification. I disagree.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant deliberately tried to conceal or defraud in 
completing her SCA. Rather, her testimony strengthens her position that she 
misunderstood what was delinquent and what was not. For example, she correctly 
noted that the debt at 1.r was covered by her 2005 bankruptcy. Consequently she failed 
to discern whether any of the other accounts at issue were previously addressed or 
similarly beyond the scope of the SCA question. Lacking evidence of an intent to 
deceive, no personal conduct disqualifying condition is raised. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the two guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a highly credible 40-year-old administrative assistant who has 
worked in the same position for eight years. Married with three children, she has 
attended some college. She has not received financial counseling. Applicant was 
diagnosed with MS in 2004, which led to her needing to seek bankruptcy protection to 
address her delinquent debts. She also failed to timely file Federal and state tax returns 
in 2003. Although she testified that those returns were ultimately filed, no evidence of 
such filing was offered.    
 
Applicant is a superior administrative assistance, but she has serious issues with 
addressing home economics and personal finance. Her disorganization in this area 
continues to present, where she recently was given a $7,000 loan, but only a small 
amount has thus far been expended on one of the debts at issue.  
 
This process expects that an applicant employ a reasonable strategy or plan to 
address one’s delinquent debts. It then requires documentary evidence that such a plan 
 
 
 
 
7 
has been successfully implemented. Applicant has failed to do that here. To her credit, 
however, I find no evidence Applicant intended to commit fraud or falsity in completing 
her SCA. Under these facts, I find that Applicant has not mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns, but has mitigated personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i-1.p:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q-1.r:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
