 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-02688 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 2, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 22, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested that his 
case be decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on July 6, 2015. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on July 14, 
2015. Applicant received the FORM on July 24, 2015. He had 30 days to submit a 
response to the FORM. He timely submitted a Response to FORM on August 18, 2015 
which is admitted as Item 9.  On September 16, 2015, the FORM was forwarded to the 
hearing office and was assigned to me on September 22, 2015.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Upon reviewing the case file and the Response to Form, on November 4, 2015, I 
issued an Order reopening the record until December 15, 2015, to allow Applicant to 
submit additional documents. (HE I). On December 14, 2015, Applicant requested an 
extension. I granted an extension until January 8, 2016 Applicant requested an 
additional extension until February 1, 2016, which was granted. He timely submitted the 
additional documents. Due to an error with the mail, the package was returned to 
Applicant labeled as “Return to Sender” through no fault of the Applicant. I gave 
Applicant additional time to mail the documents to DOHA’s post office box. The 
documents arrived and were admitted as Item 10. 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.   
 
Rulings on Evidence  
 
 Item 6 of the FORM is a portion of the Report of Investigation (ROI) from the 
background investigation of Applicant. The five-page document is a summary of  
interviews of Applicant on February 7, 2014, and March 5, 2014 , in conjunction with his 
background investigation. DoDD 5220.6, enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20 states, “An ROI may be 
received with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible under the 
Federal Rules of Evidence.” (See ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd., February 3, 
2014)). Item 6 is not authenticated.  
 
Although Applicant, who is representing himself, has not raised the issue via an 
objection, I am raising it sua sponte. Applicant’s failure to mention this issue in a 
response to the FORM is not a knowing waiver of the rule.  Waiver means “the 
voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage. The party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of 
the existing right and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1717 (Bryan A. 
Garner, 9th ed., West 2009).  
 
While the Government attempted to explain why Applicant could object to the 
admissibility of Item 6, I cannot conclude Applicant was expressly informed of the 
requirement in ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive because it was explained in a footnote. It is not 
unusual for Applicants to forego reading footnotes in a FORM. I cannot conclude 
Applicant expressly waived this rule. I find Item 6 is not admissible and it will not be 
considered in this decision.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the SOR allegations. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant is employed by a Department of Defense contractor, seeking to 
maintain a security clearance.  Applicant has been employed with the company since 
December 2013.  He is a high school graduate.  He attended college, but did not earn a 
degree. He is single and lives with his fiancé and her 13-year-old daughter. (Item 2)   
 
3 
 
 
Applicant completed an electronic questionnaires for investigations processing 
(e-QIP) on December 30, 2013. (Item 2) In response to section 26, Financial Record, 
Applicant listed several delinquent accounts. (Item 2, section 26) A subsequent 
background investigation revealed Applicant had nine delinquent accounts, with a total 
approximate balance of $25,928. (Items 7-8)   
 
The debts consist of: a $6,510 credit card judgment filed against Applicant in 
2012 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 1); a $4,377 account placed for collection by a 
bank (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 7 at 3, 6; Item 8 at 2); a $2,514 account placed for collection by a 
bank (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 7 at 3, 6; Item 8 at 1); a $2,710 account placed for collection 
(SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 7 at 4; Item 8 at 2); a $4,120 department store credit card account 
placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 7 at 5; Item 8 at 2); a $209 eyeglass store 
account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 7 at 5; Item 8 at 1); a $567 jewelry store 
account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 7 at 5; Item 8 at 2); a $4,025 account 
placed for collection by a bank (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 7 at 6; Item 8 at 1); and an $896 credit 
card account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 7 at 6).  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant mentioned that he encountered financial 
problems because he was not making enough money to pay his credit cards as well his 
daily living expenses. He chose to pay his daily living expenses. He intends to pay down 
his debts and pays what he can.  He is currently paying $75 a month towards the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He pays $25 a month towards the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He 
also pays $65 a month towards the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. (Item 4)   
 
Applicant says that the income from his new job will help him satisfy debts. He is 
happy to have his job and to be contributing to the military. He is attempting to resolve 
the debts as best as he can and will continue to do so for as long as the debt remains. 
(Item 4) It should be noted that Applicant had a period of unemployment between July 
2011 to December 2011. (Item 5, section 13A) 
  
In his response to the FORM, Applicant provided copies of the payment histories 
for the three collection agencies he has been making monthly payments to for the past 
few years for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.i. He mentioned that he is 
taking out a line of credit in order to consolidate the debt. He provided documents to 
show that he and his mother applied for a $75,000 Home Equity Line of Credit. He and 
his mother co-own the house that he lives in. When the line of credit is approved, 
Applicant will pay off his delinquent accounts. Applicant estimated that he would be able 
to pay off the debts with the funds received from the line of credit within two to three 
weeks. (Item 9)   
 
On November 4, 2015, I reopened the record, to allow Applicant the opportunity 
to provide proof that he paid off the delinquent debts. After various extensions, 
Applicant submitted additional documents. He mentioned that the bank denied the line 
of credit. His mother and stepfather loaned him $16,242. He agreed to pay them $340 a 
month beginning in March until the debt is paid off. Applicant has resolved all of the 
accounts with the exception of the debt alleged in ¶ 1.e. (Item 10 at 3-10) He entered 
 
4 
 
 
into a payment plan with the creditor, agreeing to pay $100 monthly until the debt is paid 
in full. (Item 10 at 6) 
 
The creditor cancelled the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b in 2014. Applicant paid 
taxes pertaining to the debt cancellation. (Item 10 at 4) SOR ¶ 1.d is found for Applicant 
because it is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h.  The receipt showing the debt 
is resolved in SOR ¶ 1.a is at Item 10 at 3.  The receipt showing the debt is resolved in 
SOR ¶ 1.c is at Item 10 at 5. The receipt showing the debt is resolved in SOR ¶ 1.e is at 
Item 10 at 6.  The receipt showing the debt is resolved in SOR ¶ 1.f is at Item 10 at 7. 
The receipt showing the debt is resolved in SOR ¶ 1.g is at Item 10 at 8. The receipt 
showing the debt is resolved in SOR ¶ 1.h is at Item 10 at 9. The receipt showing the 
debt is resolved in SOR ¶ 1.i is at Item 10 at 10. 
 
Applicant provided a personal financial statement. His net monthly income is 
approximately $2,895. His monthly expenses are approximately $2,220, leaving him 
$675 remaining each month. In addition, his fiancé contributes $700 each month for 
food and house necessities. Once he begins to repay his parents his net monthly 
remainder will be $335, if his fiancé’s contributions are included, it will be $1,035.     
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
5 
 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
  
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG &19(a) (an inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant incurred several delinquent debts which 
he was unable to pay, because of low paying jobs.  
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several mitigating conditions potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. Applicant has 
been working on resolving his delinquent debts for a period of three years. He was 
 
6 
 
 
under monthly payment plans with three of the debts. He ultimately decided to resolve 
all of his delinquent debts. He and his mother initially attempted to refinance the home 
that they co-own. Their application was denied, but Applicant was able to borrow money 
from his mother and step-father. He was able to pay off all of the debts alleged in the 
SOR with the exception of one debt. He is in a monthly repayment agreement towards 
that debt. Applicant’s attempts to resolve his financial situation demonstrated good 
judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability.  
 
AG & 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
applies. While there is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling, his 
financial problems are now under control. He borrowed money from his mother and 
step-father which he used to pay off all of the delinquent debts except one. He has a 
monthly repayment agreement for his one remaining delinquent account. His personal 
financial statement indicates he is able to meet his current financial obligations including 
his monthly payments towards the loan he received from his mother and step-father.   
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant provided proof that he was attempting to 
resolve his delinquent debts over a period of three years. He was in active payment 
plans on three of the debts for several years. He ultimately borrowed money from his 
mother and step-father to pay off most of the debts. His one remaining delinquent debt 
is being resolved through a monthly payment plan. Applicant made a good-faith effort to 
resolve his delinquent debts.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 
employment with a defense contractor since 2013. I considered his efforts to resolve his 
delinquent debts over the past three years. Applicant’s financial situation has improved 
and is now stable. He is able to meet his financial obligations. Applicant mitigated the 
concerns raised under financial considerations.      
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                        
     _________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
