 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05414 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 11, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline G. This action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s security clearance. On October 1, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on February 1, 
2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on February 24, 2016.  
 
2 
 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E. All 
exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on March 3, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old illustrator who has been working for a defense 
contractor since August 2014. He graduated from high school in 1978. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 1993 and a master’s degree in 2009. He is divorced and has no 
children. He is seeking a security clearance for the first time.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant was charged with and later pled guilty to driving 
under the influence of alcohol (DUI) in 1993 or 1994, in May 1994, and in May 1996 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d); that he was charged with DUI and reckless driving in 
January 2001 and pled guilty to reckless driving (SOR ¶ 1.e); that he was charged with 
DUI in January 2008 and February 2011 and those charges were dismissed on both 
occasions (SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g); and that he consumed alcohol to the point of 
intoxication about once a week (SOR ¶ 1.h). SOR ¶ 1.c alleged that he was convicted of 
careless driving in November 1995, but the allegation did not indicate that incident was 
alcohol related. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a-1.g. Those admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. He denied the allegation 
in SOR 1.h. He indicated he previously consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication but 
has since curtailed that behavior.2  
 
Applicant testified that he began consuming alcohol when he was 18 years old 
while working in a bar. At that time, he did not drink alcohol during the work week, but 
would do so on the weekends. He was married from about 1989 to 1993 while he was 
attending school, which he said was a very stressful time. His marriage did not survive 
that period. Although he was never diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or as alcohol 
dependent, he acknowledged that he abused alcohol and engaged in habitual 
consumption of alcohol in the 1990s. He speculated that stress contributed to his 
drinking.3 
 
Applicant was charged with DUI in 1993 or 1994, in May 1994, and in May 1996. 
He was convicted of DUI on each of those occasions. He could not remember how 
much alcohol he drank before being arrested on those occasions, but speculated he 
may have consumed about four to six drinks. He was never sentenced to jail, but was 
directed to attend Alcohol and Drug Safety Action Programs (ADSAP) for each 
conviction. He could not recall the length of the courses, but thought they were about 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-7, 57-61; GE 1, 3. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
3 Tr. 28-30, 52-57, 66-67; GE 3.  
 
 
3 
 
 
three months. They consisted of lectures, videos, group discussions, and attendance at 
Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. He never attended any inpatient or outpatient alcohol 
treatment program.4 
 
In November 1995, Applicant was charged with careless or reckless drinking and 
was found guilty of careless operation. Applicant claimed he did not consume alcohol 
prior to being stopped on that occasion. No evidence in the record reflected that this 
was an alcohol-related incident. I find in favor of Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.c.5  
 
In January 2001, Applicant was involved in an automobile accident. No one was 
injured in the accident. He was charged with DUI and reckless driving. He testified that 
he refused a breathalyzer test on that occasion. He pled guilty to reckless driving and 
the DUI charge was dropped. In an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview, 
he acknowledged that he was intoxicated during this incident. He was directed to attend 
ADSAP classes.6 
 
Applicant was charged with DUI in January 2008 and February 2011. On both 
occasions, he refused breathalyzer tests and indicated that he may have also refused to 
participate in field sobriety tests. He was arrested on both occasions and the charges 
were eventually dropped. His driver’s license was suspended for short periods (less 
than a week) before reinstatement. He testified that he drank two drinks before the 2008 
arrest and two or three drinks over a two-hour period before the 2011 arrest. He 
indicated that he does not submit to breathalyzer tests as a rule of thumb and would 
recommend to anyone that they refuse a breathalyzer because he believes their 
accuracy is questionable.7 
 
In his November 2012 OPM interview, Applicant indicated that he drank to the 
point of intoxication about once a week during weekends; that his behavior, 
temperament, personality, interaction with other, and judgment were not affected by 
alcohol; and that he does not have a problem with alcohol, but acknowledged that he 
has not always used good judgment where alcohol was concerned. In the OPM 
                                                          
4 Tr. 44-45, 50-52, 62-65, 67-68; GE 1-3. In the OPM interview, Applicant stated his DUI charge in 
1993 or 1994 occurred in a different state than his DUI charge in May 1994. See GE 3.  
 
5 Tr. 44-50; GE 1-3.  
 
6 Tr. 44, 63-65, 89; GE 2, 3. GE 2 (an FBI rap sheet) indicated that the DUI charge resulted in a non-
conviction. In his OPM interview, Applicant stated that he was given a breathalyzer test, but did not recall 
the results. He also stated that he was convicted of the DUI charge. See GE 3.   
 
7 Tr. 33-44, 65-66, 71-75; GE 1, 2. In his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing         
(e-QIP) and OPM interview, Applicant did not list a 2008 DUI arrest, but listed a 2007 DUI arrest. He was 
apparently confused about the date of the 2008 arrest.  In the OPM interview, he stated that he 
consumed four or five beers before that arrest, but could not recall the specific amount. He also stated 
that he was not intoxicated. His 2011 arrest occurred almost immediately after he left a bar.  
 
 
4 
 
 
interview, he also stated that he drives after drinking alcohol, but is aware of how much 
he consumes before driving.8 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he has changed his lifestyle for health 
reasons. He now works out daily and keeps a chart of his workouts. He has lost about 
30 pounds in the past couple of years. He testified that he feels better not using alcohol. 
He stated that he now drinks on very rare occasions and could not recall the last time 
he consumed alcohol, but indicated that it was a few months ago. He also stated that, 
when he drinks, he usually consumes about three to five 12-ounce vodka and soda 
drinks but has switched to drinking four or five glasses of wine in the past six months. 
He also noted that he soon would be celebrating his birthday and would not rule out 
drinking alcohol on that occasion. He indicated that the last time he was intoxicated was 
a few months ago, but also stated he has not driven a vehicle after consuming alcohol 
in years.9  
 
Applicant has had a successful career as an illustrator. He served as the 
illustrator for popular motion pictures. Applicant’s current vice president stated that his 
work performance has been exceptional and he has learned from his prior mistakes. 
The vice president noted that he has attended events at which Applicant refrained from 
consuming alcohol. He believed Applicant has mitigated the security concerns in the 
SOR.10  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
                                                          
8 GE 3.   
 
9 Tr. 26-28, 33, 52-53, 61, 67-71, 75-79; GE 3; AE D.   
 
10 AE A-C, D.  
 
 
5 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
6 
 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
 Applicant has been has been charged with DUI six times between 1993 and 
2011. He was convicted of DUI three times and once of reckless driving. He 
acknowledged that he engaged in the habitual consumption of alcohol in the past. AG 
¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 23 sets forth four mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Although Applicant’s last alcohol-related arrest occurred over five years ago, his 
alcohol problems continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. He has a significant history of alcohol problems that did not occur under 
unusual circumstances. He has not received alcohol treatment. After being arrested six 
 
7 
 
 
times for DUI, Applicant continued to drink and drive until at least November 2012. He 
also indicated that back then he became intoxicated about once a week. At the hearing, 
he claimed that he had not consumed alcohol for months; that he had not consumed 
alcohol before driving in years; but also indicated that he last drank to the point of 
intoxication a few months before the hearing. He further acknowledged that he would 
likely continue to consume alcohol in the future and, when he drank, he usually 
consumed about three to five mixed drinks or four or five glasses of wine. Based on the 
evidence presented, I cannot find that his alcohol-related problems are unlikely to recur. 
None of the above mitigating conditions fully apply in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
My comments under Guideline G are incorporated in this whole-person analysis. 
Although Applicant is a valued employee and has not had an alcohol-related incident in 
the past five years, I cannot conclude that his alcohol problems are behind him for the 
reasons stated above. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns under the alcohol consumption guideline.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  Against Applicant 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
