 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-04596 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 10, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 
14, 2015.  Applicant timely responded to the FORM and provided additional documents. 
Her response to the FORM and attached documents are admitted as Item 5. 
Department Counsel indicated no objection to Applicant’s Response to FORM on June 
5, 2015. (Item 6) The case was assigned to me on March 3, 2016. Based upon a review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admits to SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d, and denies 
the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.e. (Item 1) 
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain her security 
clearance. She has worked for her current employer since February 1996.  She is a 
high school graduate. She is divorced and has two children, ages 30 and 15. (Item 2)   
 
On January 10, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). (Item 2) In section 26, Financial Record – 
Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts of the e-QIP, Applicant indicated that she had 
three delinquent credit cards. A subsequent background investigation revealed that 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2007. (Item 3 at 2). Applicant also incurred 
the following delinquent accounts after her bankruptcy discharge: a $6,764 charged-off 
credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 3 at 7; Item 4 at 1, 3); a $5,847 charged-off credit 
card account (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 3 at 7; Item 4 at 4); a $4,555 charged-off credit card 
account (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 3 at 7; Item 4 at 2); and a $240 account that was placed for 
collection. (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 3 at 11)  
 
In her Response to the SOR Applicant explains that she filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy after her divorce. She admits the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.d, but 
believes the balances are less than alleged. Applicant denies the debt alleged in SOR 
¶1.e. When she purchased the item, she was told it would cost $12. The company she 
purchased the item from later told her it was $240. She claims she returned the item.  
Applicant states that she attempted to resolve her debts, but the creditors would not 
work with her. (Item 1) 
 
In her Response to FORM, Applicant states that she is a single mother. She 
needs a security clearance so that she can keep her job and receive a raise. She has 
worked for the same company for over 18 years. She is a good, honest, trusted person 
who does not make much money. She provided a document which indicates she 
attended mediation regarding the debt alleged in SOR ¶1.d on February 16, 2015. She 
agreed to pay $50 a month towards this debt beginning on April 15, 2016, until it is paid 
in full. Applicant did not mention the status of the other debts alleged in the SOR. (Item 
5)   
  
Applicant did not provide any character references, performance evaluations, or 
awards that could be considered under the whole-person concept.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
3 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial problems after her divorce which resulted in her filing for Chapter 
7 bankruptcy in 2007. After her bankruptcy discharge, she continued to incur delinquent 
debts. The SOR alleges four delinquent accounts with an approximate total of $17,406. 
Applicant has a history of not being able to pay her bills.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
 
5 
 
 
AG & 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG & 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
  
AG & 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG &  20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
AG & 20(a) does not apply. Applicant did not incur her recent delinquent 
accounts under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. She admits to using the three 
credit card accounts. She was unable to keep up with the payments which resulted in 
more interest and penalties added to the balance on the debts.  
 
AG & 20(b) applies with respect to Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in 
2007. Her divorce contributed to her financial problems leading her to file Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. However, I cannot conclude that Applicant’s recent delinquent credit card 
accounts were the result of circumstances beyond her control.  
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant attended 
financial counseling. Applicant entered into a repayment plan with the creditor of one of 
her delinquent accounts. However, the repayment plan will not begin until April 2016. 
Applicant provided no information about her financial budget, so I am unable to 
conclude that she is capable of meeting the terms of the repayment plan. Three other 
delinquent accounts remain unresolved. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and 
uncertain.   
 
AG & 20(d) partially applies because Applicant entered into a repayment 
agreement for the debt alleged in SOR & 1(d). The other three delinquent accounts 
remain unresolved.  For this reason AG & 20(d) is given less weight.  
 
AG & 20(e) may apply with regard to the debt alleged in SOR & 1(e). However, 
Applicant did not provide sufficient information about the nature of the debt. She did not 
provide proof that she returned the product to the creditor. She did not provide 
 
6 
 
 
information as to whether she formally disputed the debt and what actions were taken to 
resolve the issue.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, she failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances that 
would mitigate financial considerations security concerns. While Applicant provided 
evidence that she agreed to a payment plan for one of the debts, the remaining four 
debts remain unresolved. It is unknown whether Applicant has sufficient income to meet 
her financial obligations.  
   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 
employment record. Applicant may be able to demonstrate a track record of resolving 
her financial obligations at some point in the future. At present, it is too soon to make 
this conclusion. The security concerns raised under financial considerations are not 
mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
