1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-06096
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s ownership of two properties in Mexico does not generate a foreign
influence security concern. Although Applicant’s vote in a Mexican election after
becoming a U.S. citizen was an exercise of foreign preference, it no longer poses a
security concern given the amount of time that has elapsed since the vote. Applicant
has mitigated the security concern. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On March 16, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines C, foreign preference, and B, foreign influence. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), current as of September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR on March 28, 2015, admitting the allegations and
opting for a decision on the written record rather than a hearing. On September 22,
2015, Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) setting forth the
Government’s case. Applicant received the FORM on October 1, 2015, and did not
reply, whereupon, the case, on November 10, 2015, was assigned to me.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 62-year-old married man with three adult children. He was born,
raised, and educated, through high school, in Mexico. He immigrated to the United
States in 1997 and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2004. (Item 4 at 8) In 2009,
Applicant completed an associate’s degree, earning a certification as a networking
specialist. (Item 4 at 13) Since 2011, he has worked for a defense contractor as a
general office worker. (Item 4 at 13)
In 1972, Applicant purchased a home in Mexico. He lived there after moving from
his parents’ home. It is currently worth $160,000 USD. (Item 7 at 4) He still owns this
property, and intends to pass it on to his children. (Item 7 at 4) In 2009, Applicant
purchased a rental property in Mexico. Its current value is $26,000. Applicant does not
own his current residence in the United States.
Applicant has several relatives who are Mexican citizens and residents, including
one of his children. He travels to Mexico approximately twice per year to visit them, and
he stays approximately three weeks per trip. (Item 4 at 49-65) Applicant lives with his
wife. She is a Mexican citizen.
Applicant voted in the Mexican elections of 2000 and 2006. (Item 7 at 5) He
viewed the exercise of his Mexican voting rights as an opportunity to help his relatives
who are still living in Mexico. (Item 7 at 5) His voting in these Mexican elections was not
encouraged by the United States. (Item 6 at 1) He has not voted in any Mexican
elections since then.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the U.S. Government.1
3
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security. Under Directive ¶
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Influence
Under this guideline, “when an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United
States” (AG ¶ 9). Preference for a country need not be motivated by political or
ideological reasons to have negative security implications (ISCR Case No. 98-0476
(App. Bd. December 14, 1999) at 5)). 
Applicant’s vote in a 2006 Mexican election after becoming a naturalized U.S.
citizen triggers the application of  AG ¶¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege, or
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen, and 10(a)(7), “ voting in a
foreign election.” 
AG ¶ 11(f) is the only potentially mitigating condition.  There is no record1
evidence that the U.S. Government encouraged Applicant’s vote in the Mexican
election, therefore, this mitigating condition does not apply
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Under this guideline, “a security risk may exist when an individual’s immediate
family, including cohabitants, and other persons to whom he or she may be bound by
affection, influence, or obligation are not citizens of the United States or may be subject
to duress.” Moreover, “financial interests in other countries are also relevant to security
determinations if they make an individual potentially vulnerable to coercion, exploitation,
or pressure.” (AG ¶ 6)
Applicant has substantial property interests in Mexico. This raises the issue of
whether AG ¶ 7(e), “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the
individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation,” applies. In order to
determine whether a heightened risk exists, “a current and accurate assessment o f  t h e
‘geopolitical situation’ and the security/intelligence profile of the country vis a vis the
4
U.S.” is crucial. (ADP Case No. 06-14978 (App. Bd. Oct 11, 2007) at 4) Here, there is no
record evidence of the geopolitical situation and security/intelligence profile of Mexico vis
a vis the United States. Under these circumstances, I conclude that Applicant’s Mexican
property interest, despite its substantial nature, does not trigger a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Therefore, AG ¶
7(e) does not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Applicant’s voting in a foreign election triggered a foreign preference security
concern that was not mitigated by any of the mitigating conditions set forth in AG ¶ 11.
However, one of the votes occurred before he became a naturalized U.S. citizen, and the
post-naturalization vote was a one-time activity that occurred approximately ten years
ago. Absent any behavior that demonstrates a preference for Mexico over the United
States since then, I conclude that it is unlikely that any such activities will recur. Upon
considering the whole-person factors, I conclude it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a : For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
5
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
