 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06953 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 13, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On June 1, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to an 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 29, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated September 10, 2015, was provided to him by letter dated 
October 13, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on October 21, 2015. He was afforded 
a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not submit any information within the 30-day period. On 
February 17, 2016, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d, 1.f, 1.k, 1.o, and 
1.q; and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g – 1.j, 1.m, 1.n, 1.r – 1.t. He did not admit or deny SOR 
¶¶ 1.l and 1.p, or 2.a, which I view as constructive denials.  
 
Background Information1 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old training and development specialist employed by a 
defense contractor since September 2011. He seeks a security clearance in conjunction 
with his current employment. Applicant held a secret security clearance while he was on 
active duty in the Army, discussed below.2 (Items 3, 4)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1988. He served in the Army 
National Guard as an inactive reservist from August 1988 to November 1990, and then 
served on active duty in the U.S. Army from November 1990 to May 2010, retiring as a 
staff sergeant (pay grade E-6). (Items 3, 4) He married in March 2006 and separated in 
June 2009. During his July 2, 2012 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject 
Interview (OPM PSI), he stated that he filed for divorce in September 2009; however, 
his wife wanted the divorce filed in a different location.3 Applicant has been living with a 
cohabitant since August 2010. He has a 20-year-old daughter and a 4-year-old son. 
(Items 3, 4) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR alleges 20 debts to include 2 judgments, 4 charged-off 
accounts, and 14 collection accounts totaling approximately $46,975. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.t) 
The amount of his 8 admitted debts approximates $40,000.  Applicant has not provided 
proof or payment for any of the debts alleged, nor has he provided any documentation 
                                                          
1
 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and is the 
most current information available. 
 
2
 The FORM does not indicate when Applicant was granted a security clearance or the duration 
of that clearance while he was in the Army. 
 
3
 The FORM does not contain information whether Applicant completed divorce proceedings. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
of attempts to contact his creditors or otherwise resolve these debts. In his June 2015 
SOR answer and during his July 2012 OPM PSI, he claimed to have no knowledge 
about the majority of his debts or what they were for. Applicant’s debts can be found on 
his June 20, 2012, and November 13, 2014 credit reports. (Items 2, 5, 6) 
 
During Applicant’s July 2012 OPM PSI, the investigator and Applicant discussed 
his debts at length. Applicant stated that he was not intentionally ignoring any of his 
accounts. He claimed the accounts became delinquent because his former spouse was 
spending more money than they had. He also was unemployed from May 2010 to 
March 2011 after he retired from the Army. (Items 3, 4)  
 
Applicant stated in his June 2015 SOR answer that “[s]everal items above 
(referring to SOR debts) will be taken care of within the next 60-90 days. These items 
should not reflect any disparity in my commitment to the US Government.” (Item 2) As 
noted, Applicant did not submit any documentation mitigating his debts with his SOR 
answer or in response to his FORM. There is no record evidence of financial 
counseling. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant falsified his June 2012 SF-86 by omitting 
adverse financial information. When asked whether in the past seven years he had had 
any possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed, 
defaulted on any type of loan, had bills turned over to a collection agency, had any 
account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed, 
had been over 120 days delinquent on any debt not previously entered, or was currently 
over 120 days delinquent on any debt, Applicant answered, “No.”  
 
 During Applicant’s July 2012 OPM PSI, he provided several reasons why he 
failed to list financial delinquencies on his SF-86. His explanations for failing to list his 
delinquencies varied to include that he thought accounts were over seven years old, 
were paid off, were not over 120 days past due, or were current. (Item 4) None of his 
explanations have merit based on the information contained in his credit reports. 
Several of Applicant’s delinquent accounts date back to 2007 and have been ongoing. 
(Items 5, 6) Applicant, who had security clearance experience in the Army, presumably 
knew the importance of providing accurate and complete information. (Item 3)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
    
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this 
Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented not only 
in his credit reports, but also in part by Applicant’s SOR answer. (Items 2, 4, 5)  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,4 I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions above are applicable or partially applicable 
to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern. The available information shows 
that Applicant has taken no documented affirmative action to resolve his delinquent 
debts. 
 
With that said, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts or 
enforcing tax laws.5 Rather, the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness consistent with the security guidelines in the Directive. In 
evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has 
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.6 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He 
                                                          
4
  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
5
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
6
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his 
past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in 
relying on a brief explanation, financial considerations security concerns remain. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose any of the SOR debts alleged. The evidence 
established the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(a) requiring additional inquiry about 
the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant did not provide an 
explanation for his omission in his SOR answer. Furthermore, it is difficult to accept 
Applicant’s July 2012 OPM PSI explanations for failing to list any of his debts given the 
number of his delinquent debts and the aggregate amount of his debts. This, 
accompanied by Applicant’s previous security clearance experience, education, age 
and experience, causes me to question his explanation. 
 
Applicant’s concealment of relevant and material information demonstrates a lack 
of candor required of cleared personnel. The Government has an interest in examining 
all relevant and material adverse information about an applicant before making a 
clearance decision. The Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that 
adverse information in a timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be prudent or 
convenient.  
 
Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about himself 
provides some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security violations or 
other security concerns in the future, something the Government relies on to perform 
damage assessments and limit the compromise of classified information. Having failed 
to provide an adequate explanation for his failure to list adverse financial information on 
his SF-86, his conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of 
legitimate Government interests. 
  
One additional comment is worthy of note. Applicant’s loyalty and patriotism are 
not at issue in these proceedings. Section 7 of the Executive Order 10865 specifically 
provides that industrial security decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
Security clearance decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than 
loyalty and patriotism. Nothing in this decision should be considered to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied decision as to 
an Applicant’s loyalty or patriotism.  
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,7 I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guidelines F and E security 
concern. Accordingly, Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
       Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.t:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
       Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7
 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
 
