 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-04925 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John V. Berry, Esquire, and Alison R. Wills, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On April 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In his April 30, 2015, SOR 
Response, Applicant admitted all allegations and requested a determination based on 
the written record. On June 29, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) with 10 attachments (“Items”). Applicant was given an extension to file 
a FORM Response. It was submitted on September 8, 2015, with 19 attachments. The 
case was assigned to me on September 22, 2015. Based on my review of the case file 
and submissions, I find Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old warehouse technician working for a defense 
contractor. He earned a high school diploma and has attended some college. He has 
been continuously employed since 2005, except for September 2013 through November 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
2013, when he was out of work on disability. Divorced in 2010, he is now remarried. He 
has three children and three stepchildren. He served in the military in the 1990s.  
 
Today, Applicant is living within his means. He and his wife have a combined 
annual income in excess of $208,000, consisting of approximately $140,000 in salaries 
complemented by other income, and they both maintain retirement accounts. (FORM 
Response at 5; FORM Response Items 1, 3, and 7) His credit report shows 
improvement since 2010 and Applicant recently purchased a home with his wife. 
(FORM Response Items 4-5) At issue, however, is a 2010 Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
discharge involving approximately $20,000 (SOR allegation 1.a), and 10 subsequent 
delinquent debts amounting to about $7,000 (SOR allegations 1.b-1.k). 
 
Applicant sought bankruptcy protection in 2010, the year of his divorce, when his 
financial obligations outweighed his income. (FORM Brief at 4; FORM, Item 4) While 
filing, he received financial counseling.2 He then failed, however, to pay his 2010 and 
2011 taxes, as required, due to a decline in work and a period of disability. (FORM 
Response at 6; FORM Response, Item 1) Consequently, in September 2014, he had 
state tax liens filed against him. (SOR allegations 1.b and 1.c, representing 
approximately $6,240, comprised of a $4,212 confessed judgment and $2,028 tax lien) 
In his SOR Response, Applicant provided documentary evidence showing he was in 
repayment on both tax debts. (FORM Brief at 5; FORM, Item 4, at 2-3, 8-15) Evidence 
that the repayment was progressing and that the current balance owed on the 
confessed judgment was approximately $1,878 was submitted in his September 2015 
FORM Response. (FORM Response at 6) The judgment’s balance was expected to be 
paid by March 2016. (FORM Response, Item 1) The current balance on the tax lien was 
reduced through $100 bi-weekly payments to $270 as of the time the FORM Response 
was introduced. It was expected to be satisfied by September 2015. (FORM Response, 
Items 1 and 10) 
 
In addition, Applicant incurred medical bills before and through his September 
2013 through November 2013 period of disability. The medical debts at issue range 
from $39 to $95 (SOR allegations 1.d-1.j) and cumulatively amount to about $400. In his 
SOR Response, Applicant showed that he satisfied debts 1.i and 1.j. nearly three years 
ago. (FORM Brief at 6; FORM, Item 4 at 5, 31-34; see also FORM Response at 7 and 
FORM Response, Items 1, 4, and 11-13) These debts were for a March 2013 
emergency room visit related to a severe hernia. (FORM Response, Item 1)  
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant also provided documentary evidence 
showing he satisfied the debts noted at 1.d-1.h., which were related to physical therapy 
received during Applicant’s 2013 period of disability. Those accounts are no longer 
adversely reflected on his credit report. (FORM Response, Item 4) Consequently, all 
these delinquent debts at issue have been addressed.  
 
                                                          
2 Besides the debtor education received in 2010, Applicant also completed a financial counseling program 
in 2015. (FORM Response at 5 and FORM Response Item 2) 
 
 
 
 
3 
Finally, there is a past due child support balance of about $732 (SOR allegation 
1.k). He became $732 past-due on this account in 2013, when an adjustment for child 
support payments was not withheld from disability payments he received while away 
from work for medical reasons. As soon as he returned to work, he started addressing 
the arrearage. He has made regular payments on this account balance. The balance as 
of September 2015 was $17, down from the $108 balance yet owed when he submitted 
his SOR Response. (FORM Response, Items 1, 14-15; FORM Brief at 6; FORM, Item 4 
at 5, 35-37). That $17 balance should have been eliminated last year.  
 
Applicant is a dedicated and trusted worker. He has great spirit and takes visible 
pride in his work. The support he provides is considered superior in nature. He is 
especially cited for his customer relations skills His exceptional work is greatly 
appreciated by his superiors. (FORM Response, Item 16) He was recently named the 
recipient of a major workplace award from his Commander. (FORM Response, Item 17) 
Outside of work, he is active with both his community and church, where he is a 
respected member of his congregation. (FORM Response, Items 18-19)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
 
 
 
4 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had his 
debts discharged under Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2010, then acquired approximately 
$7,000 in new delinquent debts. This debt includes a child support arrearage, medical 
bills, and a tax-related confessed judgment and a state tax lien. This is sufficient to 
invoke two of the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
           While most of the debts at issue are now completely or substantially satisfied, 
their progress has been relatively recent. Those debts are multiple in number, and their 
origin is not unique. Therefore, I do not find that AG ¶ 20(a) applies. However, the facts 
are clear that health-related issues warranted immediate, if not emergency medical care 
between 2012 and 2013. This adversely impacted Applicant, his ability to work, and his 
ability to generate income. It is also noted that Applicant worked in a relatively 
expeditious manner to begin addressing his medical debts – to include his satisfaction 
of some of those debts nearly three years ago. It is further noted, albeit to a lesser 
extent given the scant information provided, that Applicant was divorced in 2010 and 
that he received financial counseling for a second time in 2015. In light of these 
considerations, I find that AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
          As noted above, Applicant received financial counseling. Evidence shows that his 
finances have improved, as has his credit report. He recently purchased a home with 
his wife. The couple has a notable income and they live within their means. Meanwhile, 
the documentary evidence shows that considerable progress has been made on all of 
the delinquent debts at issue. Indeed, given the very minor balances yet owed on some 
of the debts at issue as of September 2015 (i.e., $17 to $270), it seems fair to assume, 
given Applicant’s track record thus far, that Applicant’s strategy for satisfying his debts 
is now completed or poised for completion. Therefore, I find that AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 
20(d) apply. AG ¶ 20(e), however, is inapplicable in this case.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c) sets forth the need to 
utilize a whole-person evaluation.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a 43-year-old 
warehouse technician who served in the military, earned a high school diploma, and 
completed some college-level coursework. He is remarried and has six children in a 
blended family.  He has been continuously employed since 2005, except for September 
2013 through November 2013, when he was out of work on disability due to a severe 
medical condition necessitating physical therapy.  
 
 
 
 
6 
Applicant received a discharge of his debts in 2010 under Chapter 7. Soon 
thereafter, he encountered additional financial issues. These were caused by personal 
medical issues that impacted his ability to fully work, then required physical therapy. 
Meanwhile, his employer’s workplace faced difficult times. As a result, he was unable to 
pay his 2010 and 2011 state taxes. As well, he acquired a minor ($732) past-due child 
support arrearage which demanded his immediate attention, and some unpaid or 
uncovered medical account balances (about $400) owing to his disability. Since then, 
Applicant has again received financial counseling, entered into repayment 
arrangements with the majority of his creditors, and, as of September 2015, satisfied all 
but a nominal amount of the debt at issue. That remaining balance appears to have 
been poised for satisfaction in the past few months. Today, Applicant and his wife have 
a sizeable income and live within their means in a new home.  
 
Overall, Applicant provided sufficient information to explain how his recent 
delinquent debts arose. He also provided sufficient documentary and narrative evidence 
to show how he has brought his debt under control. Meanwhile, he demonstrated that 
he can afford his current lifestyle, that he is a valued worker, and an active person in his 
community. I find Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
