 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06245 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny him 
eligibility for access to classified information. Applicant did not present sufficient 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts proven by the written record 
concerning his history of financial problems. Accordingly, this case is decided against 
Applicant. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on July 2, 2015, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On 
November 2, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), dated January 11, 2016. The FORM contained six attachments 
(Items). On January 28, 2016, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice 
of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the potentially disqualifying conditions. He did not reply within the 30-day period from 
receipt of the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 30, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted owing six of the SOR delinquent 
obligations, denied five debts, and neither admitted nor denied the obligation listed in 
SOR 1.j. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and submissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old senior technician who has worked for a defense 
contractor since January 2014 and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 3) Before 
that, he worked as a residential technician for another federal contractor from 2012 to 
2014. And previously, he was a field engineer working for another federal contractor 
from April 2004 to May 2012. From May 2012 through July 2012, he was unemployed. 
(Item 4) In other words, except for the three months in 2012, he has been continuously 
employed for approximately the last 12 years, at least. (Item 3)  
 
Applicant is currently married and has three children ages 15, 29, and 30. In 
2012, Applicant’s wife lost her job and, as of September 2014, was still attempting to 
find full-time employment. (Item 4) He was previously divorced in April 1990. (Item 3)  
 
In Applicant’s June 2014 Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), he does not indicate any financial difficulties or delinquencies. (Item 3) He 
stated he was unaware of the debts because his wife handles the household’s finances. 
(Item 4) In his 2014 Enhanced Subject Interview (ESI), he stated during 2012, when his 
wife lost her job, he had failed to have sufficient funds withheld from his income. He 
asserted, but never documented, that he timely filed both his 2012 and 20132 federal 
tax returns and was informed by the IRS that he owed approximately $4,000 for these 
two years. (Item 4)  
 
After being informed the IRS would start garnishing his wages, Applicant agreed 
to pay 15% of his income on a biweekly basis. (Item 4) He also asserted he timely filed 
his state tax returns, but owed additional tax to the state. He asserts he established a 
repayment plan with the state and is making $30 monthly payments. (Item 4) He 
provided no documentation indicating he had filed his 2013 state and federal income tax 
returns (SOR 1.m) or that he made payment on any repayment agreement.  
 
When questioned about the delinquent accounts on his October 2012 credit 
report, Applicant stated he did not recognize or was unaware of many of the debts. He 
                                                          
2 In Applicant’s SOR response he denied failing to file his 2013 state and federal income tax forms and he 
had received an extension and properly filed his income tax returns. (Item 2)  
 
3 
believed he had established a repayment agreement for the debt listed in paragraph 
SOR 1.i ($3,628) and was making $50 monthly payments. (Item 4) Applicant admitted 
some of the delinquent obligations in his answer to the SOR. Further, these matters are 
established by credit reports, which were obtained during the security clearance 
process in June 2014 and May 2015. As of September 2014, he asserted he would 
contact his creditors and attempt to establish repayment plans. 
 
In Applicant’s November 2015 SOR response, he stated two of the debts (SOR 
1.f, $1,708 and SOR 1.h, $1,830) were almost paid. (Item 2) However, his June 2014 
and May 2015 credit reports show no reduction on the amount owed for SOR 1.f. (Items 
5, 6) Additionally, his May 2015 credit report reflects the department store debt listed in 
SOR 1.h has a zero balance, but also lists $1,830 as having been charged off. (Item 6) 
In his SOR response, he indicated the 120-day-past-due mortgage amount (SOR 1.g, 
$12,200) was part of a modification. (Item 2) His credit reports indicate he is current on 
his student loans and numerous other accounts.  
 
Applicant has not provided documentation showing that the delinquent SOR 
obligations are paid, settled, subject to a repayment agreement, in dispute, cancelled, 
forgiven, or otherwise resolved. His various claims and assertions in his answer to the 
SOR are not supported by documentation. Applicant did not provide documentation in 
reply to the SOR or the FORM.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
4 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
 
5 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant owes more than $27,000 for an unpaid judgment, seven collection 
accounts, three charged-off accounts, and one delinquent account that is more than 120 
days delinquent. Applicant denied failing to file his 2013 state and federal income tax 
returns in a timely manner and the record fails to support that he was delinquent in the 
filing of his income tax returns. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations fully apply. Applicant’s 
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He has been employed, except for 
three months in 2012, since 2004. In July 2014, he was made aware of the 
Government’s concerns about his delinquent debt. He provided no documentation 
showing payment on any of his debts, not even the $145 debt (SOR 1.l). By failing to 
make payments he has failed to act responsibly under the circumstances. He has not 
demonstrated that his financial problems are under control or that he has a plan to bring 
them under control. There is no showing of a good-faith effort to satisfy the delinquent 
obligations.  
 
 
6 
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history within the meaning of Guideline F. I reach that conclusion based on the findings 
of fact that show Applicant has done very little to address his financial problems. With 
that said, I have little concern about the two medical collection accounts for a total of 
$297. First, it is presumed that these debts were incurred for necessary medical 
expenses as opposed to frivolous or irresponsible spending. Second, all the amounts 
are minor, $172 and $125, which is indicative of co-payments and the like in medical 
billing.  
 
AG & 20(b) does not apply. Applicant states in 2012 his wife lost her job and as 
of 2014 was still looking for full-time employment. This is a factor beyond his control, but 
he has made no payments or even documented that he has had recent contact with his 
creditors. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply since there is no 
evidence he received financial counseling, nor is there a clear showing that his financial 
obligations are being addressed. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not 
apply because he has failed to document payment on any of the delinquent accounts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has failed to document 
any payment on his delinquent accounts. He has been aware of the Government’s 
concern about his delinquent debts since July 2014, which was reinforced by the July 
15, 2015 SOR. None of the SOR debts have been paid, nor is there is evidence 
indicating he has recently contacted his creditors.  
 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. However, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to supplement 
 
7 
the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances and facts that 
would mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. He failed to offer evidence 
of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to address 
his delinquent debt. He failed to provide such information, and by relying solely on his 
scant responses to the SOR, he failed to mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns. 
 
  Applicant has not presented sufficient information to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts proven by the written record. The totality of the written record does not 
show that Applicant has a reasonable plan to resolve the delinquent debts or that he 
has demonstrated a firm commitment to adhering to such a plan. The concern over 
Applicant’s problematic financial history creates doubt about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due 
consideration to the whole-person concept.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
  
Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant his 
eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant   
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c: For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.m:   For Applicant 
 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
