KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all the evidence.  Once the
the government has established its case the burden falls on the applicant to establish matters in
mitigation.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-05488.a1
DATE: 03/25/2016
DATE: March 25, 2016
In Re:
--------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05488
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Gregory F. Greiner, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 18, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the
case be decided based on the written record.  On December 10, 2015, after the close of the record,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Matthew E. Malone denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant is 36 years old.  While in the active duty military, he applied for
and received a security clearance required for his duties.  However, the investigation and
adjudication in that case revealed financial misconduct involving criminal offenses such as theft and
embezzlement, as well as delinquent debts.  DoD adjudicators initially revoked Applicant’s
clearance, but he appealed that decision and was granted a clearance conditioned upon a continuing
commitment to meet his financial obligations and not incurring further debt.  
Applicant found employment after leaving the active duty military in 2010, but left his job
in 2013 because his wife had an opportunity for a tuition-free college education.  Subsequently,
Applicant could not find work for almost three months.  He incurred state tax debts relating to an
inheritance around 2005.  These debts became delinquent and he claims he has been repaying the
debt at the rate of $175 per month.  He provided no documentary support for his claims.  In 2011,
Applicant experienced a quadrupling of homeowner’s association fees relating to a condominium
he purchased while in the military.  As a result, he had trouble making his monthly payments.  He
then moved and tried to rent out the condo, but did not receive enough rent to cover his costs.  By
the time he put the property up for sale, the condo’s value had fallen and the real estate market
crashed.  Applicant has been trying unsuccessfully for four years to execute a mortgage
modification, as the property is now worth $60,000 less than he owes.  Applicant claimed he also
has tried to dispose of the mortgage through a short sale, but was unsuccessful. Other than the
explanation he provided in his SOR response, Applicant did not provide any documentation of his
efforts to resolve this debt.  For a number of other smaller debts, Applicant produced information
documenting the payment terms and schedules of payments, but he did not establish that he actually
has made any of those payments.  Applicant claims his current finances are sound.  
The Judge concluded: Applicant has a long history of financial problems before and after his
military service.  The facts adjudicated in his prior request for clearance while he was in the military
are relevant to this suitability assessment insofar as they bear on whether Applicant’s financial
problems will recur.  Although the debts involving the mortgage and his inheritance arose through
unforseen circumstances, it is still incumbent on Applicant to show he acted responsibly in the face
of those circumstances.  Applicant did not corroborate his explanations and claims of repayment or
negotiations with creditors.  His debts are still outstanding and must be considered as recent.  His
actions to resolve his debts are either ongoing or have only come to fruition after receiving the SOR. 
Applicant did not provide information to show that his current finances are stable.  Without more
2
substantive information to support Applicant’s claims of repayments and financial stability, doubts
remain about whether his finances will continue to present a security concern.  Those doubts must
be resolved against the Applicant.  
Applicant argues that the Judge did not make specific findings of fact regarding six debts
listed in the SOR.  While it is true that the Judge did not include in his narrative a description of each
debt and the amount owed, he did incorporate by reference admissions made by Applicant in his
answer to the SOR, which included a substantial exposition about his debts and the circumstances
behind them.  The Judge also noted the SOR when mentioning that Applicant had either disclosed
the debts in question on his security clearance application, or the debts were documented by credit
reports contained in the case file. At least four of the debts were specifically mentioned when the
Judge noted Applicant’s claim that he would start repayment plans for the debts.  To the extent
Applicant is arguing that the Judge committed error through inadequate fact finding, that argument
lacks merit.
Applicant also asserts that the Judge “did not credit” certain evidence he considers mitigating
and that the failure to do so was error.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a judge has considered
all the evidence in the record, unless he or she states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06093
at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2015).  Applicant has not rebutted this presumption.  In his decision  the
Judge mentions much of the evidence in mitigation referenced by Applicant.  The gravamen of the
Judge’s decision, however, was that Applicant failed to provide evidence that corroborated the
representations he made in his answer to the SOR.  Once the Government has established its case,
the burden falls on an applicant to establish matters in mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The Judge’s
conclusion that Applicant’s assertions, standing alone, did not establish his claims of debt reduction
was sustainable.       
Applicant argues generally that the record supports a conclusion that he mitigated the
Government’s security concerns relating to his finances.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct.
12, 2007).  Here, Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for an alternate interpretation of the
record evidence regarding mitigation.  Applicant’s assertions regarding his efforts at debt resolution
was evidence the Judge was required to consider.  However, such evidence does not mandate a
favorable decision.  Other than his uncorroborated statements in his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
produced no evidence that he had a workable plan or was making payments that made it likely that
his problems would be resolved within a reasonable period of time.  In light of the foregoing, the
Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were still ongoing.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 05-07747 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2007).  The Board concludes that the Judge
appropriately weighed the Guideline F mitigating evidence against the seriousness of the
disqualifying conduct. 
Applicant notes his pro se status below and asserts that he has further mitigating information
to supply to the Judge.  He requests that the case be remanded to the Judge for additional fact finding
3
and a disposition based on additional evidence.  Applicant has failed to establish error by the Judge
or any denial of his procedural due process rights that would make such a remand appropriate.     
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when consistent with the interests of national security.’” Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b): “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”  
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett           
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James Ellis Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
