 
  1
             
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 14-04791 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations.)  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on April 14, 2014. 
On January 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR on February 17, 2015; answered it; and requested a 
decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on November 3, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6, was sent to 
 
  2
Applicant on that same day. He was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the 
FORM on November 10, 2015, and did not respond. The case was assigned to me on 
March 3, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges 25 delinquent debts totaling approximately $47,700. In his 
Answer, Applicant admitted each of the allegations and offered an explanation 
concerning each debt.  While he admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, he qualified that he had 
received an Internal Revenue Service Form 1099-C, Forgiveness of Debt (1099-C) for 
these two debts, which he filed with his 2013 tax returns.  He also stated that he had 
received a 1099-C for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, which he filed with his 2014 tax 
return.  He states that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e are the same debt. He 
also states that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.r was for satellite television equipment that 
he returned and the account should reflect a $0 balance. Applicant’s admissions in his 
Answer are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of defense contractor for which he has 
worked since December 2002. He graduated from high school in 1992 and received a 
completion certificate from an aerospace industry training program in 2002. He married 
his current wife in 2008, and they have a seven-year-old daughter and a five-year-old 
son.  Applicant’s 19 year old stepson also lives with them. He has a 14-year-old 
daughter from a previous relationship. This is his first application for a security 
clearance. (GX 3.)   
  
The delinquent debts are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) 
dated June 2015 and April 2014. (GX 5; GX 6.) He listed a number of his delinquent 
accounts on his e-QIP and discussed each account during his Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) (GX 3; GX 4.) 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 1.h through 1.k, 1.m through 1.o and 
1.q are for delinquent credit cards totaling $25,411. The $7,522 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.l is owed to Applicant’s mortgage lender, the $2,019 debt alleged in ¶ 1.p is owed to a 
collection agency for a delinquent cellular service account, and the $139 debt alleged in 
SOR 1.t is for an unpaid utility bill. (GX 4; GX 5.) Applicant has not made any payments 
on any of these debts, which total $35,091. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.s, 1.u, 1.v, 
1.x, and 1.y, totaling $402, are for unpaid medical accounts. The $2,637 debt alleged in 
1.e is the underlying debt for the $3,946 judgment alleged in 1.a, and is therefore, a 
duplicate debt. 
 
Applicant states that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($3,536) and 1.d ($3,094) 
have been resolved through 1099-C filings. He also states that the $971 satellite 
television debt should reflect a $0 balance as of May 21, 2014, because he returned the 
equipment. (GX 2.) However, he did not provide any evidence in support of these 
statements.  
 
  3
  
Applicant stated that his financial issues “are the result of several life changing 
events over a period of time from 2007 to 2010.” (GX 2.) According to Applicant, 
following his February 2008 divorce, he became responsible for his ex-wife’s debt.  He 
also provided financial support for his parents during this period.  In 2011, he was the 
defendant in a paternity suit which resulted in his owing $92,000 in child support.  His 
wages are garnished weekly for $256.16. (GX 4.) The balance as of June 2015 was 
$91,555. (GX 5.) Additionally, as of June 2015, he had approximately $29,888 in current 
credit card debt for 16 open accounts, many of which have balances very close to the 
credit limit. (GX 4.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
 
  4
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The record evidence establishes that SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e are the same debt. 
Therefore, I have not considered the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e when evaluating 
Applicant’s financial status. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under 
the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged 
twice).  
 
  5
  
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs, e-QIP, and PSI, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The 
following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant has numerous, recent delinquent debts 
that were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
  
 AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established. Applicant experienced circumstances largely 
beyond his control when he and his former wife divorced and he became responsible for 
her debts.  However, Applicant’s decision to help his parents when they were struggling 
financially was voluntary and at his own detriment.  While five of the delinquent debts 
totaling $402 are for unpaid medical bills, there is no evidence that they originated from 
a medical emergency. His ongoing child support requirements, while unanticipated, are 
not born from a condition that was largely beyond his control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has not received any counseling. He is 
not paying any of the delinquent accounts. To the contrary, he has amassed a 
significant amount of current credit-card debt.  There are no indications that his financial 
problems are under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Applicant has not made any tangible efforts to 
repay his creditors. 
 
  6
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is not established.  Applicant stated that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c, 1.d, and 1.g were resolved through 1099-C filings, and that the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.r was satisfied by returning dish/cable equipment. However, he did not submit any 
supporting evidence.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant’s decision to financially assist his parents is morally commendable, but 
was personally irresponsible. His monthly child-support payments are significant, but do 
not excuse his failure to make any payments on any of his debts. His failure to resolve 
any of his delinquent accounts and his substantial, current credit-card balances indicate 
that he does not have his finances under control.   
   
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  7
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.y:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
