 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02910 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s financial problems were 
not caused by irresponsible, reckless, or negligent behavior. She has demonstrated a 
good-faith effort to resolve her delinquent student loan accounts and provided a 
legitimate basis for disputing the medical debts alleged in the SOR. Her eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
national security to grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive information and 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On August 6, 
2015, I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission 
of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.2  The parties 
complied with the terms of the order.3 At the hearing, convened on August 26, 2015, I 
admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, without objection. Applicant did not 
submit any documents at the hearing, but timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, 
which was also admitted without objection.4  I received the transcript (Tr.) on September 
3, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 28, has worked for a federal contractor since August 2013. Initially 
hired as a temporary employee, Applicant obtained permanent status in February 2013. 
She is seeking eligibility to occupy a position of trust because her job requires access to 
personally identifiable information (PII). On her position of trust application, dated 
August 2013, she disclosed several delinquent accounts. The SOR alleges that 
Applicant owes $24,000 on 22 delinquent accounts.5   
 
 The majority of Applicant’s delinquent debts, SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.s are for 
student loans. Between January 2006 and August 2008, Applicant attended a school in 
the now-defunct, for-profit Corinthian College system. She did not obtain a degree.  In 
2015, a Department of Education (ED) investigation found that the company engaged in 
deceptive practices. Specifically, the corporation recruited low-income students using 
inflated job placement rates and encouraging students to finance their education with 
loans they would not likely be able to repay.6 Corinthian Colleges closed the majority of 
its schools in November 2015 after the findings of the investigation became public. ED 
specifically created an expedited debt relief process for certain students who attended 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
3 The discovery letter, dated July 6, 2015 is appended to the record as HE II. Due to a change of address, 
Applicant did not receive the discovery letter. Department Counsel resent it to Applicant’s new address on 
July 22, 2015. Applicant confirmed receipt of the letter.  
 
4 Correspondence related to Applicant’s post-hearing submission is appended to the record as HE III. 
 
5 Tr. 16; GE 1. 
 
6 Department of Education, Department of Education and Attorney General Kamala Harris Announce 
Findings from Investigation of Wyotech and Everest Programs (Nov. 17, 2015), 
http://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/department-of-education-and-attorney-general-kamala-harris-
announce-findings-from-investigation-of-wyotech-and-everest-programs 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s school.7 She did not qualify for the program and remains responsible for her 
student loans.8   
 
  Several of the SOR debts are related to the care of other family members. 
Between 2010 and 2015, Applicant was the only employed member of her family. In 
addition to bearing full financial responsibility for her son, she also supported her mother 
and older sister. When Applicant was unemployed between March 2012 and August 
2013, she supported her family with the help of public assistance programs. After she 
began her current employment in 2013, her financial responsibilities increased. 
Applicant began providing some financial support to her father in 2013 after he was 
diagnosed with a terminal illness. She continued to do so until his death in June 2014. 
After her father passed, Applicant became financially responsible for her younger 
brother. She incurred the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g ($788) on her mother’s behalf. 
Her mother promised to pay the accounts, but failed to do so. The debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b., 1.e, 1.t., 1.u ($3,300) are medical debts for Applicant and her son. Applicant 
had insurance through a state-run medical insurance program at the time she and her 
son received medical treatment. She believes the debts were not covered due to some 
administrative error.9 
 
 Historically, Applicant has worked a series of low paying jobs. Now, earning $14 
per hour plus time-and-a-half for overtime, Applicant is earning the highest wage of her 
career. Initially, Applicant worked 16 hours days, 7 days a week until she developed an 
emergency medical issue that required a hospital stay. At the time, Applicant was still a 
temporary employee and did not have paid time off. She checked herself out of the 
hospital against her doctor’s orders to return to work. Since then, her employer has 
made some accommodations for her medical condition and has limited her overtime 
hours to eight per week.10  
 
 Even with the reduction in her income caused by her limited hours, Applicant is 
taking steps to resolve her delinquent accounts. She is starting with her student loans. 
She has entered a program to return the loans to good standing.  Applicant is working 
toward rehabilitating her finances. In April 2015, she stopped providing financial support 
to her family members. She has also improved her credit score by 100 points. Applicant 
is able to pay her recurring financial obligations on time. She does not have any credit 
cards or open consumer credit accounts.11  
  
 
                                                          
7 Department of Education, Fact Sheet: Protecting Students from Abusive Career Colleges (June 8, 
2015), http://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/fact-sheet-protecting-students-abusive-career-colleges 
 
8 Tr. 18, 25-29. 
 
9 Tr. 17-19, 23-24, 29-30, 34-40, 48-19. 
 
10 Tr. 30, 41-42, 58-63. 
 
11 Tr. 32-33, 42-43, 47-48, 56; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive 
positions.”12 “The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is 
that, based on all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security.”13 Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any 
final unfavorable access determination may be made.14 An administrative judge’s 
objective is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision that embraces all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious concern because failure to “satisfy debts 
[or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect sensitive information.”15 
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. 
  
Applicant admits that she owes the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. 
Applicant argues, however, that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n through 1.s are 
duplicates of the student loans allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.m. A review of the 
                                                          
12 DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation) ¶¶ 
C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
13 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
14 See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
15  AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
credit reports in the record supports Applicant’s contention. The credit reports also show 
that the student loan account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.i.16 
Accordingly, SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.n through 1.s, totaling $9,800 are resolved in Applicant’s 
favor. However, she remains responsible for the $14,400 in delinquent debt in the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports in the record establish a prima facie case 
that Applicant had a history of not meeting her financial obligations and that she 
demonstrated an inability to pay his bills.17 However, Applicant has submitted sufficient 
information to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised by her finances.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems did not occur under circumstances that raise 
doubts about her current trustworthiness. She incurred the debt as a young adult trying 
to finance her education and support her family members on low wages. Now, Applicant 
is saddled with debts from opening accounts for her mother and student loans for a 
college known to engage in deceptive practices against its students. However, Applicant 
is taking responsibility for the outstanding accounts and is initiating a good-faith effort to 
resolve them, starting with her student loan accounts. Applicant has entered into a 
rehabilitation program to restore her $9,400 in delinquent student loans to good-
standing.18  In addition, Applicant presented evidence establishing a reasonable basis to 
dispute the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.t, 1.u, totaling $3,300. The 
debts should have been covered by the state-sponsored insurance plan she had at the 
time she received treatment.19 The remaining $1,600 in unresolved delinquent debt, 
while not insignificant, is not a likely source of exploitation or vulnerability for Applicant.  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about her suitability for access to 
sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicants are not held to a standard of perfection. 
Although it will take some time for Applicant to completely rehabilitate her finances, she 
is putting forth her best effort to resolve her debt given her limited resources.  
Accordingly, her request for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.u:    For Applicant 
 
 
                                                          
16 GE 3-5. 
 
17 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
18 AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
19 AG ¶ 20(e).  
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted. 
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
