1  
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )                  ISCR Case No.: 14-06046     
  )                
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence).  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
January 6, 2014.  On February 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence.  The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 18 and February 24, 2015, and 
elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  The 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
2  
Government’s written brief with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel on August 11, 2015.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns.  Applicant received the FORM on September 21, 2015, and again on 
October 16, 2015.  He did not file a response to the FORM within the time allowed, nor 
did he assert any objections to the Government’s evidence. 
 
The case was assigned to me on March 1, 2016.  The Government’s exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 1 to 3) are admitted into evidence without objection.  In 
addition, Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of Government 
documents from which relevant facts about the Philippines are derived.  The facts 
administratively noticed are set out below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR,2 Applicant admitted all the factual allegations with 
explanations annotated on the SOR and in a separate document.  His admissions and 
explanations are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 66-year-old mechanical engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since 2010.3  He is normally assigned to work overseas, and regularly visits 
his family in the Philippines during his time off.  He has not served in the military and 
was investigated for a security clearance in 2004.4  He is a U.S. citizen by birth, and is 
not a citizen of any other country. 
 
Applicant was previously married in the U.S. in 1972, and divorced in 2001.5  He 
has two adult children from his first marriage.  Despite being legally married in the U.S. 
at the time, he stated he was also “married” under Philippine common law to a citizen 
and resident of the Philippines.  The status of his “marriage” is unclear as he noted in 
his SF 86 that he has a Philippine marriage certificate, however, he stated to an OPM 
investigator that he met his current “spouse” in 1994 while on vacation in the 
Philippines, and was considered “married” on October 14, 1994, under Philippine 
common law.6  Applicant claimed in his PSI that he had no church or government-
                                                     
2 Item 1. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Item 3.  Applicant did not report this clearance investigation in his SF 86, however he acknowledged it in 
his personal subject interview (PSI).  It is unclear whether he currently holds a clearance. 
 
5 Item 2 (SF 86).  Applicant stated in his PSI that he was estimating the divorce date and that he had 
never seen the divorce certificate. 
 
6 Item 3 (PSI). 
 
3  
recognized marriage and he is unsure whether his “marriage” would be recognized in 
the U.S.7 
 
Applicant’s spouse is a 44-year-old homemaker, who is a citizen and resident of 
the Philippines.8  They have four children born between 1995 and 2004, all citizens and 
residents of the Philippines.  Applicant’s two oldest children were attending college in 
the Philippines, and have obtained dual U.S. citizenship.  His two youngest children 
were attending junior high and high school in the Philippines.  Applicant claimed that he 
planned to apply for U.S. citizenship for them in 2015.9  He travels frequently to the 
Philippines and maintains daily contact with his family members. 
 
Applicant stated that all of his financial interests are in the U.S., including his 
retirement account, 401k, bank accounts, etc.,10 however, he has provided no 
documentation to show the extent of his financial interests.  Applicant listed a home in 
the U.S. as his permanent residence since 2012, however, he acknowledged that it is 
owned by his niece and he has never lived there, but uses it as a U.S. mailing 
address.11  He claimed to have no investments or property in the Philippines, however, 
he sends $4,000 per month to his spouse to support his family, and is apparently their 
sole financial supporter.  His spouse owns her home. 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are residents and citizens of the 
Philippines.  He emphasized in his Answer that he has no “interaction with them, 
period,” because he does not speak Tagalog.  However, in his PSI, he noted that while 
his father-in-law does not speak English, his mother-in-law speaks some English and he 
sees them when he is in the Philippines.  Applicant stated that his spouse, children and 
parents-in-law do not have connections to the Philippine government. 
 
In response to the request from Department Counsel and without objection of 
Applicant, I have taken administrative notice of the following relevant facts about the 
Philippines: 
 
The Philippines is a multi-party, constitutional republic with a bicameral 
legislature. The United States recognized the Philippines as an independent state and 
established diplomatic relations in 1946.  The United States has designated the 
Philippines as a major non-NATO ally, and there are close and abiding security ties 
between the two nations, based on strong historical and cultural links and a shared 
commitment to democracy and human rights.  The Manila Declaration of 2011 
                                                     
7 Item 3. 
 
8 Item 2. 
 
9 Item 1.  It is unclear whether they have since applied for U.S. citizenship. 
 
10 Item 1. 
 
11 Items 2 and 3. 
4  
reaffirmed the 1951 U.S. Philippines Mutual defense Treaty as the foundation for a 
robust, balanced, and responsive security partnership. 
 
The United States is among the Philippines’ top trading partners, and it 
traditionally has been the Philippines’ largest foreign investor.  Philippine national 
elections have been generally free and fair, but independent observers have noted 
widespread vote buying, and dynastic political families have monopolized elective 
offices at the national and local level. 
 
The most significant human rights problems are extrajudicial killings, enforced 
disappearances undertaken by security forces and vigilante groups, a weak and 
overburdened criminal justice system, widespread official corruption and abuse of 
power, and impunity from prosecution for human rights abuses. 
 
Other human rights problems include prisoner and detainee torture and abuse by 
security forces, violence and harassment against human rights activists by security 
forces, warrantless arrests, lengthy pretrial detentions, poor prison conditions, killings 
and harassment of journalists, violence against women, abuse and sexual exploitation 
of children, and trafficking in persons.  Forced labor and sex trafficking of men, women, 
and children within the country remain a significant problem.  Pervasive corruption 
undermined government efforts to combat trafficking.  Public officials, including those in 
diplomatic missions abroad, law enforcement agencies, and other government entities, 
are reported to be complicit in trafficking or allow traffickers to operate with impunity.  
 
Muslim separatists, communist insurgencies, and terrorist organizations are 
active in the Philippines; and they have killed Philippine security forces, local 
government officials, and other civilians.  Through joint U.S.–Philippine cooperation, the 
ability of these various groups to operate in the Philippines has been constrained but 
not eliminated.  In 2014, there were numerous attacks with small arms and improvised 
explosive devices, kidnappings for ransom, and extortion efforts by suspected terrorist 
groups.  Gangs of kidnappers have targeted foreigners, including Filipino-Americans.  
The U.S. State Department has recommended that all U.S. citizens defer non-essential 
travel to the Sulu Archipelago due to the high threat of kidnapping in that area.  The 
State Department also warned U.S. citizens to exercise extreme caution if traveling to 
the main island of Mindanao due to violent activities of terrorist and insurgent groups. 
 
The Philippine government has recognized the potential threat posed by 
radicalized Philippine citizens supporting the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).  
In July 2014, the Philippine president’s anti-terrorism council convened an ad hoc 
emergency technical working group focusing on persons of interest.  The working group 
has tightened passport issuance, increased immigration screening, and increased 
monitoring of ISIL-related activity. 
 
None of the source documents submitted by Department Counsel reflect that the 
Philippines engages in economic or military intelligence activity directed toward the 
United States. 
5  
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527.  The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7.  Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
6  
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).  “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s spouse, children, mother-in-law, and father-in-
law are citizens and residents of the Philippines. 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to 
help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in 
U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the 
foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG  ¶  7(b):  connections  to  a  foreign  person,  group,  government,  or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation   to   
protect   sensitive   information   or   technology   and   the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
When foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a 
foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 
01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003).  Thus, I have considered not only Applicant’s 
frequent travel to, and financial and personal support for his family members in the 
Philippines, but also the citizenship and residency of his family members who may be 
vulnerable to kidnapping or exploitation by insurgent and terrorist elements. 
 
7  
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29,  
2002).  Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion.  The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States.  In considering the nature 
of the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in 
the country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 
2006) (reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not 
consider terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.”  The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government.  I am satisfied that the activities of insurgent 
and terrorist groups, the risks of kidnapping by criminal elements, and the danger of 
radicalized ISIL sympathizers in the Philippines are sufficient to establish the 
“heightened risk” in AG ¶ 7(a) and the potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so 
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
8  
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant has close and continuing ties of affinity to his spouse and children in 
the Philippines, although I do not find that his ties to his in-laws are of a sufficient nature 
to raise similar concerns under Guideline B.  He provides his immediate family with their 
sole means of support and visits regularly.  He maintains daily contact, is active in their 
lives, provides financial support, is very knowledgeable about his children’s individual 
goals and accomplishments, has applied for U.S. citizenship on their behalf, and is 
rightfully very proud of them.  Although Applicant stated that his retirement and financial 
accounts are in the U.S., he has not provided documentation to show the extent of his 
U.S. assets.  Alternatively, Applicant normally works and lives overseas, he returns to 
the Philippines during his time off, his entire family is in the Philippines and he is their 
sole means of support.  I do not have sufficient evidence to determine whether his U.S. 
ties and financial interests outweigh his foreign interests. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  In applying the whole- 
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis.  After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign family connections. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
