 
 1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05244 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant illegally used and purchased controlled substances, primarily marijuana, 
between December 2007 and February 2013. He declined to reveal the identities of the 
persons with whom he used drugs or from whom he bought drugs, knowing that a failure to 
fully cooperate could negatively affect his security clearance. He does not currently intend to 
abuse any drug in the future, but he risks his abstinence by continuing to be in the presence 
of friends and roommates when they are smoking marijuana. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On December 3, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct, and explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue his security clearance eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 2 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on January 20, 2015, and he requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On October 9, 2015, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to 
determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. On October 26, 2015, I scheduled the hearing for 
November 17, 2015. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Before the introduction of any evidence, SOR 
¶ 1.h was amended without objection to allege that Applicant used the prescription drug 
Prozac without a prescription in February 2008. Two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) were 
admitted into evidence without objection at the hearing. Department Counsel’s letter 
forwarding discovery to Applicant on September 10, 2015, was marked as a hearing exhibit 
(HE 1) for the record, but was not admitted as an evidentiary exhibit. Applicant testified, as 
reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on December 2, 2015. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
  The amended SOR alleges under Guideline H and cross-alleges under Guideline E 
(SOR ¶ 2.a) that Applicant used and purchased marijuana (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b) on multiple 
occasions from December 2007 to at least February 2013; sold or distributed marijuana on 
multiple occasions (SOR ¶ 1.c); used and purchased psilocybin mushrooms on multiple 
occasions (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e); used and purchased LSD once in October 2010 (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 
1.g); used the prescription drug Prozac without a prescription in February 2008 (SOR ¶ 
1.h); abused Adderall on multiple occasions between January 2010 and April 2013 by 
exceeding his prescribed dosage (SOR ¶ 1.i); continues to possess drug paraphernalia 
(SOR ¶ 1.j); may use marijuana in the future (SOR ¶ 1.k); and that he used illegal drugs or 
misused prescription drugs after becoming employed by a DOD contractor (SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 
2.c). In addition, Applicant is alleged under Guideline E to have refused to provide 
information when requested during a November 2013 interview with an authorized 
investigator for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) about the persons with whom 
he used illegal drugs and from whom he purchased illegal drugs (SOR ¶ 2.b). Applicant 
admitted the allegations when he answered the SOR. Concerning whether he may use 
marijuana in the future (SOR ¶ 1.k), Applicant responded: 
 
I understand that it is illegal to use marijuana and that it is not appropriate for 
me to do so, especially considering the work I do. However, it may become 
legalized someday, and I will retire at some point in my life. Once that 
happens, I might use marijuana again. 
 
At his hearing, he offered the following in clarification of his future intent:  “I do not intend 
on breaking the laws and rules.” 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact: 
 
 3 
Applicant is a 24-year-old engineer with a bachelor’s degree awarded in May 2013. 
He started as a summer intern with his current employer, a defense contractor, in June 
2011. He was a part-time employee from August 2011 until June 2013, when he became a 
full-time employee. (GE 1; Tr. 41.) 
 
Applicant began using marijuana in high school. From December 2007 until August 
2009, when he started college, Applicant smoked marijuana on average two to three times 
a week. During his junior year of high school, Applicant took an antidepressant, which he 
believes was Prozac, on one occasion around February 2008. He accepted an offer of the 
drug from a friend, who had a valid prescription, because he wanted to see what its effects 
would be on him. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 26.) Applicant’s parents learned that Applicant used 
marijuana early on, when he was still in high school. His father found some drug 
paraphernalia that belonged to Applicant and his sister. (Tr. 31.) His parents advised him to 
stop using marijuana and to focus on his academics. (Tr. 34.) 
 
Applicant found new friends in college who used marijuana. (Tr. 34.) Applicant 
continued to use marijuana from August 2009 to February 7, 2013, at night or on the 
weekends. (Tr. 33.) The frequency of his marijuana use varied significantly, depending on 
his academic workload. He used the drug a few times a week on average, but also multiple 
times a day on occasion. He also ingested baked goods containing marijuana four or five 
times between September 2010 and January 2013. Applicant purchased marijuana 
between January 2008 and January 2013 on average a few times a month from an 
acquaintance or a friend. “Maybe a couple of times a month at the time,” he shared small 
quantities of “his stash” of marijuana with his friends or sold some of his marijuana to them 
at no profit. They were all using the drug recreationally, and he “just wanted [his] friends to 
have a good time.” (GE 1; Tr. 24, 35.) Applicant used psilocybin (hallucinogenic or 
psychedelic mushrooms) four times between September 2010 and January 2012. He 
purchased psilocybin three times during this period for his own consumption. Around 
October 2010, Applicant tried LSD once out of curiosity. (GEs 1, 2.) He purchased the LSD 
for $30. (GE 2.) Applicant knew the people from whom he purchased the illegal drugs that 
he used. (Tr. 25.) 
 
Applicant has had a valid prescription for Adderall since early 2003. (GE 1; Tr. 28.) 
Approximately twice a month from January 2010 to April 2013, Applicant abused his 
prescription by taking more than his prescribed dose to help him focus on his studies. 
Sometime during the summer of 2010, he took multiple extra doses of his prescribed 
dosage on one occasion to see whether he experienced effects similar to what had been 
reported by others who used the drug recreationally without a prescription. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 
26-27.) One night in February 2015, he took one extra dose of his prescribed Adderall 
because he needed to complete work for his employer. (Tr. 28.) 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant needed a security clearance while working for 
his employer as a student intern during the summer of 2011 or as a part-time employee 
while pursuing his degree from August 2011 to May 2013. Around February 2013, 
Applicant decided to stop his illegal drug involvement because he wanted to focus on 
school and obtaining a job. In June 2013, he became a full-time employee. (GE 1.) 
 
 4 
 On October 2, 2013, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (QNSP). In response to whether he had 
illegally used any drugs or controlled substances in the last seven years, Applicant 
disclosed his use and purchase of marijuana between December 2007 and February 2013. 
Applicant responded affirmatively to whether he intended to use the drug in the future and 
stated: 
 
To clarify, I do not intend to smoke marijuana while working for [his employer 
omitted], especially if I am granted a security clearance. In my senior year of 
college I decided I needed to focus on school and getting a job, so I stopped 
smoking. My career is now my top priority. However, it is possible that I will 
someday choose to smoke marijuana again, for example, once I have 
retired. 
 
 Applicant answered “Yes” on his QNSP to whether he had been involved in the 
illegal purchase of any controlled substance in the last seven years. He disclosed that he 
purchased marijuana for recreational use from approximately January 2008 to January 
2013. While he never bought marijuana with the intent to sell, there were some occasions 
where he sold some of his marijuana to friends at no profit. Applicant denied any intent to 
purchase marijuana in the future as long as he works for his employer and especially if 
granted a security clearance. Should circumstances change and he someday choose to 
smoke marijuana, he would purchase it, but only through legal means. Applicant denied 
any intent to use or purchase LSD or hallucinogenic mushrooms in the future. In response 
to an QNSP inquiry concerning any misuse of a prescription drug in the last seven years, 
Applicant listed his one-time experimentation with non-prescribed Prozac in February 2008 
and his abuse of his own prescription for Adderall from January 2010 to April 2013, 
primarily when he was struggling to focus on his academics. (GE 1.) 
 
 On November 18, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the OPM. Applicant indicated that he would not use any illegal drug while holding a security 
clearance or while possessing a security clearance. However, he admitted that he would 
use marijuana in the future if it is legalized and he is retired. Applicant was asked about the 
circumstances of his marijuana use, including who else was present when he used the 
drug. Applicant responded that he had used the drug in his home, but he declined to 
provide the names of others involved in his marijuana use and purchases, even after he 
was informed by the investigator that he might not be granted a security clearance if he did 
not provide the requested information. About his psilocybin use, Applicant stated that he 
used the drug four times at a friend’s home, but he declined to name the friend. Similarly, 
Applicant would not name the acquaintance from whom he obtained the LSD that he used 
in October 2010. (GE 2; Tr. 25.) 
 
 In June 2014, the DOD CAF asked Applicant to provide a detailed history of his use 
and purchases of illegal drugs, including marijuana, and of his illegal use of a prescription 
drug or misuse of a prescribed drug. On July 8, 2014, Applicant provided details consistent 
with his QNSP admissions concerning his involvement with marijuana, LSD, hallucinogenic 
mushrooms, non-prescribed Prozac, and his misuse of his prescribed Adderall medication. 
 
 5 
As for his future intent, Applicant stated, “I have absolutely no intention of using drugs while 
holding a security clearance or working at [employer name omitted]. Aside from that, I may 
choose to use marijuana at some point in the future.” Applicant admitted that he still 
possessed some paraphernalia that he had used for smoking marijuana and a grinding tool 
to break it up. Applicant also responded affirmatively to whether he associates with 
persons who use illegal substances or frequents places where he has reason to believe 
drugs are being used, and he added, “I have friends who use marijuana. I visit their 
houses/apartments a few times a month. I also allow friends to use marijuana at my 
apartment, so I am technically there every day.” (GE 2.) 
 
 Applicant was provided a copy of the report of his November 2013 interview with the 
OPM investigator for review and comment. He noted a few corrections, including that he 
did not use marijuana consistently at the rate of two to three times a week. He clarified that 
he had estimated the frequency and amounts of his marijuana use and the dates of his 
LSD and hallucinogenic mushroom uses. He indicated that he definitely stopped using 
marijuana in February 2013. About his intent regarding any future marijuana use, Applicant 
added, “I might use marijuana before retirement/legalization, but I more likely will 
afterward.” (GE 2.) 
 
 Applicant enjoys his work for the defense contractor. Citing his maturation over the 
two plus years of his full-time employment, Applicant came to understand that he needed 
to stop using illegal drugs; that it was important for him to continue working for his 
employer so that he can contribute on projects that benefit national security. (Tr. 19, 23.) 
He does not intend to use marijuana in the future. (Tr. 28.) As of January 20, 2015, 
Applicant had disposed of or given his drug paraphernalia to others who used drugs. 
(Answer; Tr. 20, 25.) Applicant has not used any illegal drug since his last use of marijuana 
in early February 2013. He continues to maintain friendships with persons who use 
marijuana. He has rented an apartment with two college friends since September 2013, 
knowing that both friends use marijuana, including at times in their apartment. Applicant’s 
friends use marijuana in his presence whenever and wherever they feel like it, which was 
around twice a week as of November 2015. (Tr. 20-21, 26, 28-30.) Applicant informed his 
friends that he has ceased his use of marijuana for his job and for legal reasons. (Tr. 31.) 
He understands that it is in his best interest to obey the law. His employer has a drug policy 
which Applicant believes prohibits illegal drug use by its employees. Applicant is not 
concerned about being in the presence of others while they are using marijuana. He does 
not feel that he is affected by their use. (Tr. 24, 26.) Applicant denies ever being pressured 
to use marijuana by his roommates. (Tr. 30.) 
 
 Applicant was screened for illegal drugs in 2011 before he started with the defense 
contractor as a student intern. The drug screen was negative for all substances tested 
because Applicant had temporarily stopped using marijuana, knowing that he was going to 
be tested. (Tr. 22-23.) Applicant admits that he used marijuana while working as a student 
intern and as a part-time, on-call employee for the defense contractor, despite knowing that 
illegal drug use was not condoned by his employer. (Tr. 23.) He never used it just before 
reporting for work. (Tr. 33-34.) Applicant testified, with no evidence to the contrary, that he 
no longer takes extra doses of Adderall to focus at work. (Tr. 27.) 
 
 6 
 At his hearing, Applicant indicated upfront that he would not provide the names of 
any of his associates who use marijuana other than to indicate that none of them works for 
his current defense contractor employer. He never used any illegal drug with a co-worker. 
(Tr. 21.) Applicant does not want to put others in an adverse position because of his 
decision to use illegal drugs. (Tr. 25-26.) 
 
 With one exception, Applicant’s co-workers are unaware of his past drug 
involvement. Applicant confided in one individual at work, who advised him how to explain 
his situation when he completed his QNSP. (Tr. 31-32.) It is unclear what his parents know 
about his drug involvement after high school. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
 
 7 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is articulated in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because Applicant used marijuana from 
December 2007 to February 7, 2013. He experimented with LSD once around October 
2010 and with a non-prescribed antidepressant (likely Prozac) once in approximately 
February 2008. He took psychedelic mushrooms four times between September 2010 and 
January 2012. Moreover, he abused his own prescription for Adderall twice a month from 
January 2010 to April 2013 to help focus on his studies, and once in the summer of 2010 
to experience the effect of multiple doses. At his hearing, it was revealed that he took an 
extra dose of his Adderall one evening in February 2015 so that he could complete a task 
for his employer. 
 
Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia,” is also established. Applicant purchased marijuana a few times a month 
from January 2008 to January 2013, psilocybin three times between September 2010 and 
January 2012, LSD once in 2010, and Prozac without a prescription in 2008. Applicant did 
not sell any marijuana for profit, but he was compensated for the marijuana that he 
provided to his friends. Applicant’s father found drug paraphernalia belonging to Applicant 
when Applicant was still in high school. As of July 2014, Applicant possessed marijuana 
 
 8 
paraphernalia for smoking as well as a grinding tool used on illegal drugs. While he 
testified credibly that he has disposed of or given away his drug paraphernalia to others 
who use illegal drugs, he continued to possess drug paraphernalia while working as a full-
time employee for a defense contractor.  
 
Concerning the allegation that Applicant may use marijuana in the future, AG ¶ 
25(h), “expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly 
commit to discontinue drug use,” must be considered. While Applicant has unequivocally 
denied any intent to use LSD, psilocybin, or a non-prescribed drug in the future, he 
responded affirmatively on his QNSP to whether he intended to smoke marijuana in the 
future, albeit with some clarification. He denied any intent to smoke marijuana while 
working for his employer especially should he be granted a security clearance. In July 
2014, Applicant reiterated that he had no intent of using drugs while holding a security 
clearance or working for his employer, but he admitted that he may choose to use 
marijuana in the future, possibly before retirement/legalization but more likely afterward. In 
response to the SOR, Applicant indicated in January 2015 that he may use marijuana 
again if it becomes legal and after he retires. At his November 2015 hearing, Applicant 
testified that he does not intend to use marijuana in the future. (Tr. 28.) Applicant’s ongoing 
association with friends (including his roommates) who smoke marijuana could be taken as 
evidence that he is not clearly committed to discontinuing drug use, but he has not used 
any marijuana since February 7, 2013. His abstention is consistent with his intent not to 
use marijuana. 
 
Applicant’s uses and purchases of LSD, of a non-prescribed antidepressant, and of 
psilocybin were neither recent nor frequent. AG ¶ 26(a) provides for mitigation where drug 
involvement was so long ago, so infrequent, or so aberrational that it does not cast doubt 
on a person’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s abuses of marijuana and of Adderall are contrasted by their frequency 
and recency. Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency, which he estimates 
averaged twice a week. He intentionally exceeded his prescribed dose of Adderall twice a 
month on average in college, and he took an extra dose of Adderall as recently as 
February 2015. AG ¶ 26(a) cannot reasonably apply in mitigation of this drug involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s unrebutted testimony is that he not used any illegal drug since he last 
used marijuana on February 7, 2013, and that he no longer intentionally exceeds his dose 
of Adderall. Under AG ¶ 20(b), “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future” 
may be shown by the following: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
 9 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. 
 
Applicant has not used or purchased LSD, psychedelic mushrooms, or a controlled 
antidepressant like Prozac without a valid prescription in the last three years. It is unclear 
whether Applicant has disassociated himself from the persons that were involved in his 
abuse of those drugs, but there is no evidence that he continues to socialize with any 
person who abuses those drugs. Neither AG ¶ 26(b)(1) nor AG ¶ 26(b)(2) mitigates 
Applicant’s marijuana use, however. He has resided with two college friends in an 
apartment since September 2013. His roommates and other friends continue to smoke 
marijuana, including in his presence twice a week. Applicant cannot be held responsible for 
his roommates’ marijuana use, but he risks his own abstinence on a regular basis. As for 
his abuse of prescribed Adderall, AG ¶¶ 26(b)(1) and 26(b)(2) have little impact, given 
Applicant decided to take excessive doses of his own medication. He misused his Adderall 
in February 2015, after he was on notice from the DOD that his misuse of the prescription 
was of concern to the DOD. A lengthier period of abstinence is warranted before I can 
confidently conclude that he will not again abuse his prescription for Adderall or use 
marijuana. The drug involvement concerns are not fully mitigated. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate with 
security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, and 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in connection 
with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 
 10 
 The DOHA Appeal Board has held that security-related conduct can be alleged 
under more than one guideline, and in an appropriate case be given independent weight 
under each. See ISCR Case No. 11-06672 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2012). Applicant’s illegal drug 
involvement, which was cross-alleged under Guideline E (SOR ¶ 2.a) has negative 
implications for his judgment and reliability under AG ¶ 15. However, given that his drug 
activity is more appropriately addressed under Guideline H, the primary concern related to 
his drug activity under Guideline E is that he continued to use illegal drugs while employed 
first as a student intern and then as a part-time employee of the defense contractor (SOR ¶ 
2.c). Applicant abstained from illegal drugs intentionally during the hiring process so that he 
could pass a drug screen. He resumed his marijuana use knowing that it was not 
condoned, if not prohibited outright, by his employer. His disregard for the drug laws raises 
concerns about his judgment under AG ¶ 16(d), which provides as follows: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but 
which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
A separate Guideline E concern is also raised in that Applicant refused to name the 
persons with whom he used drugs and from whom he bought drugs. Applicant would not 
provide the information to the OPM investigator or at his hearing, even after being advised 
that it could adversely impact his security clearance eligibility. The Government has a 
legitimate expectation that persons seeking classified access will provide full and frank 
responses to reasonable inquiries. The nature of the inquiry was lawful in that persons with 
knowledge of Applicant’s drug use could be sources of verification or of discrepant 
information that could warrant expanding an investigation. Under Guideline E, a refusal to 
respond to a lawful inquiry would normally result in an unfavorable determination. However, 
Applicant’s motive does not appear to have been to conceal salient details from the DOD 
about his drug involvement. His accounts of his own drug activity have been credible and 
consistent. He did not engage in conduct that would implicate AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately 
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative.” He did not want other persons to be adversely affected by the 
consequences of his conduct. His desire to avoid trouble for his friends does not justify his 
refusal to provide requested information, although his failure to provide the information is 
not viewed as serious as had he refused to discuss his own drug use or provided 
inconsistent accounts of his drug involvement. 
 
Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(e) is pertinent because only one co-worker is aware 
that Applicant used illegal drugs. AG ¶ 16(e) provides: 
 
 
 11 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant testified that his parents know about his drug use. His father found some drug 
paraphernalia that belonged to Applicant and his sister when Applicant was still in high 
school. While it is unclear what his parents know about his use in college, there is no 
evidence that Applicant has tried to conceal the information from his parents. 
 
 There is also a reasonable basis to apply disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(g), 
“association with persons involved in criminal activity.” Applicant admitted at his hearing 
that some friends, including his two roommates, are marijuana users who continue to 
smoke the drug in his presence approximately twice a week. Marijuana use remains illegal 
under federal law. 
 
 Applicant’s candid disclosures to the DOD about his own drug activity mitigate the 
vulnerability concerns under AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce 
or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” He has informed at least 
one co-worker about his drug involvement, and given the extent of his disclosures, he is 
not seen as likely to conceal or deny his drug involvement if it became known at work.  
 
None of the other mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 17 are fully established. Applicant’s 
refusal to provide information requested by the OPM investigator is not mitigated under AG 
¶ 17(b), especially where he indicated upfront at his security clearance hearing that he 
would not name the persons involved in his drug use. AG ¶ 17(b) provides: 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of authorized 
personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual specifically 
concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
  Applicant’s disregard for the drug laws was neither “so minor” nor “so infrequent” to 
implicate AG ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
Applicant’s cessation of drug use is some evidence in reform under AG ¶ 17(d): 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 
 12 
At the same time, it is difficult to conclude that he is not likely to again engage in conduct 
that would be in violation of federal law should he relapse into marijuana use. He was 
around marijuana twice a week as of November 2015, and he sees no problem with his 
friends and roommates using marijuana in his presence whenever they want. AG ¶ 17(g), 
“association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or occurs under 
circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and regulations,” cannot apply under the 
circumstances. Personal conduct concerns persist. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).
1
 Applicant’s illegal drug involvement during high school and college is explained in 
part by his youth and the college environment. His consistent accounts about his drug 
activity allow me to accept as credible his abstinence from marijuana since February 2013 
and last misuse of his Adderall prescription in February 2015. His candor about his own 
drug involvement minimizes but does not completely overcome the security concerns 
raised by his refusal to provide the names of other persons who used drugs with him or 
sold drugs to him. Applicant has not shown the sound judgment required of classified 
access when he continues to be around friends when they are using drugs; when he still 
will not divulge the information requested by the OPM investigator, knowing that it could 
cost him a clearance; when he possessed drug paraphernalia long after his reported last 
use of marijuana; and when he knowingly took an extra dose of Adderall in 2015.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9
th
 Cir. 1990.). For the reasons 
noted above, based on the facts before me and the adjudicative guidelines that I am 
required to consider, I am unable to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue security clearance eligibility for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the amended 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
                                                 
1
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 13 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.h: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1,j:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
