 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06731 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline E (personal 
conduct), but failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 29, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On May 16, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. 
 
On June 9, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated July 22, 2015, was provided to him by cover letter dated August 
14, 2015. Applicant received his copy of the FORM on August 24, 2015. He was given 
30 days from the date he received the FORM to submit any objections, and information 
in mitigation or extenuation. He did not submit additional information within the 30-day 
period. The case was assigned to me on December 28, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b with explanations, and 
denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a with an explanation. (Item 2) 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old information technology specialist employed by defense 
contractor since July 2013. On his SF-86, he listed past security clearance experience 
with a secret security clearance granted in November 1977, a secret security clearance 
granted in August 2010, and a top secret security clearance granted in November 2010. 
(Items 3, 4, 5) 
 
Applicant was awarded a General Education Development Diploma in 1977, and 
was awarded a bachelor’s degree in September 2004. (Item 5) He married in December 
1987, and has a 27-year-old son. (Items 3, 4, 5) During his June 6, 2014 Office of 
Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), he stated that he has 
been separated since April 1997 and has no intention of going through a divorce as he 
sees it as unnecessary. (Item 5) Applicant served in the active Navy Reserve from 
November 1980 to August 1983. (Item 5) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Security concerns under this Guideline arise from two long-standing collection 
accounts in the respective amounts of $36,457 and $2,505, totaling $38,962. By 
Applicant’s admission, they “went delinquent and then into default before 2007.” (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a and 1.b; Item 2)  
 
Applicant attributes these debts to the closing of a factory in 2002 and loss of a 
job that he held for 16 years. After losing that job, he went through a two-year retraining 
program followed by “three years of part-time and low paying jobs.” (Items 2, 3, 4) 
Applicant stated that this five-year period was the only time he was unable to meet his 
 
3 
 
 
financial obligations. Applicant was confronted with these debts during his June 2014 
OPM PSI. He discussed these two debts at length during this interview and stated that 
he “plans to save up enough money and have the debts paid off in the next five years.” 
In his June 2015 SOR answer, he basically reiterated what he said during his June 
OPM PSI, that he plans to repay these two large debts once he paid off his current 
debts. (Items 2, 3, 4) 
 
Applicant did not submit any evidence of attempts to contact these two creditors 
or otherwise resolve these debts. He did not submit any evidence of financial 
counseling. Department Counsel also noted in her July 2015 FORM that Applicant 
provided no documentation of any attempts to pay these debts. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
When Applicant completed his April 2014 SF-86, he failed to disclose the two 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b when asked whether in the past seven years he 
had any bills or debts turned over to a collection agency, had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failure to pay as agreed. Applicant denied that 
he deliberately failed to disclose those debts. He explained that they were old debts that 
went into default before 2007 and were “outside the seven-year timeframe.” (Item 2) He 
added that he has not tried to hide these debts stating that he has discussed them 
during his previous background investigations. (Item 2) 
 
Applicant disclosed these debts when he completed his November 5, 2010 SF-
86 adding credence to his assertion that he had put the Government on notice of these 
debts in the past. He also discussed these debts during his June 2014 OPM PSI. (Items 
3, 5) Department Counsel correctly noted in her FORM that when Applicant completed 
his April 2014 SF-86, the debts were over 120 days delinquent.  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
 
4 
 
 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,1 I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions above are applicable or partially applicable 
to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern. The available information shows 
                                                          
1
  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
 
6 
 
 
that Applicant has taken no documented affirmative action to resolve his delinquent 
debts. 
 
With that said, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts or 
enforcing tax laws.2 Rather the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness consistent with the security guidelines in the Directive. In 
evaluating F cases, the Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has 
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is not requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.3 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He 
failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his 
past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in 
relying on a brief explanation, financial considerations security concerns remain. 
  
One additional comment is worthy of note. Applicant’s loyalty and patriotism are 
not at issue in these proceedings. Section 7 of the Executive Order 10865 specifically 
provides that industrial security decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
Security clearance decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than 
loyalty and patriotism. Nothing in this Decision should be considered to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied decision as to 
an applicant’s loyalty or patriotism. 
 
                                                          
2
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
3
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Posing potential security concerns are Applicant’s documented omissions of two 
long-standing delinquent debts on his April 2014 SF-86. His omissions are, however, 
attributable to his mistaken belief that at the time he completed his SF-86 he was not 
required to list the two debts in question because they were outside the seven-year 
timeframe. Applicant argued that he had never attempted to hide these debts during 
past investigations, which is corroborated by the fact that he listed these debts on his 
November 2010 SF-86. He discussed these debts at length during his June 2014 OPM 
PSI. While Applicant could reasonably have been expected to be more diligent about 
checking on the status of his debts, his judgment lapses are not enough to impute 
knowing and willful falsification under Guideline E. 
 
Applicant’s explanations of his omissions are persuasive enough to avert 
inferences of knowing and willful omission. There being no misconduct substantiated, 
there is no need to discuss extenuation or mitigating conditions. Cf. ISCR Case No. 02-
13568 (App. Bd. Feb. 13, 2004). While Applicant failed to exercise due diligence in 
inquiring into the state of his debts, his mistaken belief that he was not required to list 
them  enable him to refute allegations of deliberate falsification of his SF-86. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. Applicant’s financial indebtedness as pertaining to 
these two debts has been ongoing since at least 2007. It is difficult to accept the notion 
that during the past nine years Applicant has been unable to make any progress in 
resolving these debts. Applicant was put on notice during his June 2014 OPM PSI that 
these debts were a concern and again when he received his May 2015 SOR.  As such, I 
 
8 
 
 
have concerns about his current ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts 
and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person concept, I conclude he has not 
mitigated security concerns pertaining to financial considerations, but has mitigated 
security concerns pertaining to personal conduct. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
