 Exhibit 1 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------ ) ISCR Case No. 14-01992
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him eligibility for
access to classified information. His inappropriate behavior in the workplace is mitigated
by the passage of time without recurrence. He also provided sufficient evidence to rebut
and explain that allegations that he made false and misleading statements during the
security clearance process. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
This case has been pending for some time. Applicant completed and submitted a
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86 Format) on December 1, 2012.  In1
doing so, he disclosed in detail that in July 2010 he left a job by mutual agreement
following charges or allegations of misconduct. About two years later on December 23,
2014, after reviewing the application and information gathered during a background
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Appellate Exhibit I. 4
 Tr. 15–17. 5
2
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD)  sent Applicant a statement of reasons2
(SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.  3
The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the reasons for the action under the
security guidelines known as Guideline D for sexual behavior and Guideline E for
personal conduct. Applicant answered the SOR on January 17, 2015; he admitted the
allegations (except one), and provided an explanation for each admission; he denied an
allegation that he grabbed a female coworker’s rear end; and he requested a decision
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel then reviewed the case and made a timely request for a
hearing.  Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 28, 2015. The case was4
assigned to me on September 18, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled on
November 13, 2015. Department Counsel offered Exhibits 1–2, and they were admitted.
Applicant elected to rely on the government exhibits and offered no exhibits of his own.
Other than Applicant, no witnesses were called. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was
received on November 24, 2015. 
At the close of the hearing, the record was kept open until November 30, 2015, to
allow Applicant to provide documentary information concerning his employment record
and job training. Applicant made a timely submission, and those matters are made part
of the record as Exhibits A, B, C, and D.  
Procedural Matters 
At the start of the hearing, Department Counsel withdrew the Guideline D sexual
behavior allegations, as set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.f.  They took that action because they5
concluded that the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a was misplaced, and that the allegations in
SOR ¶¶ 1.b–1.f were more appropriately addressed as workplace misconduct as cross-
alleged under Guideline E for personal conduct. In addition, SOR ¶ 2.a was amended to
 Exhibit C. 6
 Exhibit D. 7
 Exhibit A. 8
 Tr. 52. 9
 Exhibit B. 10
3
delete a reference to SOR ¶ 1.a, with the cross-allegation focused on the matters
described in  ¶¶ 1.b–1.f, as noted above. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security
clearance, at the top-secret level, that he has held since about 2006. He is employed as
a network security engineer for a consulting firm. He has worked for that consulting firm
since December 2010, and he has a good employment record in that job.  His6
educational background includes a bachelor’s degree in computer information systems
awarded in 2002. In addition, he has obtained eight certifications attesting to his
knowledge, skills, and abilities in the field of information technology.  He married in7
2005; he divorced in 2011; and he shares custody of a nine-year-old daughter. He
remarried about two years ago. His spouse  works for the same firm and she also holds
a security clearance. 
Applicant was first granted eligibility for access to classified information for his job
as a technician during 2006–2008. He received a top-secret security clearance as well
as eligibility for access to sensitive compartmented information (TS/SCI) by another
governmental agency (AGA). He had a good employment record in that job, including
recognition as the company’s outstanding new employee in 2007.  For this employment,8
there were no issues involving discipline, misconduct, or security matters. He left in
March 2008 for a better opportunity for advancement with an employer seeking
someone with a TS/SCI clearance. 
Applicant was employed as a principal systems engineer with a federal
contractor from March 2008 to July 16, 2010, when he left by mutual agreement
following charges or allegations of misconduct. It is this period of employment that
serves as the basis for the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. Until shortly before his
resignation, Applicant believed he was in good standing with the company. Indeed, he
stated that he was offered a management position with the company as well as federal
employment with the customer, both of which he declined.  A job performance9
appraisal, for the period ending December 31, 2009, gave Applicant an overall rating of
“exceptional performance,” noting that he was a “central figure” in leading a particular
project.10
 Exhibit 2. 11
 Tr. 53. 12
 Tr. 26. 13
 Tr. 51–52. 14
 Tr. 57–59.15
 Exhibit 2. 16
4
In mid-July 2010, the company informed Applicant he was under investigation for
allegations of misconduct. At the same time, the company, in a July 13, 2010 letter,
informed the AGA that Applicant was under investigation.  The company met with11
Applicant, informed him of the allegations, and told him that he could resign without
repercussions.  The allegations consisted of inappropriate workplace behavior that12
Applicant readily admits, with the one exception previously noted. The admitted
allegations consist of the following: (1) in December 2009, he lit the corner of a piece of
letter-sized paper on fire, and then placed it in a freezer when it would not extinguish;
(2) in about March 2010, he rested or placed his head on a female coworker’s breast,
an older woman considered the office mother, who took no offense at the time; and (3)
also in 2010, he spayed compressed air on a female coworker’s lower back or rear end.
Applicant admits his actions were childish, sophomoric, and immature.  He also13
indicated his actions were part of a workplace environment that was very casual, the
typical office dress was jeans and T-shirts, and inappropriate humor, including practical
jokes and jokes of a sexual nature, was commonplace. He described the workplace
environment as toxic, and he regrets that he did not leave sooner on his own terms.14
Nevertheless, he blames no one else but himself for his actions. 
Applicant asked if the matter would affect or impact his security clearance and
company officials replied in the negative, indicating he could treat the matter as if it
never happened.  Accordingly, Applicant resigned. His company, in a September 21,15
2010 letter, informed the AGA that their human-resources department had determined
that Applicant had engaged in inappropriate behavior in violation of company policy; that
Applicant had resigned on July 16, 2010;  and that his employment record reflected
termination by mutual consent.  16
Following his resignation, there was a series of events that resulted in allegations
that Applicant provided false or misleading information about his resignation during the
security clearance process. Those events are set forth in SOR ¶¶ 2.c–2.f, and they are
discussed below.  
Applicant was unemployed for several months before beginning his current job in
December 2010. In the interim, he sought employment with another company. (SOR ¶
 Tr. 56–66.17
 Tr. 66–75. 18
 Tr. 77–85. 19
 Exhibit 2. 20
5
2.c)  As part of that process in September 2010, he was asked to submit a security17
clearance application, a copy of which is not in evidence. In doing so, he did not
disclose his resignation following charges of allegations of misconduct. He omitted that
information based on his understanding that his resignation was voluntary, without
repercussions, and that no security-related actions were taken by his former employer.
Shortly thereafter, the company facility security officer (FSO) informed Applicant there
was an issue with his security clearance application, at which point he informed the
FSO of the circumstances of his resignation. The FSO then asked him to complete an
addendum to address the resignation. The addendum was never submitted, however,
because the company was rushing to fill the position and elected to discontinue
sponsoring Applicant for a clearance. The FSO also advised Applicant to disclose the
circumstances surrounding his resignation the next time he completed a security
clearance application.
In about October 2010, Applicant applied for the job with his current employer,
but the consulting firm did not ask him to submit a security clearance application at that
time. (SOR ¶¶ 2.d and 2.e)  Nor did Applicant submit the addendum to the consulting18
firm’s FSO. Nevertheless, Applicant disclosed the circumstances of his resignation
when he completed an application for employment with the consulting firm. In addition,
Applicant explained in detail the many steps he has taken to keep the firm’s FSO
informed as well as working with the FSO in completing and submitting the 2012
security clearance application.  
In January 2011, Applicant had an interview with the AGA, as the consulting firm
was sponsoring him for eligibility for SCI access. (SOR ¶ 2.f)  He was accused of19
making a false statement during that interview by stating the previous FSO told him not
to disclose the circumstances of his resignation in the September 2010 security
clearance application. The allegation appears to be based on a misunderstanding by or
confusion of Applicant. At the hearing, Applicant explained he submitted the September
2010 security clearance application without disclosing the circumstances of his
resignation. But the FSO did not advise him to omit information. The FSO did not talk to
him about the application until a problem arose. He then followed the FSO’s instruction
to create an addendum, which he did not submit because the process ended
prematurely. 
Several months later in August 2011, the AGA denied Applicant eligibility for SCI
access based on his inappropriate behavior in the workplace and his failure to disclose
the circumstances of his resignation in the September 2010 security clearance
application.  Applicant, with the assistance of legal counsel, appealed the adverse20
 Exhibit 2. 21
 Exhibit 1. 22
 Tr. 85–87.23
 Tr. 88–90.24
 Tr. 95–96. 25
 Tr. 99–100. 26
6
decision without success.  As part of that process, Applicant, at the direction of legal
counsel, obtained a psychological evaluation from a licensed psychologist in 2012 and a
second or follow-up evaluation by another psychologist in July 2012. Those matters
were disclosed to the AGA during the appeal process.21
In December 2012, he submitted the security clearance application that is now
under review.  In response to a question in section 21 of the application, Applicant22
denied, in the last seven years, having consulted with a health-care professional
regarding an emotional or mental health condition or were you hospitalized for such a
condition.  (SOR ¶ 2.g) He did not disclose the two consultations mentioned in the23
previous paragraph. Applicant explained he answered the question in the negative
because he thought he fit into the exception for “strictly marital, family, grief not related
to violence by you.” He interpreted grief to cover the grief he experienced as a result of
his workplace misconduct and resulting loss of employment. His interpretation, although
misplaced, is consistent with his disclosure of the mental-health consultations during the
AGA appeal process, which certainly put the Government on notice.    
Outside of work, Applicant’s personal interests are largely focused on family and
church.  He and his wife are involved in his daughter’s school activities, and he attends24
a blended-family group on Tuesday nights and a Bible-study group on Wednesday
nights. He is also involved in his church’s security committee. 
Looking backward, Applicant has learned several lessons.  Those lessons25
include the practice of full disclosure during the security clearance process; to stay true
to yourself and not to follow the behavior of others; and to avoid frivolity at the
workplace. As an example of his changed behavior, Applicant has worn a shirt-and-tie
to work every day, except one, since he resumed employment in December 2010.   26
At the hearing, Applicant impressed me as contrite and intelligent, he was polite
and respectful throughout, he answered questions in a direct manner, and I found him
to be a credible source of information.  
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to27
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.28
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 29
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 30
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).31
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.32
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.33
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.34
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 35
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).36
7
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As27
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt28
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An29
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  30
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting31
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An32
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate33
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme34
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.35
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.36
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.37
 AG ¶¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 38
 AG ¶ 15. 39
8
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it37
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Personal conduct under Guideline E  is a concern because it asks the central38
question if a person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to
properly handle and safeguard classified information. The suitability of an applicant may
be questioned or put into doubt when an applicant engages in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with the
rules and regulations. And “of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and
candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate
with the security clearance process.”  39
The deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any
written document or oral statement to the Government when applying for a security
clearance or in other official matters is a concern. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly
and willfully. An omission of relevant and material information, for example, is not
deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it,
misunderstood the question, or thought the information did not need to be reported. 
In analyzing the facts of this case, I have considered the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 16(a), (b), and (d), and AG ¶¶ 17(c) and (d), respectively.
Concerning the inappropriate behavior in the workplace, Applicant became
caught up in office hijinks and shenanigans. He recognizes that he exercised poor
judgment during that period, and he has adjusted and corrected his behavior. In
addition, he has since remarried to a woman who also holds a security clearance, and
he appears to have a stable lifestyle outside of work focused on family and church
activities. I am persuaded that Applicant’s misconduct is mitigated by the passage of
time without recurrence. His misconduct happened so long ago in 2009–2010 and was
such an aberration from an otherwise excellent employment record, that his misconduct
no longer rises to a level that justifies revocation of his security clearance. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).40
9
Concerning the multiple allegations of making false or misleading statements
during the security clearance process, as far as I can determine, he made one
deliberately false statement. It occurred when he omitted the circumstances of his
resignation from his September 2010 security clearance application. His omission was
largely caused by the misinformation, if not deliberately misleading information,
provided by his former employer. But for that information, it is probable Applicant would
have disclosed the resignation in the first place. In addition, his false statement
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. 
In addition, I am not persuaded that Applicant made deliberately false statements
or omissions during the security clearance process in 2010–2011 for the reasons
outlined in the findings of fact. Concerning the allegation that he falsified his 2012
security clearance application when he failed to disclose the mental-health
consultations, I am persuaded that Applicant misunderstood the question and thought
he did not have to report the consultations.    
The concern over Applicant’s personal conduct does not create doubt about his
current reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified
information. In reaching this conclusion, I considered the whole-person concept.  I also40
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Accordingly, I conclude he met his ultimate
burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant him eligibility for access to classified information.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline D: Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.f: Withdrawn 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2a.–2.g: For Applicant  
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. 
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge  
