KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s arguments are insufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all the record evidence. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-04479.a1
DATE: 03/04/2016
DATE: March 4, 2016
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 14-04479
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On March 31, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On December 17, 2015, after considering the record,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied
Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ 
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
In 2007, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, completing payments in 2012. 
He discharged about $200,000 in debt.  His SOR alleges additional debts that arose from 2008 until
2014.  Though Applicant contended that most of his debts were resolved, the Judge found that three
of them had been paid.  She entered favorable findings for these three but adverse findings for the
remainder.  The debts that the Judge resolved against Applicant were for student loans, medical
treatments, and a vehicle loan.  The student loans appear to be the subject of some sort of payment
plan, the terms of which were not provided.  Applicant attributed his problems to medical bills and
to a period of self-employment in which he did not have enough income.  There is no evidence in
the record that Applicant received financial counseling, nor did he provide a budget or a plan to
resolve his debts.  He did not submit character references or job performance evaluations.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that Applicant continued to accumulate delinquent debt during and after
his bankruptcy discharge.  She concluded that he had submitted insufficient information to show that
his financial problems are unlikely to recur.  Though noting circumstances outside Applicant’s
control that affected his financial condition, such as medical problems and inadequate income, the
Judge concluded that his circumstances did not permit the full application of Mitigating Condition
20(b), which requires evidence of responsible action in regard to debts.1  Though she found that he
had initiated good faith efforts to pay the three debts mentioned above, she stated that it is not clear
when he began addressing his student loans. She also stated that there is no evidence of any
successful dispute of Applicant’s delinquent debts.  The Judge concluded that Applicant failed to
submit sufficient evidence to show that his finances are being properly handled and that his
problems are unlikely to recur.
Discussion
Much of Applicant’s appeal presentation consists of assertions and documents that are not
found in the record.  We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  He cites to
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(b): “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances[.]”
2
evidence regarding debts resolution.  However, his arguments are not enough to rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record or to show that she mis-
weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 14-03541 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 3, 2015).  Applicant
challenges the Judge’s finding that he had not received financial counseling.  He states that such
counseling is a requirement for a successful bankruptcy discharge.  In point of fact, the Judge found
that the record contained no evidence on this matter, which is correct.  Even if one concludes that
she should have inferred such counseling from Applicant’s bankruptcy, her failure to have done so
did not likely affect her overall decision.  Therefore, even if this was an error, it was harmless.  
Applicant denies that he is at risk to commit illegal acts to resolve his debts.  However, the
concern under Guideline F is not simply that an applicant might be tempted to compromise classified
information or engage in other illegality in order to pay his debts.  It also addresses the extent to
which an applicant’s circumstances cast doubt upon his judgment, self control, and other qualities
essential to protecting classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01479 at 2 (App. Bd.
Sep. 2, 2015).  In this case, the Judge’s findings that Applicant had a significant amount of
delinquent debt, much of which he acquired during the time he was undergoing Chapter 13
bankruptcy proceedings, along with her sustainable conclusion that Applicant had not submitted
enough evidence to meet his burden of persuasion as to mitigation, support her adverse decision.
 The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness
cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding
security clearances:  such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’” See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2013). 
See also Kaplan v. Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert. denied.
  
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Wuilliam S. Fields       
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
