KEYWORD: Guideline G
DIGEST: Disagreement with a Judge’s decision does not constitute a prima facie showing of
bias.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-05022.a1
DATE: 03/09/2016
DATE: March 9, 2016
In Re:
--------.
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05022
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Stephen J. Dunn, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 20, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). Applicant requested a hearing. 
On November 21, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased against him
and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent
with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the U.S. military from 1980 until 2000.  His employment requires him
to hold a clearance, which he has done since 2003.  Applicant began drinking while he was in the
military.  He tended to do so on the weekend.  In 2007, he attended a cookout where he consumed
five or six beers.  Afterward he drove home and was stopped by the police for speeding.  His blood
alcohol content at the time was .22.  He pled guilty to DWI and received probation before judgment.
Applicant completed an alcohol treatment program, where he was diagnosed as alcohol
dependent.  He drank no alcohol at all during his first year of probation; then he resumed drinking
with friends.  He did so despite attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous (AA).  This resumption was
due to his failure to acknowledge the extent of his alcohol habit.
In 2011, Applicant attended a birthday party.  He claimed that he drank two beers.  He was
returning from a department store when he was stopped for tapping the car in front of him.  His
blood alcohol level was .21.  He was found guilty of DWI and sentenced to 12 months incarceration,
which was converted to 15 consecutive weekends.  Applicant was on supervised probation until
September 2014.  
Before his sentencing, Applicant attended an inpatient treatment program.  He was again
diagnosed as alcohol dependent.  After completing treatment he was recommended for daily AA
meetings.  His participation in the inpatient program was evaluated “good.”  Decision at 3.  He
considered this program to be an “eye opener.”  Id.  Applicant also received treatment from a
licensed psychologist, who recommended AA attendance.  He claimed that he has attended AA
about once a week since August 2011.  He has a sponsor and has not consumed alcohol since 2011.
Applicant modified his prior testimony by stating that he was attending Narcotics
Anonymous (NA) instead.  He stated that he was more comfortable sharing his feelings in that
environment.  Although he stated that he had completed the 12 NA steps, he could not name the first
of them.  The Judge stated that, given Applicant’s purported attendance at AA and NA since 2007,
his inability to remember this step undercut his claims of reform.
2
Applicant stated that his decision to stop drinking was in part due to the potential probation
violation that he would have faced otherwise.  He also wanted to avoid a third DWI.  He stated that
his 2011 treatment had a positive impact on his recovery. 
The facility manager at Applicant’s place of employment stated that despite his two DWIs
Applicant’s presence makes the other workers more effective.  He stated that Applicant had told him
about the DWIs.  Another witness testified that he sees Applicant from once a day to every two
months.  He stated that he had never seen Applicant hung over and finds him to be a dependable
person.    
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted Applicant’s abstinence since 2011.  He stated, however, that the impact of
this was diminished by his requirement to abstain from drinking as a condition of probation and by
evidence that Applicant had returned to alcohol use after his 2007 conviction despite similar
conditions.  He also noted that this resumption of alcohol consumption occurred following the earlier
diagnosis of alcohol dependence.  The Judge stated that Applicant did not provide a prognosis from
a health care provider as to his likelihood of relapse.1  He provided little testimony or evidence as
to substantive changes he had made in his lifestyle to maintain sobriety.  
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge reiterated much of this discussion.  He stated that,
given Applicant’s claims to have attended AA and/or NA for many years, he should have been able
to recall the first of the 12 steps taught in those programs.  The Judge stated that, in view of the
absence both of an actual prognosis from a medical health professional and of independent evidence
of lifestyle changes, Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from his alcohol abuse.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge was biased against him, citing to evidence that he believes
to be mitigating and that the Judge either ignored or failed properly to weigh.  We construe his
argument to be that his mitigating evidence was so compelling that an adverse decision is
attributable to bias.  
1Applicant contends that a favorable prognosis is implicit in letters from Applicant’s psychologist.  Applicant
submitted three such letters, included in the record as Applicant Exhibit (AE) E.  These letters describe the scope of the
treatment provided Applicant, the matters that the psychologist discussed with him, and a breakdown of costs that
Applicant incurred in obtaining treatment.  The psychologist stated that Applicant understood himself to suffer from
Alcohol Dependence Disorder and that he “will need to apply all of his skills, positive attitudes and routines of daily
living to maintaining sobriety, one day at a time.”  AE E at p. 2.  Nowhere in these three letters does the psychologist
provide an expert opinion as to Applicant’s likelihood of success.  
3
We have examined the Decision as well as the Judge’s conduct of the hearing and find
nothing therein that would convince a reasonable person that he lacked the requisite impartiality. 
Disagreement with a Judge’s decision does not constitute a prima facie showing of bias.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 08-03233 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 7, 2009).2  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption
that the Judge was impartial.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03108 at 3 (App. Bd. May 20, 2015).  
Applicant argues that the Judge substituted a credibility determination for record evidence. 
We are required to give deference to a Judge’s credibility determination.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  
In this case, Applicant’s inability to recall the first step of AA and NA, despite many years of
attendance, supports the Judge’s conclusion, in that it detracts somewhat from Applicant’s claims
of vigilance in maintaining sobriety.3  As with the issue of bias, Applicant’s argument appears to be
that his evidence in mitigation is conclusive and that the Judge’s adverse decision is explicable only
as the result of impropriety.  
However, evidence that (1) Applicant has twice been convicted of DWI, (2) Applicant
returned to drinking after having been diagnosed as alcohol dependent in 2007, (3) Applicant
submitted letters from his psychologist following a second diagnosis of alcohol dependence that
contained no actual prognosis regarding sobriety, and (4) Applicant provided little corroboration
regarding lifestyle changes in support of sobriety could persuade a reasonable person that he had not
met his burden of persuasion as to mitigation, even without regard to an adverse credibility
determination. Applicant has not provided a reason to disturb the Judge’s credibility determination. 
Neither has he demonstrated that the Judge substituted his adverse credibility determination for
record evidence.  
Applicant’s brief argues that the Judge either did not consider, or mis-weighed, favorable
record evidence.  However, the Judge discussed much of the evidence that Applicant has cited. 
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the
record. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06093 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2015).  Applicant argues for an
alternative interpretation of the evidence, which is not sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016). 
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
2In the cited case, the applicant offered no explanation for her claim of bias other than the adverse decision. 
This failed to meet the standard that applies to claims of bias, which is whether the Judge acted in a manner that would
lead a disinterested person to question his or her fairness or impartiality.
3The Judge’s finding that Applicant claimed to have consumed only two beers in the 2011 incident despite a
.21 blood alcohol level also supports his credibility determination.  
4
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin            
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
