KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to
argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge
weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-04939.a1
DATE: 03/09/2016
DATE: March 9, 2016
In Re:
--------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04939
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 27, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On December 8, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Matthew E. Malone denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant is 50 years old.  In 2006, he was laid off from his company when
it declared bankruptcy and reorganized as part of a merger.  Unable to find similar work, Applicant
started his own trucking and hauling business.  This venture failed with the economic recession. 
Applicant was unemployed from late 2007 until late 2010.  In 2007, Applicant filed for Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection because he was in danger of losing his home to foreclosure.  Several petitions
were dismissed and he eventually lost his home to foreclosure.  He has outstanding delinquent debts
which consist largely of unpaid parking tickets, income taxes, and homeowners association fees. 
Applicant established that he has paid or is close to paying each of the parking ticket debts.  He is
paying down one large homeowners association debt at the rate of $1,000 per month.  He also states
that he is repaying income tax debts.  He characterized his monthly financial status as “breaking
even.”
In connection with his current job, Applicant completed a security clearance application. 
He had previously filled out a similar application for a trustworthiness position with the same
employer.  Thus, Applicant was already familiar with the questions and topics of inquiry when he
completed his security clearance application.  He did not disclose any of the adverse financial
information in his background on the form.  Applicant was later interviewed about his finances by
a Government investigator.  The investigator asked him about his negative answers to the financial
questions on the clearance application and Applicant confirmed his answers.  The investigator then
confronted Applicant with information about his bankruptcy and his past-due and delinquent debts. 
Applicant then provided information about the causes of his financial problems and the corrective
measures  he had taken or intended to take.  At the hearing, Applicant’s explanations included
claims that he either forgot about his debts, errors occurred because his wife helped him complete
the security clearance application, he was not careful with his answers, or he did not pay close
enough attention to the questions because of turmoil in his life at the time.
The Judge concluded: Applicant appears to have recently paid or otherwise resolved most
of the debts alleged in the SOR.  However, he has failed to show that his current finances will
remain sound.  He still owns rental property that has not produced income in three years.  He is still
repaying income tax debts along with civil judgments for unpaid HOA fees.  Based on financial
information he provided in his testimony, he is still struggling to make ends meet each month. 
2
Although he has taken action to resolve his debts, that action has only taken place after issuance of
the SOR.  He did not produce any explanatory information that would give the Government a better
understanding of his current monthly finances.  Applicant failed to meet his burden or persuasion
in response to the Government’s information about his finances.
The available information probative of Applicant’s intent with regard to his completion of
his security clearance application supports a conclusion that he knowingly and wilfully withheld
information about his finances from his application.  His testimony about why he omitted
information from his application was not credible.  Applicant compounded his deception by initially
confirming those same false answers when he met with a Government investigator.  His lack of
candor creates doubts about his suitability for access to classified information.  Those doubts must
be resolved against Applicant.   
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence in the record, citing
to evidence that Applicant received a credit report prior to the issuing of the SOR which did not
depict any of the debts listed in the SOR.  Applicant states that he acted responsibly under the
circumstances when he later contacted the creditors after he was notified of his debts through
interrogatories.  Applicant appears to be arguing that the Judge ignored the mitigating circumstance
of his acting to resolve his debts as soon as he had knowledge of them, even though his obtaining
this knowledge post-dated the issuance of the SOR.  Applicant’s argument is not consistent with the
record evidence.  Applicant did testify that he was sent information about his debts after the issuance
of the SOR.  However, he never identified the source of the information and did not produce
corroborating documentation establishing the nature of the information.  The credit report referenced
by Applicant that purportedly showed none of the debts listed in the SOR was never made part of
the record.  Moreover, the record indicates that Applicant had knowledge of his delinquent debts
well before the issuance of the SOR.  Portions of his testimony acknowledge this.  Also, Applicant
was made aware of the SOR debts through an interview with a Government investigator which took
place in late 2012.  Applicant affirmatively attested to the accuracy of the contents of that
investigation in a set of interrogatories executed in 2014.  Thus, Applicant’s claim that he was not
made aware of the nature of his indebtedness until after the issuance of the SOR is refuted by the
record.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence of record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 08-10225 at 2 (App. Bd. May 28, 2010).  Applicant’s argument about when he knew about his
debts does not rebut that presumption.  
Applicant also argues that the Judge did not consider numerous matters in mitigation.  A
review of the record evidence and the Judge’s decision convinces the Board that the Judge
considered the mitigating aspects of the case, and specifically mentioned Applicant’s periods of
unemployment, his failed trucking business and the fact that Applicant had resolved or was
addressing a number of his previously delinquent debts.  Applicant’s citation to this favorable
evidence is not enough to show that the Judge ignored it.
Applicant argues that the Judge did not properly apply the mitigating factors.  As the trier
of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence
outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App.
3
Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability
to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge
weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  Applicant’s appeal brief
essentially argues for an alternate interpretation of the record evidence.  A review of the Judge’s
decision reveals that, regarding Guideline F, the Judge listed the potentially applicable mitigating
conditions and then discussed several components of those factors in his analysis.  The Judge offered
a narrative explanation as to why the disqualifying conduct was not mitigated.  The gravamen of the
Judge’s decision is the fact that, despite paying off or otherwise resolving a significant portion of
his debts, the timing of Applicant’s efforts (post-SOR) undercuts the mitigating effect of Applicant’s
actions.  Also, the Judge cited the lack of details in the record regarding Applicant’s finances,
continuing debt delinquencies, an unproductive rental property, and Applicant’s statement that he
was only “breaking even” as factors that create continuing doubts about his financial recovery.  The
Judge’s conclusion that Applicant failed to overcome the Government’s case is sustainable.  The
Board concludes that the Judge appropriately weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant
against the seriousness of the disqualifying conduct. 
  
Regarding Guideline E, Applicant argues that he was unaware of his debts prior to
completing his security clearance application, again asserting his reliance on a credit report that was
never made part of the record.  This explanation varies from explanations that Applicant gave at the
hearing.  The Judge found those explanations lacking in credibility.  After a review of the record and
the Judge’s decision, the Board concludes that the Judge’s resolution of the allegation under
Guideline E is sustainable.  
The Board gives due consideration to the Hearing Office case that Applicant has cited.
However, Hearing Office decisions are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal
Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-01297 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2015).  The Board concludes
that nothing in the cited case operates to undermine the findings and conclusions of the Judge.
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the national security.’” Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b): “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”
4
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett      
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
