KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge’s decision is a recognition that, despite his connections within the U.S.,
Applicant could be tempted or pressured to compromise classified information.  One
circumstance is the presence of close family members in a country where terrorists operate.
Another is family members who are well-known and through whom he could come to the
attention of forces that seek U.S. national secrets.  The Judge’s decision is not a determination
that he has acted disloyally or that he is lacking in character.  The concern is not necessarily that
his  relatives might act against the U.S.  Rather, it is that they could come to the attention of
forces within Yemen that are hostile to the U.S. or otherwise seek classified information and
through them he could be subjected to coercion.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-06675.a1
DATE: 03/04/2016
DATE: March 4, 2016
In Re:
----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-06675
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 23, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). Applicant requested a hearing.  On
December 23, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge James F. Duffy denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Federal contractor since 2009.  He was born in Yeman and came 
to the U.S. in the early 2000s.  He became a U.S. citizen in the late 2000s.  Applicant is married with
two children.  His wife and children are U.S. citizens by birth.  While in Yeman, he was required
to serve for one year in the military.  Applicant avoided this responsibility by serving as an assistant
to a relative who was a high ranking official in the Yemeni military.  Registering under a military
official’s name was an acceptable way to avoid active service.  Applicant’s relative retired within
the past few years.
As a student in the U.S., Applicant received aid through the Yemeni government.  He
received bachelor’s and master’s degrees, student loans for which he has repaid.  Applicant has
registered for the U.S. selective service.  
Applicant’s parents and siblings are citizens and residents of Yemen.  His father is a well-
known member of his profession, who is separated from Applicant’s mother.  Applicant speaks with
his mother weekly and with his father every two or three months.  One of Applicant’s siblings works
for a government agency that is involved in security matters.  His also has an in-law who works for
the Yemeni government.
Applicant has surrendered his Yemeni passport to his employer’s security officer.  He has
not used it for foreign travel since becoming a U.S. citizen.
Applicant stated that his family was not close to the ongoing armed conflict in Yemen,
although he later indicated that his mother heard airplane sounds and gunfire on a routine basis.
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for the quality of his work performance and has
completed numerous professional development programs.  He is thought of as a family man who
2
puts his children first.  Applicant’s supervisor and a former supervisor believe that he is worthy of
a clearance.  A co-worker describes him as honest and trustworthy.
The U.S. and Yemen have a strong partnership.  However, terrorism and civil unrest are
significant problems in Yemen, and, in January 2015, the President and cabinet resigned due to
growing violence.  A month later, the U.S. Embassy suspended operations in Sana’a, and the staff
was temporarily relocated due to uncertainty caused by renewed violence.
The Judge’s Analysis
 In concluding that Applicant had not rebutted security concerns arising from his connections
in Yemen, the Judge noted the presence of terrorist activity and civil unrest in that  country.  He
stated that Yemen’s unstable government and the presence within it of a violent insurgency made
it conceivable that Applicant’s family could be vulnerable to coercion.  In addition, the Judge cited
to evidence that Applicant has close contact with his parents and siblings in Yemen, that his father
is well-known, and that a sibling works for a government agency.  The Judge acknowledged
Applicant’s roots in the U.S. and his work history.  However, he concluded that Applicant’s family
contacts in Yemen could create a conflict of interest.  
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge’s decision to deny him a clearance is a challenge to his
loyalty.  However, an adverse adjudication is in no sense a conclusion that an applicant is disloyal
or unpatriotic.  Rather, it is a determination in terms of national security.  Directive, Enclosure 1,
SECTION 7.  See also ADP Case No. 14-06346 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 28, 2015).  In a case such as the
one before us, the Judge’s adverse decision is a recognition that Applicant’s circumstances are such
that, despite his connections within the U.S., he could be tempted or pressured to compromise
classified information.  One such circumstance is the presence of close family members in a country
where terrorists operate.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007). 
Another is family members who are well-known and through whom the applicant could come to the
attention of forces that seek access to U.S. national secrets.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03112 at
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015).  Accordingly, the Judge’s decision is not a determination that Applicant
has acted in a manner that shows disloyalty or that he is lacking in character.  It is a recognition that
even those who are patriotic and whose character has earned them high esteem could experience
circumstances in which they could be tempted or pressured to help foreign relatives by
compromising classified information.   
Applicant cites to evidence about his family members in Yemen, his personal history, the
nature of his contacts with his mother and others, the nature of the Yemeni government, and the civil
unrest in that country.1  He denies that his contacts with his mother and with other relatives poses
1We note that the record in this case is not complete.  Recently, we remanded a case where, as here, the record
did not include documentary exhibits regarding the nature of the foreign country at issue.  In the case before us, remand
would serve no purpose.  Applicant does not challenge most of the Judge’s findings about Yemen.  To the extent that
3
a danger to national security.  He also denies that his relatives know anything about his job or that
they could jeopardize the interests of the U.S.  Again, however, the concern is not necessarily that
Applicant’s relatives might undertake actions that are hostile to the U.S.  Rather, it is that they could
foreseeably come to the attention of forces within Yemen that are hostile to the U.S. or that
otherwise seek access to classified information and become a means through which Applicant could
be subjected to coercion.  Applicant’s arguments are not sufficient to show that the Judge failed to
consider all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06093 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec.
4, 2015).  He has presented an alternative interpretation of the record, but that is not enough to show
that the Judge  weighed the evidence in as manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016).  
Applicant notes that his continued employment requires a security clearance.  The Directive
does not permit us to consider the impact that an adverse decision might have upon an applicant. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04202 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 24, 2015).  Applicant’s brief refers to matters
that are not found in the record.  We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
See also ISCR Case No. 14-03062 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015).    
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
he asks us to take notice of additional facts about that country, we conclude that even if such facts were supported by
the missing exhibits they would not alter the outcome of the case.  
4
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
