 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02579 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephane C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
February 8, 2013.  On July 22, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations.1  The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
                                                     
1 Item 1. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 5, 2014,2 and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on May 5, 2015.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns.  Applicant received the FORM on May 28, 2015.  He did not submit a 
response to the FORM, nor did he assert any objections to the Government’s evidence. 
 
The case was assigned to me on February 23, 2016.  The Government’s exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 1 to 7) are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling approximately $56,771, including 
delinquencies for unpaid child support (SOR ¶ 1.a - $674 and ¶ 1.e - $22) and credit 
cards (SOR ¶ 1.b - 1.d totaling approximately $56,075).  Applicant admitted all the 
allegations in the SOR,3 and provided an explanation for his financial difficulties.  The 
evidence submitted with the FORM substantiates the SOR allegations.4 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old and is employed by a defense contractor in the 
information technology industry since 1986.  He has not served in the military but has 
held security clearances in the past.  He earned an associate’s degree in 1988.  He is 
currently married since 2008, and was previously married in 1988 and divorced in 2001.  
On his February 2013 security clearance application (SCA), Applicant reported that he 
has two children (22 and 19) and two stepchildren (30 and 23).5  
 
Applicant stated in his Answer to the SOR that financial delinquencies resulted 
from his divorce in 2001, where he incurred additional expenses for attorney fees and 
child support, which were largely paid through the use of credit cards.  When he was 
unable to meet debts and expenses, he took out loans against his 401k retirement plan.  
When repayment of the loans became burdensome, he again resorted to credit cards.  
Applicant became overwhelmed with financial obligations but was afraid to declare 
bankruptcy for fear of losing his security clearance.  He made every effort to prolong his 
financial issues and admitted he was irresponsible for failing to address his debts in a 
timely manner.  He asserted that he lives a modest lifestyle and does not own 
                                                     
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Items 1, 2. 
 
4 Items 2 – 7. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
substantial assets.  He plans to contact an attorney to explore options for filing 
bankruptcy.6 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, but noted that his child-support 
obligations in SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.e, which appear to be the same account, were satisfied 
through a payment in September 2014.7  His credit bureau report from May 2015 shows 
his child-support account is currently “paid as agreed” and in good standing.8   
 
In his SCA, Applicant disclosed that he was offered settlements for the credit 
card debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and 1.c, but was unable to pay the required 
installments because of insufficient funds.9   
 
No documentary evidence was submitted with Applicant’s Answer or in response 
to this FORM to show substantial efforts to address the SOR debts.  Additionally, he did 
not submit evidence of credit counseling or budget education.  I was unable to evaluate 
his credibility and demeanor since he elected to have his case decided without a 
hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.”  The 
                                                     
6 Item 2. 
 
7 Items 2 and 5. 
 
8 Item 5. 
 
9 Item 4. 
 
4 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.10  In Department of Navy v. Egan11, the Supreme Court stated that the burden 
of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.12 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”   It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.13 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to sensitive and classified information.  Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive or classified information.  Such decisions entail 
a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of sensitive or classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
                                                     
10 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan.27, 1995). 
 
11 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to 
a security clearance). 
 
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
13 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and, 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 Applicant has long-standing delinquent debts that he is unable or unwilling to 
resolve.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has been working full time with his current employer since 1986.  After 
sustaining increased expenses and debts from his divorce in 2001, he progressively fell 
behind on financial obligations because of an inability to pay.  He resorted to use of 
loans against his retirement account to pay credit cards, but eventually was unable to 
make all required payments on his debts, resulting in delinquencies.  He avoided 
addressing his financial problems through bankruptcy because of fear of losing his 
security clearance.  Applicant has made payments to correct arrearages in his child-
support obligations, which are confirmed by his most recent credit report.  All other 
debts alleged in the SOR remain unresolved.  Applicant intends to explore the 
resolution of his debts through filing bankruptcy, but has not submitted evidence of such 
action.  Finally, he has not offered evidence of credit counseling or budget education. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 Based on the evidence presented, I find that the child-support debts alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.e have been mitigated.  The remaining debts, which comprise the 
largest delinquencies, have not been sufficiently addressed to warrant application of full 
mitigation credit.  The remaining unresolved debts leave me with doubts about 
Applicant’s overall ability or willingness to face his financial responsibilities. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s remaining 
financial obligations will be resolved within a reasonable period.  I am unable to find that 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to 
resolve his debts.  His financial issues are recent and ongoing.  They continue to cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  None of the above 
mitigating conditions are applicable except with respect to SOR ¶ 1.a. and 1.e as 
previously discussed. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  I have incorporated my findings of fact and 
comments under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
