1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
) ISCR Case No. 14-06852      
)
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging security concerns arising under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline
F (Financial Considerations), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct). The SOR was dated April 25, 2015. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the
record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written
case on September 22, 2015. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material
(FORM) on October 5, 2015, and was provided an opportunity to file objections and
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  Applicant
submitted a response, which was marked as AX A and entered into the record without
2
objection. The case was assigned to me on January 20, 2016. Based on a review of the
case file, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted and denied the factual allegations
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). He
admitted the allegations under Guideline G, and under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in 1975. He served in the U.S. Navy from 1978 until 1991, receiving an
honorable discharge. He is widowed and has two children. Applicant has worked for his
current employer since 1996.  He has held a security clearance for many years. 
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges 17 delinquent debts totaling about $13,371. (Item 5-6)
Applicant admits responsibility for nine delinquent debts. He denies the other debts
because they have been removed from his credit report. (Item 2) The majority of the
delinquent debts are medical accounts. He has a judgment in the amount of $5,588,
and he claims that he has been making monthly payments of $175 since 2014. He has
not provided any information concerning payments on any of the delinquent debts. 
Applicant admits that he has made mistakes and is working on identifying
creditors with outstanding balances so that he can arrange to pay the debts. He states
that he will resolve them in the upcoming future as quickly as he can. (AX A) He admits
to his delinquent accounts but states generally that he will investigate them. (Item 2)
The record does not reflect that he has obtained financial counseling.
Applicant has been steadily employed in his current position since 1996. He did
not present any information that he was unemployed. (Item 3) He has had medical
insurance through his job, according to the report with OPM investigators in July 2012.
He is not sure what the medical bills are for. (Item 4)
Applicant stated in that same interview that he agreed with the information in the
credit reports. During his July 2012, interview with investigators, he stated he intends to
pay his debts. He has not furnished any receipts for any payments or any structured
plan to repay the SOR debts. (Item 4) In his response to the FORM, he submitted a
letter from a collection firm that in May 2015, affirming that he started making payments
concerning the judgment. However, he did not include any receipts.
Criminal Conduct
Applicant has six criminal arrests and five convictions from 1978 until 2014. (Item
2, 8, 9,11 and 12) He admits that he has been charged and convicted of two driving
while impaired charges and two driving under the influence charges. In 2011, he states
that the driving while impaired was reduced to reckless driving. (Item 4) His 2014 arrest
3
for driving under the influence resulted in a court recommendation for 20 hours of
counseling, 48 hours of community service and a fine. There is no court documentation
in the record to clarify the disposition.  
Alcohol Consumption
The alcohol-related convictions from 1978 until 2014 were cross-alleged under
alcohol consumption. Applicant admits the incidents and convictions. He acknowledges
that he has made big mistakes by drinking and driving, especially after he had an
accident. He states that he has almost stopped alcohol consumption and only has a
beer every now and then. He realizes that his drinking has not done him any good and
does not like to pay the fines and lose his driver’s license. (Item 2)
He submitted a certificate of completion for 20 hours of DUI/DWI intensive
education, dated October 4, 2015, in response to the FORM.  However, he has had
other alcohol courses as a result of a 2009 conviction. Despite multiple alcohol-related
arrests and convictions over a span of almost 30 years, he continues to consume some
alcohol.
Personal Conduct
Applicant admitted that on his 2012 security clearance application  under Section
26-Financial Records that he failed to disclose his non-payment of state income taxes
for tax years 2004 and 2006, resulting in a court-ordered garnishment of his wages in
the amount of $8,475. He stated that he has no excuse for not disclosing the
information. He admitted the intentional omission.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
5
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches
of trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
Applicant admits to nine delinquent debts. As to the debts that he denies, his
reasoning is that the account is not on his credit report and he will investigate it. The
6
debts are confirmed in his credit reports. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to
raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Applicant has claimed that he has good intentions to pay his delinquent debts.
However, he has not provided any documentary evidence to show that he has paid the
delinquent debts or has a plan to repay the debts. He has not reported financial
counseling. He has been gainfully employed since 1996, and has not raised any
circumstances beyond his control that would contribute to his financial problems.  None
of the mitigating conditions apply.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
7
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable
conditions;
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; and
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-
mandated rehabilitation program.
Applicant’s admissions and the evidence of arrests and convictions from 1978
until 2014 are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
After reviewing the mitigating conditions, I find that none of them fully apply in
this case. Applicant’s behavior occurred between 1978 and 2014. He acknowledged
that the last incident was in 2014. Although almost two years have elapsed, Applicant
has not provided information establishing that he is rehabilitated. There is no
information in the record concerning completion of his community service. I find that he
has not mitigated the security concern under criminal conduct.  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption,
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.”
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
8
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent;
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol
dependence;
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol
treatment program;
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and,
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education,
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence.
Applicant has alcohol-related incidents over a span of almost 30 years. He has
been ordered to complete alcohol classes. He did take a course in 2015, but despite
the multiple arrests and convictions, he continues to consume alcohol. The record does
not have any other information concerning rehabilitation. AG ¶ 22(a) applies.
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
9
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and,
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
After considering the mitigating factors, I find that none of them apply in this
case.
  Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
10
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information;
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources.
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group;
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to
the employer as a condition of employment; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
Applicant’s behavior concerning his financial responsibility and his criminal
conduct shows lack of judgment, reliability and trustworthiness over a period of years.
His conduct shows a pattern of poor judgment. He did not disclose his financial
problems concerning his failure to pay state income taxes for years 2004 and 2006 on
his security clearance application. He admitted that he has no excuse for not reporting
the failure and the resulting garnishment and falsified his security clearance application.
AG ¶ 16 (a), (c), and (e) apply.
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
11
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
Applicant admitted that he did not disclose the information on his security
clearance application. He gave no reason in mitigation, and his omission is concluded
to be wilful and knowing. He has not provided any other information to persuade me
that he has mitigated personal conduct concerns.  I have doubts about his judgment
and reliability. After considering the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concern under personal conduct. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
12
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant has a history of alcohol-related arrests and convictions that span almost 30
years. He still consumes alcohol and has not presented evidence of rehabilitation. His
conduct was frequent, recent, did not happen under unusual circumstances, and is
likely to recur. He did present evidence of recent court-ordered counseling, but no
evidence of participation in ongoing alcohol support groups. The criminal conduct is
linked to the alcohol incidents. The choices he made over the years indicate lack of
trustworthiness. 
Applicant has not provided any information to show that he is a changed person
or that he has taken action to resolve his delinquent SOR debts. At this point, I have
doubts about his judgment and reliability. Any doubts must be resolved in favor of the
Government. Applicant has not met his burden in this case. He has not mitigated the
security concerns under financial considerations, alcohol consumption, criminal
conduct, and personal conduct. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.f: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Guideline 4, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT
13
Subparagraphs 4.a-q: Against Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
