 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-04174 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
June 11, 2013.  On October 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations.2  DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
                                                     
1 Applicant is requesting a trustworthiness determination for access to sensitive information, also known 
as a “public trust” determination, to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position. 
 
2 Item 1. 
 
 
2 
 
1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 20, 2015,3 and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on May 20, 2015.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
concerns.  Applicant received the FORM on June 9, 2015.  She did not submit a 
response to the FORM, nor did she assert any objections to the Government’s 
evidence.  The case was assigned to me on February 23, 2016.  The Government’s 
exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 7) are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges 28 delinquent debts, including four judgments, totaling 
approximately $17,000.  Additionally, the SOR alleges two bankruptcy filings that 
resulted in a Chapter 7 discharge in 2004 and the dismissal of a Chapter 13 case in 
2006.  Applicant admitted the SOR allegations except for five debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.p, 1.r, 1.t, 1.y, and 1.z.  She provided brief notes with her denials. The evidence 
submitted with the FORM substantiates the SOR allegations.4 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and has been employed as a customer service 
representative for a defense contractor since May 2013.  She has not served in the 
military nor has she previously held a public trust position.  In the past 10 years, she 
experienced approximately 3.5 years of unemployment or part-time employment.  Due 
to her inability to meet financial obligations, Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
2004.  Her reported liabilities of approximately $40,000 were discharged in 2004.5  She 
again filed bankruptcy in 2005 under Chapter 13.  This bankruptcy was dismissed in 
2006 because Applicant failed to make payments to cure the arrears, and failed to make 
plan payments.6  
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.p, a judgment for $906 filed by her bankruptcy 
attorney in 2008 for unpaid attorney fees.  In her Answer and SF 86, Applicant claimed 
the debt had been reduced to $125 through the use of a payment plan.7  Applicant is 
making progress toward resolving this debt. 
                                                     
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Items 2–7. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 5. 
 
7 Items 2 and 3. 
 
3 
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.r, a judgment filed in 2007 for approximately $694, as 
paid in 2007.  She did not provide evidence of payment and the debt continues to 
appear as an unsatisfied judgment in her 2013 credit bureau report (CBR).8  Applicant 
denied SOR ¶ 1.t, a judgment for $990.  She claimed in her Answer that she was 
unaware of the judgment, however, the judgment appears on her 2014 CBR and she 
listed it in her SF 86 as a collection for an auto loan for which she was making 
payments until she was laid off in 2009.  Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.y, a collection 
account for $336 by a cable service provider.  She claimed in her Answer that she 
returned the equipment, however the debt continues to appear as a collection account 
in her 2013 CBR.  Finally, Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.z, which alleges a collection for a 
cash advance company for $275.  Applicant claimed in her Answer that this was “billed 
twice.”  I am assuming Applicant is claiming this debt is a duplicate SOR allegation; 
otherwise, the reason for her denial is unclear.  Although there is a similar account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.bb, her 2013 CBR shows that these are separate accounts.  For all 
of the denied allegations, Applicant did not submit documentary evidence in support of 
her contentions. 
 
Applicant submitted evidence of debtor education and counseling, completed in 
December 2014, in anticipation of a new Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing.9  Although 
Applicant claimed her income covers her household expenses, a personal budget 
submitted with her Answer indicates the contrary; her monthly income of $3,798 is 
insufficient to meet her expenses of $3,937.  No documents or additional information 
were submitted in response to the FORM.  There is no documentary evidence of 
payments toward or resolution of the SOR debts, except as described above.  I was 
unable to evaluate Applicant’s credibility and demeanor, or to inquire into the current 
status of her finances since she elected to have her case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.  DOD contractor personnel are 
entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable 
access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                           
 
8 Item 7. 
 
9 No evidence of a new bankruptcy filing has been submitted except for certificates of completion of 
courses in credit counseling and personal financial management, and notices of electronic filing 
procedures. 
 
4 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision.  An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14.  Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  An applicant has the ultimate burden 
of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise concerns under AG ¶ 19.  
The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 Applicant has long-standing financial problems that she is unable or unwilling to 
resolve.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are long-standing and reoccurring.  Applicant has a 
history of filing bankruptcy to discharge or reduce payments on delinquent debts.  
Although many of her debts have become delinquent due to job loss or 
underemployment, Applicant has not acted responsibly despite receiving a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy discharge in 2004, and a payment plan in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy filed a 
year later.  Although Applicant now claims to be filing another Chapter 7 bankruptcy, 
she has not established a consistent record of sound financial management before or 
after past bankruptcy filings.  Applicant has again completed court-mandated credit 
counseling, however there is no evidence that her financial problems are being resolved 
or are under control.   
 
 With regard to SOR ¶ 1.p, there is evidence of good-faith efforts to repay the 
debt, and Applicant has made sufficient headway toward its resolution.  However, there 
is insufficient evidence to persuade me that the remaining SOR debts have been or are 
being satisfactorily addressed, nor is there evidence that Applicant is financially stable 
and able to meet future financial responsibilities. 
 
6 
 
 Based on the record presented, I find that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p has 
been mitigated.  The remaining debts have not been sufficiently addressed to warrant 
application of full mitigation credit.  The remaining unresolved debts and Applicant’s 
precarious financial condition leave me with questions and concerns about Applicant’s 
overall ability and willingness to fully face her financial responsibilities.  Therefore, her 
financial status creates doubt about her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances.  An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I have incorporated my findings 
of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of public trust.  I conclude Applicant did 
not mitigate the financial considerations concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.o, and 1.q - 1.dd:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.p:     For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position.  Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
