 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-03557
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not meet his burden of producing information that mitigates the
security concerns about his past-due or delinquent debts. His request for access to
classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On August 7, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information
required as part of his employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the
completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could
not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have
access to classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included eight exhibits (Items 1 - 8) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case. The exhibit numbers listed on page 1 of the FORM for Applicant’s Answer
to the SOR (Item 3) and for his EQIP (Item 4) should be reversed based on the way those enclosures were
actually presented. Applicant’s Answer will be cited herein as Item 4, and the EQIP as Item 3.
2
On March 28, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On
July 21, 2015, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant3
received the FORM on September 30, 2015, and had 30 days from the date of receipt
to submit additional information in response to the FORM. Applicant did not submit
additional information within the time allotted. The record closed on October 30, 2015,
and the case was assigned to me on November 12, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $19,383 for ten
delinquent or past-due accounts (SOR 1.a - 1.j). The $12,333 debt alleged at SOR 1.j is
for the remainder after resale of a car that was repossessed in 2012. It comprises about
64 percent of the total delinquent debt listed. Applicant denied all but one (SOR 1.f) of
the allegations on grounds that he either was the victim of identity theft or that some of
the debts alleged were actually attributable to his late father, whose name is similar to
his. (FORM, Items 1 and 2) In addition to the facts established by his admission, I make
the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since May 2012. He worked in a previous capacity for two different federal
contractors from October 2001 until April 2006. Concurrently, he was a federal
employee from February 1992 until April 2006. At that time, he started his own small
business, which was his sole source of income until May 2012, when the business failed
due to the poor economy. This is his first application for a security clearance. (FORM,
Item 3) 
Applicant is a high school graduate. He and his wife have been married since
April 1997, and they have two children, ages 21 and 14. (FORM, Item 3)
When he submitted his EQIP, Applicant disclosed the debts alleged at SOR 1.f
and 1.j. SOR 1.j is for an unpaid cell phone account. Available information shows only
that this account was closed, not that it has been paid, as Applicant claims. SOR 1.f is
for a debt that arose when his car was repossessed and sold at auction. He bought the
car for $27,000 in March 2006, but defaulted on the loan in 2009. After the car was sold
at auction, Applicant was still responsible for $12,333 as the amount yet needed to
satisfy the loan. In January 2014, Applicant reached a settlement with the law firm
engaged to collect the delinquency. A garnishment of Applicant’s wages had been
established, but would be lifted if Applicant paid the firm $10,000. Applicant did not
 Directive. 6.3.4
3
present any information showing that he acted pursuant to the settlement. (FORM,
Items 3 - 6)
A credit report obtained during Applicant’s background investigation documented
all of the debts alleged in the SOR. On October 10, 2012, Applicant was interviewed
about his debts by a Government investigator. He stated at that time that he did not
recognize some of the debts listed in his credit report, but he did not mention the
possibility that the debts were either attributable to his late father, or that they were the
result of identity theft. Applicant first suggested that possibility when he responded to
the SOR. One of the credit reports presented by the Government shows that Applicant
filed an identity theft alert with one of the major credit reporting companies in June
2014. The reason stated for the alert was that Applicant did not recognize companies
that were doing credit checks on him. 
As for Applicant’s late father, they shared the same first and last names, and they
had the same middle initial. Applicant’s father died intestate and Applicant was assigned
as administrator of the estate. However, none of the credit reports suggest, and
Applicant’s information does not show, that any of the debts were actually attributable to
his late father. Applicant’s theory in this regard was first raised in response to the SOR,
and he has not presented any information that shows he has challenged the validity of
any of those debts. (FORM, Items 5 and 8)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Applicant denied all but one of the allegations in the SOR. Nonetheless, the
Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the SOR. The
facts established herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18
as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations). In response to the Government’s information, it
was incumbent on Applicant to produce information sufficient to refute or mitigate the
facts established against him. His response to the SOR did not support his claims of
5
payment or other action to resolve his past-due debts. In particular, I note the
documents he submitted regarding his settlement of the $12,333 debt at SOR 1.f. That
information does not clearly establish actual payment pursuant to the agreed upon
settlement amount. He did not submit any additional information in response to the
FORM.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Available information shows that Applicant’s debt problems continue to be
unresolved, and must be considered as recent. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Although some of his financial difficulty arose from a failed small business, it was
Applicant’s choice to leave a steady job with a federal agency and embark on that
venture. He did not establish that he has acted to pay or otherwise resolve his
delinquent debts since his company failed. Applicant also did not support his affirmative
defense that the debts listed in the SOR were either his late father’s obligations or the
result of identity theft. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.
Applicant also did not present any evidence showing he has sought financial
counseling or other professional assistance to resolve his debts and improve his
financial circumstances. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.
Applicant claimed that he has resolved the SOR 1.f and 1.j debts, but the
information he submitted does not fully support his claims. It is clear he agreed to a
settlement of SOR 1.f, but available information, to which he had ample opportunity to
contribute, does not establish actual resolution of the debt. He did not otherwise
6
address any of the other debts other than to claim they are not his responsibility. AG ¶¶
20(d) and (e) do not apply. On balance, Applicant did not meet his burden of producing
sufficient evidence to refute the SOR allegations or to mitigate the security concerns
about his financial problems. 
In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative
factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is presumed to be a mature,
responsible father and husband. Nonetheless, it was incumbent on him to present
sufficient information in support of his response to the Government’s case. Without such
information, doubts remain about his suitability for access to classified information.
Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications,
those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
