 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-06151
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not meet her burden of producing information that mitigates the
security concerns about her past-due or delinquent debts. Her request for access to
classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On March 6, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information
required as part of her employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the
completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could
not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have
access to classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included five exhibits (Items 1 - 5) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
2
On March 11, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On
August 31, 2015, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant3
received the FORM on September 21, 2015, and had 30 days from the date of receipt
to submit additional information in response to the FORM. Applicant did not submit
additional information within the time allotted. The record closed on October 21, 2015,
and the case was assigned to me on November 12, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $86,104 for
eight delinquent or past-due accounts (SOR 1.a - 1.h). Applicant denied the allegations
at SOR 1.b - 1.d, and 1.h, claiming that they were her ex-husband’s responsibility. She
also stated her intent to contact her creditors and negotiate repayment plans. (FORM,
Item 1) In addition to the facts established by her admissions to the remaining
allegations, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where she has
worked as a quality assurance inspector since July 2000. She was married from June
1994 until divorcing in March 2005. She is a single mother of a 16-year-old child, and
claims she has not received any child support from her ex-husband. (FORM, Items 1
and 2) 
When she submitted her EQIP, Applicant did not disclose any delinquent or past-
due debts in response to EQIP Section 26 (Financial Record) questions. On April 14,
2014, she was interviewed by a Government investigator. She confirmed her negative
response regarding financial problems, but was confronted with the results of a credit
report obtained as part of her background investigation. Applicant generally denied
knowledge of any of the debts contained in the credit report, and she stated her
assumption that the debts were joint marital obligations that she thought her ex-
husband had resolved. (FORM, Items 3 and 4).
Although Applicant’s credit reports reflect a few joint debts, the debts alleged in
the SOR are all documented in those reports as individual accounts attributable to
Applicant. The debts listed at SOR 1.a and 1.g, both of which Applicant admits are her
responsibility, were either opened or referred for collection in October 2006 and June
2001, respectively. The rest of the SOR debts documented in her credit history
originated with their current creditors between May 2011 and November 2013, or
between six and eight years after Applicant’s divorce. She has not paid or otherwise
resolved any of them. (FORM, Items 3 and 4)
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
3
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the
SOR. The facts established herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part,
at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations).
In response to the Government’s information, it was incumbent on Applicant to
produce information sufficient to refute or mitigate the facts established against her.
Applicant’s response to the SOR was (1) to assert that some of the debts were partially
her ex-husband’s responsibility, and (2) that she would negotiate with the creditors for
those debts she acknowledged as hers to establish repayment plans. As to the former,
the entries in her credit history identifying the debts alleged in the SOR list them as
“individual” rather than “joint” accounts. Applicant has not presented any information in
response to either the SOR or the FORM that shows otherwise. She also did not
present any information to show that she has tried to pay or otherwise resolve her
debts.
In consideration of all of the foregoing, I conclude that none of the pertinent AG ¶
20 mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s debts are current, she did not support her
claims that some are not hers, she has not made any payments on her debts, and she
has not sought any financial counseling or other professional help for her financial
problems. Even if her debts stem from her failed marriage, it has been more than 10
years since her divorce and there has been no identifiable action taken to address her
debts.
In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative
factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is presumed to be a mature,
responsible mother and employee. Nonetheless, Applicant had the burden of presenting
5
sufficient information to refute the SOR allegations or to mitigate the security concerns
established by the Government’s information. Without such information, doubts remain
about her suitability for access to classified information. Because protection of the
national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be
resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
