 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ADP Case No. 14-06047 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate trustworthiness concerns pertaining to Guideline F 
(financial considerations). Eligibility to occupy a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 8, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions version of an application for a public trust position (SF-86). On March 27, 
2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended, and modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006.    
 
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy 
a public trust position, which entails access to sensitive information. The DOD CAF 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether access to 
sensitive information should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On April 28, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated August 31, 2015, was provided to her by letter dated December 
16, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on December 31, 2015. She was afforded a 
period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not submit additional information within the 30-day period. On 
March 15, 2016, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.i, and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c, 1.e - 1.h, 
1.j – 1.t.1 
 
Background Information2 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old applicant seeking employment with a defense 
contractor who requires her to have a public trust position. During her Office of 
Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI) on April 29, 2014, she 
was employed at a health club and taking on-line college courses. (Items 4, 8)  
 
Applicant has attended several college-level institutions since 2004, and as of 
her April 2014 OPM PSI, she had not graduated. However, during her OPM PSI, she 
stated that she expected to graduate with a bachelor’s degree in December 2014. 
Applicant has never married and has no dependents. She did not serve in the U.S. 
armed forces. (Items 4, 8) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists 20 delinquent debts totaling approximately $71,297. The 
delinquencies are comprised of a variety of creditors to include credit card companies, 
medical debts, former landlords, and the U.S. Government. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.t; Item 1)  
 
Applicant’s debts are listed on her April 22, 2014, October 28, 2014, and August 
31, 2015 credit reports. (Items 5, 6, 7)  
 
During Applicant’s April 29, 2014 OPM PSI, she attributed most of her debts to 
identity theft that occurred “approximately seven to eight years ago” or were paid 
through other sources. She stated that she ran her credit report in “2011 or 2012” and 
                                            
1 Department Counsel’s FORM noted that Applicant’s SOR answer had a handwritten note on the 
third page of her SOR answer purporting to list attached enclosures. Department Counsel further noted 
that the case file did not include any enclosures. Applicant did not address this discrepancy during the 30-
day time she was afforded after receipt of her FORM to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.  
 
2 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was 
the most current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
believes that all of the fraudulent charges were removed except for her landlord-related 
accounts. She was unemployed when she was attending college and during those times 
was supported by student loans and her mother, who passed in January 2012, and later 
by her boyfriend.  Her mother was an attorney and a county circuit court judge. (Items 2, 
4, 8) 
 
 While Applicant was attending college, she depended on her mother for her 
“main financial support.” Since her mother’s passing, Applicant has struggled financially 
adding that her mother’s estate is “tied up in probate.” During Applicant’s April 2014 
OPM PSI, she stated that within the next month, she expected to receive $100,000 to 
$150,000 from her mother’s estate. She planned to pay off all of the accounts she was 
“responsible for” from her mother’s inheritance. (Items 2, 4, 8) 
 
During a follow-up OPM PSI on June 20, 2014, Applicant stated that she had 
started paying off her smaller debts and added that her mother’s estate was released by 
probate on June 19, 2014, but her mother’s home had not been sold nor had she 
received any money as of that date. (Item 8) A review of Applicant’s credit reports 
indicate that her indebtedness began in 2009 and has been ongoing. (Items 5, 6, 7) 
 
As noted, Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d (charged-off credit card 
account for $627) and 1.i (2009 U.S. Government tax lien for $6,304). She claimed the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.d was paid off in June 2014 and that she has been making payments 
on the tax lien and she was negotiating a lesser amount. She claimed her medical debts 
were being paid at $150 per month.  (Items 2, 8) Applicant did not submit any 
documentation to support her claims of payments. (Items 2, 4, 8)  
 
Applicant did not address her lack of documentation after receiving her FORM. 
There is no record evidence documenting any attempt by Applicant to contact any of her 
creditors or documentation that she paid or settled any of her debts. There is no record 
evidence that Applicant sought financial counseling nor does the FORM contain any 
character evidence or performance evaluations. In short, Applicant provided no 
evidence demonstrating that her financial situation is under control. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance [or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity 
clearance [or trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security and sensitive records is of paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”   
 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented not 
only in her credit reports, but also in the additional evidence contained in the FORM. 
The evidence establishes the validity of the allegations and the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,3 financial considerations concerns 
remain. If favorable evidence exists, Applicant did not provide it. None of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions above are applicable or partially applicable 
to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the SOR allegations. The available information shows 
that Applicant has taken little or no affirmative action to resolve the financial 
shortcomings identified in her FORM. 
  
With that said, a trustworthiness case is not aimed at collecting debts.4 Rather 
the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness 
consistent with the guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating Guideline F cases, the 
Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that [she] has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that [she] has 
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of [her] 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.5 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
5 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation marks 
omitted). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, she failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances, 
articulate her position, and mitigate the financial considerations concerns. She failed to 
offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding her past 
efforts to address her delinquent debt. She failed to establish a track record of 
delinquent debt resolution. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on an 
explanation, lacking sufficient detail to fully establish mitigation, public trust concerns 
remain. 
 
After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,6 I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guideline F public trust 
concerns. Accordingly, Applicant has not met her ultimate burden of persuasion to show 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for a public 
trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.t:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
                                         
                                                                                                                                            
 
6 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
