Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-5.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXX, Xxxxxx Xxxxxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 14-04935 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 20 April 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
hearing by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The record in this case
closed 24 September 2015, when Applicant’s response to the FORM was due.
Applicant provided no additional documents. DOHA assigned the case to me 20
January 2016.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations. He is a 36-year-old
administrative support officer employed by a U.S. defense contractor since February
2004. His clearance status is unclear. Applicant served on active duty in the U.S.
military from June 1999 to August 2003, and received an honorable discharge.
Applicant married in February 2001. He and his wife have two children, a son
born in December 1999 and a daughter born in June 2001. Applicant and his wife
separated in October 2008 (Item 5). They have no separation agreement, and
apparently, no immediate intent to divorce. When they separated, Applicant claims that
he paid his wife approximately $700 monthly child support. However, he paid her in
cash, and kept no records of his payments. He does not say how long he made these
payments. His wife filed for child support with the state, and Applicant was assessed
child support arrears.
The SOR alleges, Government exhibits (Items 3-5) substantiate, and Applicant
admits an $8,967 delinquent child support account referred to collection, of which
$7,588 is past-due, and a delinquent education loan that is $822 past-due on an
$11,961 balance (Item 4). Applicant also admits filing a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition
in June 2008 for $7,000, and receiving a discharge of his dischargeable debts in
November 2011. Applicant documented no contacts with his creditors, and provided no
evidence of their current status. Applicant attributes his financial problems generally to
his separation from his wife. Although the circumstances of his delinquent child support
are clear enough, he has not really explained why his education loan is delinquent.
Applicant discussed his financial and marital situations with a Government
investigator during a May 2014 subject interview. He has not documented any contact
with his creditors since completing his clearance application in March 2014 and
discussing his personal situation with the Government investigator in May 2014. He has
stated no plan for addressing his delinquent debts. He provided no budget or financial
statement. Applicant has not received any credit counseling or debt consolidation. He
provided no work or character references, or any evidence of community involvement.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;4
¶20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that5
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and6
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
3
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant failed to submit sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns. Applicant
has a history of financial difficulties, which are ongoing.  Applicant’s financial problems4
appear to date from at least 2008, when he first filed for bankruptcy relief. However, he
successfully completed his Chapter 13 bankruptcy in November 2011, over four years
ago. That bankruptcy no longer holds any security concerns. Nevertheless, despite
steady employment since February 2004, there is no evidence of any efforts by
Applicant to resolve his child support and educational loan debts. These are debts that
could not be discharged in bankruptcy.
Applicant meets none of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations.
His financial difficulties are both recent and multiple; although the immediate causes of
his problems could be resolved if Applicant and his wife reached a separation
agreement and/or a divorce.  Applicant’s separation was certainly beyond his control,5
but his failure to negotiate a formal settlement of marital issues with his wife was not,
and he has not shown that he has otherwise been responsible in addressing his two
debts.6
 
¶20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that7
the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.8
4
Applicant submitted no evidence to show that he received credit or financial
counseling, and his debts are clearly not being resolved.  There are no signs that7
Applicant has been in contact with any of the creditors alleged in the SOR, and thus he
cannot establish that he has made a good-faith effort to address his debts.  Moreover,8
Applicant has mostly disregarded these financial obligations since completing his
clearance application in March 2014. His documented inaction for over a year raises
significant security concerns that Applicant has not begun to address. Accordingly, I
conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
 Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs b-c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
