 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-05337
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not meet his burden of producing information that mitigates the
security concerns about his past-due or delinquent debts. His request for access to
classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On March 20, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information
required as part of his employment with a defense contractor. This is his first request for
a clearance. After reviewing the completed background investigation, Department of
Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest for Applicant to have access to classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six exhibits (Items 1 - 6) proffered in support3
of the Government’s case.
2
On February 5, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On
July 29, 2015, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant3
received the FORM on September 1, 2015, and had 30 days from the date of receipt to
submit additional information in response to the FORM. Applicant did not submit
additional information within the time allotted. The record closed on October 2, 2015,
and the case was assigned to me on November 12, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $26,847 for ten
delinquent or past-due accounts (SOR 1.a - 1.j). The debt alleged at SOR 1.j is a
delinquent student loan account for $12,213, or about 45 percent of the total delinquent
debt listed. The debts at SOR 1.c - 1.i, totaling $9,117 (34 percent of the total debt
listed) are for unpaid medical bills that resulted from the deductible portions of his
medical insurance. Applicant admitted all but one (SOR 1.i) of the allegations. (FORM,
Items 1 and 2) In addition to the facts established by his admissions, I make the
following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since February 2014. He and his wife have been married since August 2008.
They have an eight-year-old child together, and she has a nine-year-old child from
before their marriage.
After Applicant graduated from high school in 2001, he attended a vocational and
technical school until December 2002, when he received certification in automotive
technologies. In August 2003, he completed similar training with a national automotive
company. From August 2003 until February 2014, except for a period of self-
employment between January and April 2011, Applicant worked for various employers
as a diesel engine technician and mechanic. His current job is his first with a defense
contractor. (FORM, Items 3 and 6)
In his clearance application, Applicant disclosed the debts alleged at SOR 1.a,
1.c, 1.d - 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. All of the debts alleged in the SOR are documented in two
credit reports obtained during his background investigation, and he discussed those
debts during a personal subject interview with a Government investigator on April 21,
2014. During that interview, he stated his intent to enter into repayment plans with some
of his creditors by May 2014. (FORM, Items 3 - 6)
Applicant attributed his financial problems to being the sole income earner for his
family until recently. In his current position, he earns about $42,000 annually, and his
 Directive. 6.3.4
3
wife is now working outside the home as a nurse. She earns about $30,000 annually.
He has not incurred new unpaid debts since 2014, and he is able to meet all of his
current financial obligations. (FORM, Item 6)
Applicant also cited, as a factor contributing to his financial problems, his failed
attempt to start his own diesel repair company in January 2011. His attempt failed in just
four months due to poor economic conditions; however, he has been gainfully employed
since April 2011. The debt alleged at SOR 1.a is for the remainder after resale of a truck
that was repossessed in 2011. Applicant fell two months behind on his payments while
he was self-employed, and was told by the lender that he owed $4,000 after the truck
was sold at auction. The debt remains unresolved. (FORM, Items 3 - 6) 
The debt at SOR 1.b is for an overdrawn bank account that Applicant closed in
April 2011, before he moved to the state where he currently lives.  He has not resolved
that debt. Applicant denied the $88 medical debt at SOR 1.i, claiming it has been paid.
However, that debt is still listed as an active collection account in the most recent credit
report available. As for the remaining medical debts, he did not produce any information
showing that he has paid or otherwise resolved them. Applicant stated in his subject
interview that in December 2012, he enlisted the services of a credit repair firm to verify
and clean up his credit history. But he did not provide any documentation related to that
effort or any results produced by the firm. (FORM, Items 3, 5, and 6)
The student loan debt alleged at SOR 1.j is related to Applicant’s tuition for his
technical training between 2001 and 2003. He struggled to make his monthly payments
and his loans were referred for collection. In 2014, Applicant took advantage of an
opportunity to consolidate his delinquent loans and he made timely payments for nine
months to bring them current. He discussed this effort during his April 2014 interview,
but he did not otherwise document his claim. Department Counsel acknowledged that
Applicant’s most recent credit report shows a new, current account that correlates to the
student loan account in SOR 1.j. I find that the debt at SOR 1.j is no longer delinquent.
(FORM at 2; FORM, Item 5)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the
SOR. The facts established herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part,
at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
5
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations). In response to the Government’s information, it
was incumbent on Applicant to produce information sufficient to refute or mitigate the
facts established against him. He did not submit any documents in response to the SOR
or the FORM. Although his student loans are once again current, the basis for that
finding came from an interpretation of the Government’s exhibit (FORM, Item 5).
Applicant did not show that he is still paying that debt on a regular basis, and he did not
show that he is trying to resolve any of his other debts. He has carried delinquencies for
several years, and it is understandable that he may not have been able to meet his
obligations for reasons beyond his control. However, he and his wife now earn a good
living, yet it does not appear that he is engaged in any systematic effort to resolve his
past-due debts.
In summary, Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by the
Government’s information. In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the
appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has been
gainfully employed for most of his adult life, and he is presumed to be a mature,
responsible father and husband. Nonetheless, without other information suggesting his
financial problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his suitability for access
to classified information. Protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these
adjudications. Accordingly, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
