 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02346 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct and financial considerations 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 6, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 4, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 13, 2015, scheduling the hearing for December 9, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary 
evidence. The record was held open until February 9, 2016, for Applicant to submit 
additional information. He did not submit anything. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on December 16, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer or a predecessor contractor since 1988. He seeks to retain a 
security clearance, which he has held for decades. He attended college for a period, but 
he did not earn a degree. He is married, but he has been separated for 19 years. He 
has four adult children.1 
 
 The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts, but credit reports indicate that Applicant 
was only an authorized user of the account identified in SOR ¶ 1.d. He admitted the $26 
medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, but he stated it had been billed to him in error. He 
denied the six remaining delinquent debts totaling about $31,700. He stated that those 
debts belong to his son who has the same first, middle, and last name as Applicant. All 
of the debts are listed on a combined credit report from April 2013, an Equifax credit 
report from April 2014, or both credit reports.2 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
April 2013. He reported that he once owed the IRS for back taxes from tax years 2006 
through 2010.3 He wrote that he had been making monthly payments for a number of 
years, and his taxes would be completely paid within a month. He did not list any of the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR under any of the pertinent financial questions.4 
 
Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in April 2013. He 
discussed his back taxes. He was confronted with delinquent debts from the April 2013 
credit report. He stated that he was unaware of the debts and they must belong to his 
son. He told the investigator that he would contact his son and have him contact the 
creditors and provide them the necessary information to put the accounts in his son’s 
name. Applicant stated that he would pull a credit report, contact the creditors, and ask 
them to remove the accounts from his credit report.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 33-34; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4. 
 
3 The SOR does not allege that Applicant did not pay his taxes, and that will not be used for 
disqualification purposes. It may be considered in gauging Applicant’s credibility. It is relevant in that it 
shows that Applicant had financial problems independent of the disputed debts alleged in the SOR.  
4 GE 1. 
 
5 GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant testified that the six accounts belong to his son, but he had done 
nothing to dispute the debts. He was informed that the DOD relies on credit reports,6 
and the debts are on his credit report. He was informed that the debts not only affected 
the financial aspect of the case, but they also formed the basis for the allegation that he 
falsified the SF 86. Applicant was provided 60 days after the hearing to submit evidence 
to substantiate his dispute of the legitimacy of the debts. He did not submit anything 
post-hearing.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
6 “Credit reports are generally sufficient to establish the Government’s prima facie case of Guideline F 
security concerns.” See ISCR Case No. 10-03668 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 5, 2012). 
 
7 Tr. at 19-38. 
 
 
4 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guidelines E (Personal Conduct) and F (Financial Considerations) 
 
  The security concerns for personal conduct and financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶¶ 15 and 18, as follows: 
 
15. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
18. Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
  AG ¶¶ 16 and 19 describe conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was only an authorized user of the account identified in SOR ¶ 1.d. The 
$26 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f has no security significance. Those allegations 
are concluded for Applicant. 
 
5 
 
 Applicant denied owing the remaining six debts, claiming they belong to his son 
who has the same first, middle, and last name as Applicant. This case is relatively 
simple. If the debts belong to his son, Applicant does not have financial problems and 
he did not falsify the SF 86. If the debts belong to Applicant, then he has unresolved 
financial problems, he falsified the SF 86, he lied during his background investigation, 
and he lied during his hearing.  
 
 Applicant told the background investigator in April 2013 that he would contact his 
son, and he would have his son contact the creditors and provide them the necessary 
information to put the accounts in his son’s name. Applicant also stated that he would 
pull a credit report, contact the creditors, and ask them to remove the accounts off his 
credit report. Applicant did none of the above. He was given two months after the 
hearing to submit evidence to substantiate his dispute. He did not submit anything. I 
also note that Applicant’s financial history was not otherwise spotless. He did not pay 
his taxes on time for tax years 2006 through 2010.  
 
 I find by substantial evidence8 that Applicant is responsible for the six debts 
alleged in the SOR. I further find that he intentionally falsified his SF 86 when he failed 
to report the debts. AG ¶¶ 16(a), 19(a), and 19(c) are applicable. 
 
 I have considered all the mitigating conditions, particularly AG ¶ 20(e),9 but none 
of them are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
                                                          
8 Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” ISCR Case No. 10-09035 at 
5 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2014) (citing Directive ¶¶ E3.1.14; E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the 
weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence 
does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal 
Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than 
a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994); ISCR 
Case No. 04-07187 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2006). 
 
9 The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause 
of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
6 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the personal conduct and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
