 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06527  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant has $130,000 in unresolved delinquent 
debt. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance. 
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on July 27, 2015. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received the 
FORM on September 10, 2015, and did not respond. The case was assigned to me on 
November 18, 2015. The documents appended to the FORM are admitted as 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, without objection. GE 6 is excluded as 
explained below.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 GE 6 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing the interview Applicant had 
with a background investigator during his January 2014 investigation. The interview is 
not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Footnote 1 of the FORM 
advises Applicant of that fact and further cautions Applicant that if he fails to object to 
the admission of the interview summary in his response to the FORM that his failure 
may be taken as a waiver of the authentication requirement. Applicant’s failure to 
respond to the FORM does not demonstrate that he understands the concepts of 
authentication, or waiver and admissibility. It also does not establish that he 
understands the implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the interview. 
Accordingly, GE 6 is inadmissible and I have not considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 57, has worked for a federal contractor as a mechanic since 
November 2010. He completed his security clearance application in January 2013 and 
disclosed that his home was foreclosed in 2009. The ensuing investigation revealed that 
Applicant owes $130,000 on 17 delinquent accounts.3  
 
 Applicant maintained a favorable credit history until 2008. In December 2005, he 
bought a home. Shortly thereafter, his father-in-law immigrated to the United States to 
live with Applicant and his wife. Applicant’s father-in-law died a year later. Applicant’s 
wife wanted to bury her father in his native country. To accomplish her wish, Applicant 
borrowed money to repatriate his father-in-law’s remains and pay his burial expenses. 
With the increased debt, Applicant began to have difficulty paying his bills and fell 
behind on his mortgage. He lost his home to foreclosure in 2009, leaving a $93,700 
deficiency balance on his mortgage loan (SOR ¶ 1.a). In 2012, Applicant and his wife 
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. For unexplained reasons, their bankruptcy 
petition was converted to a Chapter 13, with a $1,200 monthly payment for 60 months. 
Applicant and his wife abandoned the petition and it was dismissed (SOR ¶ 1.i).4  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant explains that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.c, and 1.k – 1.l, totaling $26,000 are related to the burial expenses for his 
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 3-5. 
 
4 GE 2.  
 
3 
 
father-in-law. He also admits responsibility for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l, 1.h, and 
1.r, totaling $5,000. Applicant blames his wife for opening the accounts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, 1.j, 1.m, 1.n, 1.p, 1.q, totaling $5,000. He claims she abandoned 
responsibility for the accounts after their separation in 2012. However, the credit reports 
in the record show all of the accounts alleged in the SOR, with the exception of SOR ¶ 
1.q, are individual accounts in Applicant’s name. He disputes the accounts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.o. All of the alleged accounts remain unresolved.5   
    
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                          
5 GE 2, 4-5. 
 
4 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”6  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $130,000 on 17 delinquent 
accounts. Applicant admits that he began having difficulty paying his debts in 2008, 
which resulted in the loss of his home, the accumulation of delinquent debt, and an 
abandoned bankruptcy petition. The record supports a prima facie case that Applicant 
has a history of not meeting his financial obligations and that he has demonstrated an 
inability to do so.7 While Applicant offered explanations for his delinquent accounts, he 
did not provide any evidence regarding their resolution, all of which remain unresolved. 
Furthermore, Applicant failed to demonstrate that his financial problems occurred under 
circumstances beyond his control. Accordingly, the security concerns raised by 
Applicant’s finances remain, and none of the financial considerations mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
After reviewing the record, I conclude that doubts remain about Applicant’s 
security worthiness. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2. Ultimately, Applicant failed to meet his burdens of production and 
persuasion. Because the security concerns raised in the SOR remain, following Egan8 
and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national 
security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6  AG ¶ 18. 
 
7 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
8 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
