 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-05073 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position to work in the defense industry. Although Applicant’s financial 
problems were caused by events beyond her control, she did not present any 
information regarding her efforts to resolve her delinquent accounts. Accordingly, her 
eligibility to occupy a positon of trust is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons SOR detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with national security to 
grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive information and recommended that the 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or 
deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position. 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on October 8, 2015. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. She received 
the FORM on October 30, 2015, and did not respond. The case was assigned to me on 
February 8, 2016. The documents appended to the FORM are admitted as 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, without objection.  GE 6 is omitted for the 
reasons explained below.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 GE 6 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing the interview Applicant had 
with a background investigator during her October 2013 investigation. The interview is 
not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Footnote 1 of the FORM 
advises Applicant of that fact and further cautions Applicant that if she fails to object to 
the admission of the interview summary in her response to the FORM that her failure 
may be taken as a waiver of the authentication requirement. Applicant’s failure to 
respond to the FORM does not demonstrate that she understands the concepts of 
authentication, or waiver and admissibility. It also does not establish that she 
understands the implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the interview. 
Accordingly, GE 6 is inadmissible and I have not considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 52, has worked for a federal contractor in a temporary position since 
September 2013. Her position requires access to personally identifiable information 
(PII), and requires her to obtain eligibility to occupy a public trust position. Based on the 
disclosures in her September 2013 eligibility application and the ensuing investigation 
that revealed that Applicant is indebted owes $17,400 on 34 delinquent accounts.3 
 
 On her eligibility application, Applicant indicated that her financial problems were 
caused by her husband’s cancer diagnosis and her unemployment while she attended 
college between November 2009 and November 2011. She was also unemployed for 
11 months before beginning her current position. Applicant’s September 2013 credit 
report revealed $9,200 in delinquent debts. By September 2014, Applicant had 
accumulated an additional $5,500 in delinquent accounts, including $2,300 in past-due 
student loan payments, $2,300 in delinquent medical bills, and $900 in other delinquent 
accounts. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant cited her husband’s deteriorating health 
and her treatment for a serious health issue as the reason for her increased delinquent 
debt.4  
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about her current finances or her plans 
for resolving her delinquent accounts.  
                                                          
2 GE 2. 
 
3 GE 3-5. 
 
4 GE 2-5.  
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”5 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.”6 Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to 
the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made.7 An administrative judge’s objective is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision that embraces all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”8  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $14,700 in delinquent debt. The record 
supports a prima facie case that Applicant has a history of not meeting her financial 
                                                          
5 DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation) ¶¶ 
C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
6 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
7 See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
8  AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
4 
 
obligations and that she has demonstrated an inability to do so.9 Applicant’s financial 
problems were caused by events beyond her control: her husband’s deteriorating 
health, her two lengthy periods of unemployment, and her own health issues. However, 
Applicant has not provided any evidence to show that she has acted responsibly in light 
of his circumstances, that she is making a good-faith effort to address her delinquent 
debt, or that her finances are otherwise under control. The Appeal Board has repeatedly 
held that an applicant is not required to be debt free or have a plan for paying off all 
debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that Applicant act responsibly 
given her circumstances and develop a reasonable plan of repayment accompanied by 
conduct showing intent to effectuate the plan.10 Applicant has not provided this 
information.  
 
 Accordingly, doubts remain about Applicant’s trustworthiness. In reaching this 
decision, I have considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. An adverse decision in 
this case is not a finding that Applicant does not possess the good character required of 
those with access to sensitive information. However, even good people can pose a 
trustworthiness risk because of facts and circumstances not entirely under their 
control.11 While a favorable decision is not warranted at this time, Applicant may well 
present persuasive evidence of financial rehabilitation and reform in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.hh:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
10 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009)(citations omitted). 
 
11 ISCR Case No.01-26893 at 8 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002); See also Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 527-28 (1988). 
