KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant requests that we grant him a 30 day extension in which to obtain additional
evidence.  Our scope of review is limited to the issues outlined in Directive ¶ E3.1.32.  We have
no authority to grant an applicant an extension for the purpose of obtaining more evidence. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-04281.a1
DATE: 03/21/2016
DATE: March 21, 2016
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04281
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On   
March 28, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On December 24, 2015, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Thomas M. Crean denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in finding that he
had deliberately omitted material information from his security clearance application (SCA),
whether he was denied a reasonable opportunity to present documentary evidence, and whether the
Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is 74 years old and has been employed by Federal contractors since about 1999. 
Before that he worked for 25 years as a Federal police officer.  He also served in the military for
three years, receiving an honorable discharge.  He has been favorably investigated for access to
classified information several times in the past.  
Applicant’s SOR lists a number of delinquent debts, for such things as cable services,
telephone services, two automobile loans that resulted in repossession, and a home improvement
debt.  The total amount of the debt alleged in the SOR is nearly $23,000.
When completing his security clearance SCA, Applicant did not disclose any of the
delinquent debts.  During his subsequent interview, he characterized his financial outlook as
“positive.”  Decision at 3.  Although he stated to the investigator that he had experienced problems
in the past, he asserted that his present obligations were paid in a timely manner.  When the
investigator confronted him with the debts contained in his credit report, Applicant denied
knowledge of several of them.  He acknowledged that he had defaulted on his payments for an
automobile because of expensive medical treatments that he was undergoing at the time.  He stated
that he did not consider this to have been a repossession because he voluntarily relinquished the
vehicle to the creditor.1  
Applicant also stated that he had repaid part of the home improvement loan, although he did
not provide corroboration.  He stated to the clearance investigator that he would research his debts
and make payments on as many as he could, although he did not know how long this would take. 
He provided no information to show that he had done so. 
1“When [Applicant] was asked if he knew what a repossession was, [Applicant] answered that he knew what
a repossession was and that it was a mistake to omit this information form the security questionnaire.”  Item 4, Clearance
Interview Summary, at 8.  
2
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted Applicant’s claims that some of his debts had been paid.  He found that
Applicant had submitted no documentation to substantiate these claims or to show the status of the
debts.  The Judge noted Applicant’s promise to the investigator that he would research his debts and
make payments.  He stated that Applicant had two opportunities to show that he had done so, in his
answer to the SOR and later in his response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM).  However, he
failed to do so.  The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial problems were not under control. 
In the Judge’s view, Applicant had not been reasonable or responsible in regard to his debts.  He
stated that this was a reason to believe that Applicant may not protect classified information.
Regarding Guideline E, the Judge found that, during his interview, Applicant had discussed
the details of some of his debts when prompted to do so by the investigator.  He concluded that
Applicant knew that he had delinquent debts at the time he completed the SCA and, accordingly,
that his failure to list any of them was a deliberate effort to deceive.  Moreover, Applicant did not
disclose his debts until confronted with them by the interviewer.  He concluded that Applicant had
not mitigated the concerns arising from his delinquent debts.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he had deliberately failed to disclose his debts
on his SCA.  We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by “such relevant evidence
as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary
evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. When evaluating the deliberate nature of an
applicant’s omissions or false statements, a Judge should consider the applicant’s mens rea in light
of the entirety of the record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04226 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 18,
2015).  In the case before us, the SCA questions were clear and unambiguous, and the Judge could
reasonably believe that Applicant was aware of the kind of information that the Government seeks
in adjudicating a clearance, in light of the Judge’s findings that Applicant had considerable prior
experience in submitting SCAs.  Applicant discussed some of his delinquent debts with the
investigator, as the Judge found, thereby undermining any claim of ignorance.  We also note
evidence that, during his interview, Applicant acknowledged that he had intentionally left two of
these debts off his SCA.  Item 4 at 7-8.  We find no reason to disturb the challenged finding.  
Applicant states that he believed that a response to the FORM had been made on his behalf. 
He asserts that he had indeed researched his debts and made payments, as he promised the
investigator that he would do.  He claimed that he thought an official at his place of employment had
submitted to the Judge evidence of these payments.2  Applicant’s brief contains matters from outside
2In his Appeal Brief Applicant states that, in June 2014, he and the official reviewed his bills.  “I immediately
contacted the bill collectors and increased payment amounts . . . and paid off several that were in collection status.” The
documents attached to the brief are acknowledgments from creditors that accounts have been paid or are the subject of
payment plans.  These documents are dated June 2015 and after.  They all post-date the SOR.  On their faces they do
not corroborate Applicant’s claim to have paid off at least some of his debts in mid-2014.  
3
the record, including some attached documents that he asserts constituted the response that he
thought had been made on his behalf.  We are generally precluded from considering new evidence
on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1. 29.  However, we will consider new evidence insofar as it bears upon
threshold issues such as due process.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00812 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 8,
2015).
  
The record shows that DOHA provided Applicant with guidance about his right to make a
documentary response to the FORM.  This information was contained in the FORM itself, as well
as in the cover letter that accompanied it, receipt of which Applicant acknowledged.  This guidance
was sufficient to apprise a reasonable person of his right and obligation to submit documentary
evidence for the Judge’s consideration.  Applicant provided no corroboration for his claim that a
named “security rep” at his place of employment had been authorized to do this on his behalf but
had failed to follow through.  Under the facts of this case, Applicant’s uncorroborated assertions are
not enough to constitute a prima facie showing that he reasonably attempted to respond to the
FORM and that the attempt failed through no fault of his own.  See ISCR Case No. 14-00967 at 2
(App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015).  We find no reason to conclude that Applicant was denied a reasonable
opportunity to present documentary evidence in his behalf.  
Applicant requests that we grant him a 30 day extension in which to obtain additional
evidence.  Our scope of review is limited to the issues outlined in Directive ¶ E3.1.32.  We have no
authority to grant an applicant an extension for the purpose of obtaining more evidence.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 12, 2014).
  Much of Applicant’s brief consists of new evidence which, as we noted above, we are not
permitted to consider.  Viewing the record as a whole, we conclude that the Judge examined the
relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision is sustainable
on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly
consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.    
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan             
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
4
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                   
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
