 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05866 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne M. Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 11, 2015, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 6, 2015, setting the hearing for 
October 21, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 29, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and has worked for a government contractor for about 
33 years. He has an associate’s degree. He is married for a second time and has three 
children. He has held a security clearance since becoming a contractor employee and 
has never had a security incident.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant has 10 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$14,718. The debts were listed on credit reports from April 2013, September 2014, and 
August 2015. Applicant did not admit or deny any of the allegations, but rather stated 
the current status of each account. His responses will be treated as denials.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties resulted when he divorced his first wife in 2010. 
Although the divorce decree did not divide the couple’s assets and liabilities, they 
reached a private agreement concerning the home and debts related to the home. 
Applicant was to remain as a co-mortgage holder with his ex-wife, but she was to 
remain in the house and be responsible for making the monthly mortgage payments. 
She was also responsible for making all the home-related expenses, such as utility and 
telecommunication expenses. Applicant’s ex-wife is a nurse. In late 2011 or early 2012, 
Applicant’s ex-wife became ill and lost her employment for a period of time. As a result 
of her illness, she got behind on paying her bills, including her mortgage payment. She 
provided written acknowledgment of her responsibility for the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.c (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are for the same underlying debt), and 1.f. After the 
divorce, Applicant changed bank account numbers, but some of his bills were 
associated with his old bank account for automatic payment purposes and were not 
switched to his new account until after they became delinquent. Once he became aware 
of this problem, he set up the automatic payments for the new account and brought his 
debts into a current status. The status of the debts is as follows:3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a ($8,934): 
 
 This is a vehicle debt that arose because of Applicant’s banking change. He has 
since made the account current as documented by the most recent credit report. This 
debt is being resolved.4  
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 23-24; GE 1. 
 
2 Answer; GE 3-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 26-27, 42, 48; Answer; GE 2; AE A-B. 
 
4 Tr. at 29-31; GE 5.  
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,162): 
 
 This is a telecommunication account opened by his ex-wife after the divorce. She 
accepted responsibility for this account. This debt is resolved.5 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d (same underlying debt) ($667): 
 
 This debt became delinquent after the divorce and Applicant’s ex-wife accepts 
responsibility for it. This debt is resolved.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e ($600): 
 
 This is a debt that arose because of Applicant’s banking change. He has since 
paid the account as documented by the most recent credit report. This debt is resolved.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f ($437): 
 
 This debt became delinquent after the Applicant separated from his ex-wife. She 
accepts responsibility for it. This debt is resolved.8 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.g ($363): 
 
 This is a debt that arose because of Applicant’s banking change. He has since 
paid the account as documented by the most recent credit report. This debt is resolved.9 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h ($262): 
 
 This is Applicant’s daughter’s debt related to an apartment lease when she was 
in college. Applicant looked into the debt by contacting the landlord who had no record 
of the debt or of Applicant’s responsibility for it. This debt does not appear on 
Applicant’s most recent credit report. This issue is resolved.10 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i ($1,574): 
 
 This is the monthly mortgage payment for the home owed by Applicant and his 
ex-wife. She has assumed responsibility for making the payments. Applicant’s ex-wife 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 31-32; GE 5; AE A-B. 
 
6 Tr. at 32; GE 5; AE A-B.  
 
7 Tr. at 34; GE 5.  
 
8 Tr. at 35; GE 5; AE A-B.  
 
9 Tr. at 36; GE 5.  
 
10 Tr. at 37; GE 5.  
 
 
4 
 
told him that she was now current on her payments. Applicant stated that the current 
mortgage balance was about $38,000 and, if necessary, he could pay it off if she did not 
make the payments. This debt is being resolved.11 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j ($53): 
 
 This is a line-of-credit debt that arose because of Applicant’s banking change. He 
has since paid the account as documented by the most recent credit report. This debt is 
resolved.12 
 
 Applicant testified that he currently has $100,000 in a retirement account. He is 
current on all his other debts. He provided letters from his brother and a work 
supervisor, and both commented positively on Applicant’s work ethic, responsible 
behavior, and integrity.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 38-40; GE 5; AE A-B.  
 
12 Tr. at 41; GE 5.  
 
13 Tr. at 43; AE C-E. 
 
 
5 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts that he failed to pay over an extended 
period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise both disqualifying conditions stated in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue 
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant are recent. He has paid all the 
delinquent debts for which his ex-wife is not responsible. Even though his ex-wife will 
continue to pay the monthly mortgage payment, he is in a position to pay off the 
mortgage balance should that prove necessary. Since he has made a concerted effort 
to repair his financial position, it is reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will 
not recur, nor do they cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received credit counseling. He made a good-faith 
effort to resolve the debts by either them. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies and ¶ 20(d) fully 
applies. 
 
 Applicant’s ex-wife assumed responsibility for four debts and the evidence 
supported that most were incurred after their divorce. He successfully refuted any 
obligation he had for his daughter’s apartment debt. The most recent credit report and 
his ex-wife’s written assumption of liability satisfy the documentation requirement. AG ¶ 
20(e) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.d, 1.f, 1.i, and 1.j 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s 33 years of federal contractor service. I found Applicant 
to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to his debts. He took action to 
resolve his debts. I find it unlikely that Applicant will find himself in a similar future 
situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
