 
 1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )   ISCR Case No. 14-04735 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of his native Israel and the United States, who renewed 
his Israeli passport in April 2012 despite his longtime U.S. residency and citizenship. The 
security concerns raised by his renewal and use of his Israeli passport are mitigated by 
his surrender of that passport in August 2013. Applicant maintains close ties to his 
children, sister, and some friends in Israel. The foreign influence concerns are not fully 
mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 10, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference, and Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence, and explaining why it was unable to grant or continue a security clearance to 
Applicant. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 2 
Applicant filed a pro se response to the SOR allegations on February 20, 2015, 
and he requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On July 21, 2015, the case was assigned to me to 
conduct a hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. On July 23, 2015, I scheduled a 
hearing for August 18, 2015. 
 
At the hearing, two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) and two Applicant exhibits 
(AEs A-B) were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, as reflected in a 
transcript (Tr.) received on August 26, 2015. Based on Applicant’s testimony, I 
amended the SOR at the request of the Government to conform to the evidence 
presented, as set forth below. Additionally, the Government requested that I take 
administrative notice of several facts pertinent to Israel and its relationships with other 
countries, including the United States.1 I agreed to take administrative notice, but held 
the record open after the hearing for Applicant to submit a response. 
 
On September 7, 2015, Applicant submitted a letter from his employer, which 
was marked as AE C, and five recent articles intended as his rebuttal to the 
Government’s Administrative Notice request. On September 14, 2015, Department 
Counsel responded that the documents were not appropriate for administrative notice, 
but that the Government did not object to their admission as evidence. On September 
16, 2015, I admitted AE C and asked Applicant to confirm whether he intended to 
submit the other documents in evidence or as facts for administrative notice. On 
September 19, 2015, Applicant proffered the documents in evidence. Accordingly, I 
accepted the documents collectively as AE D. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 Based on Applicant’s testimony, the Government moved to amend the SOR 
under ¶ E3.1.17 of the Directive to add the following allegation under ¶ 2, Guideline B: 
 
2.d. Your son is a dual citizen of Israel and the United States and he 
resides in Israel. 
 
I granted the motion on good cause shown. The information was not known to 
the Government before the hearing but was known to Applicant, who filed no objection.2 
                                                 
1
The Government provided a copy of its Administrative Notice request to Applicant only days before the 
hearing. Applicant nonetheless indicated that he had an adequate opportunity to review the request, and 
he objected to its relevance to his case. I agreed to take administrative notice, but held the record open to 
give Applicant more time to review the source documents, which the Government indicated could be 
obtained via the Internet at the web addresses provided in its request; to comment on the facts submitted 
by the Government for administrative notice; and to propose facts for administrative notice. 
  
2 
The Government initially moved to amend the SOR to add an allegation 2.e that Applicant’s son-in-law is 
a citizen of Israel. After it was shown that the information was of record and known to the Government 
 
 3 
Administrative Notice 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested administrative notice of several facts 
pertinent to Israel, as set forth in an Administrative Notice request dated August 12, 
2015. The Government’s request was based on several government publications 
referenced in the document.3 At Applicant’s hearing, Department Counsel 
acknowledged that despite an assertion to the contrary in the Administrative Notice 
request, Applicant had not been provided copies of the source documents. Copies of 
the documents were not provided for the record or to Applicant at the hearing. 
 
Pursuant to my obligation to take administrative notice of the most current 
political conditions in evaluating Guideline B concerns (see ISCR Case No. 05-11292 
(App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007)), I informed the parties of my intent to take administrative 
notice, subject to the reliability of the source documentation and the relevance and 
materiality of the facts proposed. Applicant was given time after the hearing to access 
the source documents via the Internet addresses provided by the Government, and he 
submitted his response on September 7, 2015. On September 14, 2015, Department 
Counsel indicated that he did not object to the admission of Applicant’s documents in 
evidence, but they were not appropriate for administrative notice. AE C, a letter from 
Applicant’s employer, was admitted into evidence. On September 19, 2015, Applicant 
indicated that he wanted the documents regarding the relationship between Israel and 
the United States submitted as evidence in his case. The documents were accepted 
into the record collectively as AE D. 
 
 With the decision on Applicant’s security eligibility still pending, the DOHA Appeal 
Board remanded ADP Case No. 14-01655 on November 3, 2015, for the administrative 
judge to incorporate in the record the “official notice documents” relied on by the 
Government but identified only by URL in the case record. Citing ISCR Case No. 02-
24875 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2006), the Appeal Board stated in part: “[b]ecause of the 
dynamic nature of the Internet, a reference to a document’s URL in the case record 
would not necessarily be sufficient to preserve the matter for meaningful appellate 
review.” 
 
                                                                                                                                                             
before the SOR was issued, Department Counsel withdrew that allegation. 
 
3 
The Government’s request for administrative notice was based on the U.S. State Department’s Country 
Specific Information: Israel, the West Bank and Gaza, dated September 11, 2014; the State Department’s 
Travel Warning–Israel, dated February 18, 2015; the National Counterintelligence Center’s Annual Report 
to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage–2000 and its Annual Report to 
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage–2005; a news release from the U.S. 
Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security reporting an order related to an export 
violation issued May 5, 2010; the U.S. Department of Justice’s Summary of Major U.S. Export 
Enforcement, Economic Espionage, Trade Secret and Embargo-Related Criminal Cases, January 2008 
to January 23, 2015; the U.S. State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2014-
Israel, dated August 2015; and the Congressional Research Service’s CRS Issue Brief for Congress, 
Israel: Background and Relations with the U.S., updated October 26, 2005. 
 
 
 4 
 Administrative notice is not taken of the source documents in their entirety, but of 
specific facts properly noticed and relevant and material to the issues. Accordingly, to 
preserve the record for appeal and to ensure that the parties are fully apprised of the 
source information from which facts would be administratively noticed, I reopened the 
record on January 26, 2016, for Department Counsel to submit into the record, with a 
copy to Applicant, of the documents identified as I through VIII in his August 12, 2015 
Administrative Notice request. Department Counsel was given a deadline of February 
18, 2016, to comply. The pages of the source documents specifically relied on by the 
Government were submitted on February 17, 2016, and with the August 12, 2015 
Administrative Notice request, were incorporated into the record as Hearing Exhibit 1. 
 
 On February 26, 2016, Applicant requested an opportunity to respond to the 
source information submitted by the Government for my review. Applicant filed a 
response by the March 7, 2016 deadline. His response, dated March 5, 2016, was not 
admitted in evidence but was incorporated in the record as Hearing Exhibit 2. The 
Government filed no rebuttal by the March 14, 2016 deadline for comment. 
 
Concerning the facts submitted for administrative notice, Department Counsel 
requested that I notice cases involving espionage by some U.S. government employees 
and illegal export cases implicating Israeli officials and companies. While that 
information is relevant to the issue of whether Israel actively pursues collection of U.S. 
intelligence and economic and proprietary information, none of the cases involved 
Applicant personally or involved espionage through any family relationships. The 
anecdotal evidence of criminal wrongdoing of other U.S. citizens is of decreased 
relevance to an assessment of Applicant’s security suitability, given there is no evidence 
that Applicant or any member of his family was involved in any aspect of the cited 
cases. Additionally, as correctly noted by Applicant in his March 5, 2016 response, 
some of the information relied on by the Government is more than ten years old and 
must be evaluated in light of its age. Some of the reports relied on by the Government 
have been updated.4 With these caveats, the facts administratively noticed are set forth 
below. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
The amended SOR alleges Guideline C, foreign preference, security concerns 
because Applicant obtained an Israeli passport in April 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and used his 
Israeli passport to travel to Israel in April 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Guideline B, foreign 
influence, security concerns are alleged because Applicant’s daughter is an Israeli 
resident (SOR ¶ 2.a); Applicant’s sister, brother-in-law, and cousin are Israeli resident 
citizens (SOR ¶ 2.b; Applicant maintains friendships with Israeli resident citizens, 
                                                 
4 
For example, the CRS Issue Brief for Congress regarding Israel and its Background and Relations with 
the United States, has been updated several times since the October 26, 2005 report relied on by the 
Government. The CRS issued publications on July 6, 2007, February 26, 2008, September 8, 2008, 
February 14, 2011, November 7, 2012, June 12, 2013, July 22, 2014, and July 31, 2014. The State 
Department Travel Warning that was in effect as of Applicant’s hearing was recently replaced by a travel 
warning issued on December 16, 2015. The Government submitted the updated travel warning for my 
review. 
 
 5 
including two very close friends with whom he has contact (SOR ¶ 2.c); and Applicant’s 
son is a dual citizen of Israel and the United States, who resides in Israel (SOR ¶ 2.d). 
 
When he answered the SOR, Applicant admitted that he had renewed and used 
his Israeli passport as alleged. Israel requires its citizens, even those who hold dual 
citizenship, to enter Israel on an Israeli passport. However, he did not know when he 
renewed his Israeli passport that it could impact his future eligibility for a security 
clearance. On commencing his employment with a U.S. defense contractor, he 
relinquished his Israeli passport to the Israeli Consulate. Applicant also admitted the 
Guideline B allegations, but he denied that he had divided loyalties or foreign financial 
interests. A longtime resident of the United States and citizen since 1985, Applicant 
indicated that he had no control over the decision of his adult daughter to move to Israel 
ten years ago. As for his contact with family and friends in Israel, “[t]hey are simply the 
result of having immigrated to the United States and making the effort to stay in touch 
with family and friends.” 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to his renewal and use of his Israeli passport in April 
2012, to the Israeli residency of his daughter and son, and to the Israeli citizenship and 
residency of other family members and friends, are incorporated as findings of fact. 
After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 64-year-old electrical engineer with an M.B.A degree. He has 
worked for several defense contractors over the years. (AE B.) There is no evidence 
that he has ever held a DOD security clearance, but he was vetted and apparently 
approved to work on some sensitive equipment in his previous job. (Tr. 100.) Applicant 
began working for his current employer in June 2013. He requires a DOD security 
clearance for his present job. (GEs 1, 2; AE C.) 
 
Applicant was born in Israel. His parents and his sister immigrated to Israel from 
their native Romania in 1946. Applicant’s father, who owned a business, died in 1971. 
Applicant was around 20 years old and performing compulsory military service in Israel 
at the time of his father’s death. Applicant’s mother passed away in 2008 in Israel. 
Applicant’s sister, now age 82, is a longtime resident citizen of Israel, who worked as a 
secretary for an Israeli company until she retired around 1994. (GEs 1, 2.) 
 
In May 1969, Applicant graduated from a technical high school in Israel. He 
served as a private in the infantry for the Israeli Defense Force between January 1970 
and January 1973. From September 1974 to May 1976, he earned the equivalent of an 
associate degree in electrical engineering. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 36-38.) He then worked as an 
electrical technician in Israel for a commercial company in Israel. (Tr. 39.) 
 
In November 1976, Applicant married a native citizen of Israel. (GE 1; Tr. 41-42.) 
Applicant and his spouse came to the United States in June 1978 with the support of 
 
 6 
her sister, who was a citizen and resident of the United States. Applicant voted in Israeli 
government elections when he was residing in Israel. He has not voted in any Israeli 
election since moving to the United States in 1978. (GE 1.) 
 
From September 1979 to June 1982, Applicant pursued his bachelor’s degree in 
electrical engineering at a public university in the United States. He and his spouse had 
their first child, a daughter, in November 1979. Shortly after the birth in March 1982 of 
another daughter, Applicant and his spouse bought their current residence in the United 
States. In April 1988, they had a son. Their three children are dual citizens of the United 
States and Israel. They acquired Israeli citizenship derivatively from their mother’s 
Israeli citizenship. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 67.) 
 
In October 1984, Applicant and his spouse became naturalized U.S. citizens. 
They took no action to renounce their Israeli citizenship, and they held both U.S. and 
Israeli passports, renewing them when they expired. Applicant used his U.S. passport 
for foreign travel except on trips to Israel, when he entered the country on his Israeli 
passport as required of Israeli citizens under Israeli law. Applicant traveled to Israel to 
visit his mother every year or two until her death in 2008. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 42.) 
 
In July 2005, Applicant’s elder daughter married an Israeli citizen, who had 
moved to the United States in 2003. He has U.S. permanent residency and works as an 
assistant store manager for a supermarket in the United States. They have two sons. In 
2006, Applicant’s younger daughter moved to Israel. As of August 2013, she was 
employed by a nonprofit organization in Israel. (GEs 1, 2.) 
 
Applicant traveled on business to Turkey for his previous employer from 
December 2006 to January 2007. He spent approximately one week in Israel during that 
trip to visit his mother. Applicant went to Israel on business in January 2008 and again 
in March 2008, as a technical representative for his employer to the Israeli Air Force. 
Applicant spent another week in Israel in May 2008 when his mother died. Applicant 
returned to Israel for two to three weeks in June 2010 and in April 2012 to visit family 
members (his younger daughter, his sister, and his wife’s brother). Applicant also visited 
an Israeli couple with whom he and his spouse have had a close friendship for almost 
40 years. In April 2012, Applicant renewed his Israeli passport for another ten years, to 
comply with Israeli law that requires Israeli citizens to enter the country on an Israeli 
passport, and he used his Israeli passport to enter and exit Israel. Applicant and his 
spouse vacationed with their three children in Italy before going on to Israel, and he 
used his U.S. passport in Italy. (GEs 1, 2.) 
 
In January 2013, Applicant separated from his employment of almost 14 years, 
reportedly due to a conflict with his manager over the direction of their work. Applicant 
was unemployed until he began working for his current employer in early June 2013. On 
July 23, 2013, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (QNSP) incorporated within an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for a security clearance needed for his position. 
Applicant disclosed his and his spouse’s dual citizenship with Israel and the United 
 
 7 
States; his possession of a U.S. passport valid to October 2015 and of an Israeli 
passport to April 2022; his former military service for Israeli; his voting in Israeli 
elections until 1978; and his foreign travel. Applicant reported only the U.S. citizenship 
status for his three children, but he disclosed that his younger daughter was living in 
Israel. Applicant disclosed the Israeli citizenship and residency of his sister, with whom 
he had occasional correspondence by email and telephone, and added that she had 
worked for an Israeli company until her retirement in 1994. (GE 1.)  
 
Applicant responded affirmatively on his QNSP to whether he had any close 
and/or continuing contact with a foreign national within the last seven years with whom 
he or his spouse are bound by affection, influence, common interests, or obligation. He 
explained that he has telephone, email, and in-person contact in the United States and 
Israel with his wife’s brother and with an Israeli couple, whom he has known since 1975. 
Applicant became acquainted with the couple through his wife and developed a close 
friendship with the husband over the years.5 The husband had owned a business in 
Israel before he retired while the wife still works as a nurse at an Israeli hospital. 
Applicant added that he has several other friends in Israel with whom he is in contact 
once every couple of years, but he did not name them. Applicant also answered “Yes” 
to an inquiry concerning any foreign financial interests. He disclosed that he was in the 
process of settling his mother’s estate, which he valued at $0 reportedly on the advice 
of his employer’s facility security officer. Applicant was unable to assign a value to the 
property because it could take several years to settle his mother’s estate due to a 
conflict between rabbinical and civil law in Israel. His mother died without a will. Judaic 
rabbinical law, which would pass the property to him, conflicts with Israeli civil law, in 
which his sister has inheritance rights. The issue would have to be settled in court. 
Applicant listed in response to foreign travel inquiries his multiple trips to Israel within 
the last seven years. (GE 1.) 
 
During the security clearance application process, Applicant’s employer advised 
him that he may have to relinquish his Israeli passport. (Tr. 101-102.) Applicant 
contacted the Israeli consulate, and was told that he could surrender his Israeli passport 
without relinquishing his Israeli citizenship. (Tr. 102.) On August 5, 2013, Applicant’s 
employer verified for the Israeli consulate that Applicant had been employed by the 
defense contractor since June 3, 2013; that he requires a DOD industrial security 
clearance for his work as an advanced engineer; and that DOD adjudicative guidelines 
require that Applicant provide proof of his surrender of his non-U.S. passport. (AE C.) 
On August 6, 2013, Applicant relinquished his Israeli passport to the Israeli consulate 
for the stated purpose of receiving a U.S. DOD industrial security clearance. The 
consulate issued a letter to the effect that Applicant’s Israel passport had been 
cancelled for the purpose of receiving a DOD clearance. (AE A.) Applicant was advised 
that a copy of the letter would be provided to the Israeli government. (Tr. 50.) According 
to Applicant, the Israeli consulate would not have cancelled the passport of an Israeli 
citizen for any purpose other than the expressed need for a DOD clearance. (Tr. 49.) 
Applicant took no steps to renounce his Israeli citizenship because he was told by the 
Israeli consulate that he did not need to do so to surrender his Israeli passport. (Tr. 45.) 
                                                 
5 
Applicant explained at his hearing that their spouses attended nursing school together in Israel. (Tr. 71.)  
 
 8 
On August 28, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). He acknowledged that he has family and 
friends who reside in Israel and that he returns to Israel to visit them. He indicated that 
he maintained his dual citizenship with Israel because it allowed him to hold an Israeli 
passport affording easier entry into Israel. However, in consideration of his employment 
with a DOD contractor, Applicant had surrendered his passport to the Israeli consulate. 
He provided the letter from the Israeli consulate confirming the surrender. Applicant 
expressed willingness to renounce his Israeli citizenship if the needs of his clearance 
demanded it. Applicant professed allegiance to the United States while acknowledging a 
cultural affinity to Israel because of his birth there and because he has family and 
friends who reside there. Applicant provided details about the employments of these 
foreign citizens and the extent of his contacts with them. Applicant described his contact 
with his sister, who is married to a retired bus driver, as monthly via Skype or telephone. 
Applicant explained that his children are considered to be Israeli citizens by virtue of his 
and his spouse’s heritage. His older daughter works as a psychologist in the United 
States while his younger daughter moved to Israel in 2006 and works in an 
administrative capacity for a non-profit organization. Applicant reported bi-weekly 
contact by telephone or Skype with his daughter in Israel. Applicant explained that his 
son was employed as a mechanical engineer with a chemical company in the United 
States. (GE 2.) His son has a bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering and a master’s 
degree in “green energy” from universities in the United States. (Tr. 61-62.) 
 
Applicant’s indicated that he had weekly telephone contact with his spouse’s 
brother, who retired from a managerial position with an Israeli telephone company. 
Applicant had monthly contact with his close friend in Israel, who had a scrap metal 
salvaging business before he retired. As for any other foreign friends, Applicant 
explained that he was in contact by email or telephone once a year or less with two old 
friends from high school. One friend works as a bank clerk while the other friend is a 
retired mechanic. Applicant volunteered that he visits a female cousin and her husband 
in Israel every couple of years. His cousin works as a physical education instructor and 
her spouse is a zoologist at a university. Applicant denied any vulnerability to foreign 
influence because of his foreign family members and friends. None had any connection 
with the Israeli government or had more than a general knowledge of Applicant’s current 
employment with a defense contractor. (GE 2.)  
 
As for his listed foreign financial interest, Applicant explained that his mother had 
no assets but her apartment, and neither he nor his sister holds clear title to the 
property. Applicant’s younger daughter resides in the property pending a legal 
resolution of ownership. (Tr. 55.) Applicant speculated that the property will eventually 
be sold and the proceeds split between him and his sister. He did not anticipate the 
matter being settled before he retires. Concerning his business travel to Israel in 
January 2008 and March 2008 for his previous employer, Applicant elaborated that he 
went to several military bases in Israel in support of a contract his employer had with the 
Israeli Air Force. He was unable to provide any specifics regarding the Israeli personnel 
with whom he dealt. He had no contact with them after he completed his work. (GE 2.) 
 
 
 9 
Applicant’s son moved to Israel in late 2014 and is currently performing his 
compulsory military service for Israel. (Tr. 60, 69.) In July 2015, Applicant and his 
spouse vacationed in Europe with their three children, including their son, before 
traveling on with their older daughter and her family to Israel to visit other family and 
friends. They visited Applicant’s sister, Applicant’s spouse’s brother, and the married 
couple with whom they have shared a close friendship for some 40 years. (Tr. 69, 72.) 
Applicant understood from the Israeli consulate that he would have to present the letter 
noting his surrender of his Israeli passport at the Israeli border. (Tr. 43-44, 48.) 
Applicant was informed at the border that the surrender of his passport for a DOD 
clearance was already documented in Israel’s computer records. (Tr. 48-50.)  
 
As an executive secretary for a nonprofit in Israel, Applicant’s younger daughter 
helps individuals find employment. (Tr. 63, 93.) She rented her own apartment before 
she moved into her grandmother’s apartment after her grandmother died. (Tr. 65.) She 
pays the property taxes on the apartment. (Tr. 55, 57.) As of August 2015, neither 
Applicant nor his sister had started pursuing a legal resolution to ownership of the 
property. (Tr. 58.) Applicant has had weekly or bi-weekly contact with his son since his 
son moved to Israel. (Tr. 62.) Applicant’s son did not explain to Applicant why he 
decided to move to Israel or how long he plans to stay. (Tr. 85.) 
 
Applicant’s sister and her husband receive a benefit comparable to U.S. social 
security from the Israeli government. (Tr. 51.) Applicant’s sister has three adult children. 
Applicant did not see his sister’s son or two daughters during his trip to Israel in July 
2015. (Tr. 53.) Applicant’s relatives in Israel know the name of his employer and that he 
works with systems, but he had not discussed the specifics of his work with them. (Tr. 
93-94, 107.)  
 
Applicant’s older daughter spent six months at a university in Israel on an 
exchange program when she was in college. Her spouse has yet to acquire his U.S. 
citizenship. (Tr. 66.) The couple’s two sons are considered Israeli citizens by Israel. (Tr. 
67.) 
 
Applicant’s spouse is a self-employed rental property manager for properties 
owned by her sister. (GE 2; Tr. 106.) Applicant estimates that they net $5,000 in 
monthly income. Applicant and his spouse own their home outright. (GE 2.) 
 
After reviewing the documents submitted by the Government for administrative 
notice, AE D, and Hearing Exhibit 2, I note the following facts with respect to Israel: 
 
Israel is a vibrant parliamentary democracy with a modern economy. Despite the 
instability and armed conflict that have marked Israel’s relations within the region since 
it came into existence, Israel has developed a robust, diversified, and technologically 
advanced market economy focused on high-technology electronic and biomedical 
equipment, chemicals, and transport equipment. Israel occupied the West Bank, Gaza 
Strip, Golan Heights, and East Jerusalem as a result of the 1967 war. In 1994, the 
Palestinian Authority was established in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, although the 
 
 10 
Islamic Resistance Movement (HAMAS), a U.S. designated foreign terrorist 
organization (FTO), took control of the Gaza Strip in June 2007. The U.S. State 
Department advises U.S. citizens to take due precautions when traveling to Israel and 
the West Bank, and strongly warns against travel to the Gaza Strip. While there is no 
indication that U.S. citizens, including tourists, students, residents, and U.S. government 
personnel, have been specifically targeted based on their nationality, more than 12 U.S. 
citizens were among those killed and injured in multiple attacks in 2014 and 2015. Since 
October 2015, attacks on individuals and groups have increased in frequency in various 
places in Israel, including Jerusalem, the West Bank, and Tel Aviv. 
 
All persons applying for entry to Israel, the West Bank, or Gaza are subject to 
security and police record checks by the Israeli government and may be denied entry or 
exit without explanation. The Israeli government considers U.S. citizens who also hold 
Israeli citizenship or have a claim to dual nationality to be Israeli citizens for immigration 
and other legal purposes. Children born in the United States to Israeli parents usually 
acquire both U.S. and Israeli nationality at birth. According to the U.S. State 
Department, Israeli citizens, including dual nationals, must enter and depart Israel on 
their Israeli passport. U.S. citizen visitors have been subjected to questioning and 
thorough searches by Israeli authorities on entry or departure. Israeli authorities have 
denied access of some U.S. citizens to U.S. consular officers, lawyers, and family 
members during temporary detention. Some travelers have had their laptop computers 
and other electronic equipment searched at the airport, with some equipment retained 
for lengthy periods and reportedly damaged, lost, destroyed, or never returned. On 
occasion, Israeli security officials have requested access to travelers’ personal email 
accounts or other social media accounts as a condition of entry. 
 
The relationship between Israel and the United States is friendly and yet 
complex. Since 1948, the United States and Israel have a close friendship based on 
common democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests. In 1985, Israel 
and the United States concluded a Free Trade Agreement designed to strengthen 
economic ties by eliminating tariffs. The United States is Israel’s largest single trading 
partner. Other than Afghanistan, Israel is the leading recipient of U.S. foreign aid and is 
a frequent purchaser of major U.S. weapons systems. 
 
Israel and the United States do not have a mutual defense agreement, although 
the United States remains committed to Israel’s security and well-being, predicated on 
Israel maintaining a “qualitative military edge” over other countries in its region. Strong 
U.S. congressional support for Israel resulted in the country being designated as a 
“major non-NATO ally” in 1989 and receiving preferential treatment in bidding for U.S. 
defense contracts and access to expanded weapons systems at lower prices. With the 
phase out of economic aid to Israel in 2007, U.S. bilateral aid to Israel is the form of 
foreign military financing, currently at $3.1 billion a year until fiscal year 2018. In 
December 2014, Congress passed the United States Israel Strategic Partnership Act of 
2013, which provides additional support for defense and energy, and expands 
cooperation in business and academics. Several large American corporations already 
have major research and development centers in Israel. Israel and the United States 
 
 11 
have concluded numerous treaties and agreements aimed at strengthening military ties, 
including agreements on mutual defense assistance, procurement, and security of 
information. Israel and the United States have established joint groups to further military 
cooperation. The two countries participate in joint military exercises, collaborate on 
military research and weapons development, and share intelligence. The United States 
has committed to deliver the first F-35 Joint Strike Fighter to Israel in 2016. 
 
Yet, the interests of the two countries are not always aligned. The United States 
has acted to restrict aid and/or rebuked Israel in the past for possible improper use of 
U.S.-supplied military equipment. Israeli-U.S. relations have been strained during Israeli 
Prime Minister Netanyahu’s second administration and the Obama administration, 
particularly over Israeli settlements in the West Bank. The United States is the principal 
international proponent of the Arab-Israeli peace process and views the growth of Israeli 
settlements as an impediment to the success of peace negotiations. Negotiations to end 
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are presently at an impasse. Israel perceives threats from 
Iran; Iranian-sponsored non-state actors, such as the Lebanese Shiite group Hezbollah; 
and violent jihadist terrorist groups in the region, such as the Islamic State. Israel’s 
concerns about a nuclear-weapons-capable Iran as an imminent threat to its security 
have led Israel to criticize the international agreement that lifted the sanctions on Iran. 
Demographic trends in Israel have led to the emergence of nationalistic and 
conservative elements, more hawkish on foreign policy and security. 
  
The United States has also expressed concern about Israel’s sales of sensitive 
security equipment and technology, especially to China; Israel’s inadequate protection 
of U.S. intellectual property; Israel’s suspected use of U.S.-made cluster bombs against 
civilian populated areas in Lebanon; and espionage-related cases implicating Israeli 
officials. Israeli military officials have been implicated in economic espionage activity in 
the United States. U.S. government employees (e.g., Jonathan Pollard in 1985, who 
acted as an agent for Israel) and U.S. government contractors have been implicated in 
providing classified and sensitive information to Israel. Israel was listed as one of the 
nations that aggressively targeted U.S. economic intelligence in 2000. Israel was not 
named specifically in the National Counterintelligence Executive’s (NCIX) Annual 
Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage—2005. In 
October 2005, a DOD analyst pleaded guilty to two counts of conspiracy related to his 
transfer of classified national defense information concerning Iran to an Israeli diplomat. 
In 2009, a scientist who once held U.S. government security clearances up to Top 
Secret pleaded guilty to attempted espionage for providing classified information to a 
person he believed to be an Israeli intelligence officer. In May 2010, a U.S. company 
was assessed a $76,000 civil penalty, in part for exporting an oscilloscope controlled for 
nuclear non-proliferation reasons to Israel through Canada without a license. The 
transfer by sale of U.S. defense articles or services to Israel and all other foreign 
countries is subject to the Arms Export Control Act and implementing regulations as well 
as the 1952 Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement between the United States and 
Israel. The Government presented no information of recent activities implicating Israel in 
industrial or economic espionage. 
  
 
 12 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government 
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
  
 
 13 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C—Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign preference is articulated 
in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
Applicant is a citizen of his native Israel from birth and of the United States by 
choice. Retention of foreign citizenship acquired from birth out of respect for one’s 
ethnic heritage, for example, is not disqualifying in the absence of an exercise of a right, 
privilege, or obligation of that citizenship. See AG ¶ 11(a), “dual citizenship is based 
solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” However, after Applicant 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in October 1984, he retained his Israeli passport and 
used it to travel to Israel every year or two to visit family and friends. In recent years, he 
went to Israel in early 2007 to see his mother; in January 2008 and March 2008 on 
business for his then employer; in May 2008 on his mother’s death; and in June 2010, 
April 2012, and July 2015 to visit family members and close friends. Before his trip in 
April 2012, he renewed his Israeli passport for another 10 years to comply with Israeli 
law requiring its citizens enter the country on an Israeli passport. He used his Israeli 
passport to enter and exit Israel on that trip. While Applicant used his U.S. passport for 
his foreign travel to other countries, his renewal, use, and possession of an active Israeli 
passport after his naturalization in the United States raises significant issues of foreign 
preference under AG ¶ 10(a): 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
AG ¶ 10(b),”action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American 
citizen,” is implicated only in that Applicant’s renewal of his Israeli passport at the Israeli 
consulate in April 2012 was an action obtaining official recognition of his Israeli citizenship. 
  
The United States does not encourage dual nationality because of the competing 
obligations that could arise, but he is not required to renounce his foreign citizenship for 
security clearance eligibility. During his August 28, 2013 interview with the OPM 
investigator, Applicant indicated that he maintained his dual citizenship with Israel 
because it allowed him to hold an Israeli passport affording easier entry into Israel. At 
his hearing, he explained that it was required by foreign law and not simply a matter of 
convenience. Either way, AG ¶ 11(a) does not mitigate an intentional exercise of foreign 
citizenship or the risk of unverifiable travel raised by his renewal and use of his Israeli 
 
 14 
passport. Applicant’s renewals of his Israeli passport over the years show his 
willingness to comply with a requirement of his Israeli citizenship. 
 
During his subject interview, Applicant expressed his intent to renounce his 
Israeli citizenship if necessary for a security clearance. AG ¶ 11(b), “the individual has 
expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship,” is not applicable to a conditional 
willingness to renounce, especially when he has taken no steps to give up his Israeli 
citizenship. 
 
However, in consideration of his employment with a DOD contractor, Applicant 
had surrendered his passport to the Israeli consulate. During the security clearance 
application process, Applicant was informed by his employer that he may have to 
relinquish his Israeli passport. On verification from Applicant’s employer of his need for 
a DOD industrial security clearance for his work as an advanced engineer, the Israeli 
consulate cancelled Applicant’s Israeli passport on August 6, 2013. AG ¶ 11(e), “the 
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated,” applies. Applicant’s timely compliance with the DOD requirement 
to relinquish his Israeli passport is mitigating of the foreign preference concerns. 
 
Guideline B—Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant and his spouse are dual citizens of their native Israel and the United 
States, where they were naturalized in October 1984. Their children were born in the 
United States but are also considered Israeli citizens by the Israeli government. The 
younger of their daughters and their son are both currently living in Israel. Applicant’s 
sister and her husband, Applicant’s cousin, Applicant’s spouse’s brother, and a married 
couple with whom Applicant and his spouse have shared a close friendship for some 40 
years, are resident citizens of Israel. Applicant also maintains some contact, albeit 
infrequent, with two friends from high school, who are both Israeli resident citizens. AG 
¶ 7(a) is implicated if contacts create a heightened risk of foreign influence: 
 
 
 15 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The “heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. The nature and strength of 
the family ties or other foreign interests and the country involved (i.e., the nature of its 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record) are 
relevant in assessing whether there is a likelihood of vulnerability to government 
coercion. Applicant’s contention that there is no connection between human rights 
violations during wartime by Israel and his request for security clearance is not 
persuasive. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the 
foreign country has an authoritarian government; a family member is associated with, or 
dependent on, the foreign government; or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. In considering the nature of the foreign 
government, the administrative judge must take into account any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
Israel and the United States have long had a close friendship. The United States 
is committed to Israel’s security, to the extent of ensuring that Israel maintains a 
“qualitative military edge” in its region. Israel receives preferential treatment in bidding 
for U.S. contracts and substantial military aid from the United States. However, even 
friendly nations may have interests that are not completely aligned with the United 
States. As noted by the DOHA Appeal Board, “the United States has a compelling 
interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, 
organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of 
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.” See ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). Israel was 
among the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic intelligence as of 2000. There 
is no recent report showing direct involvement by the Israeli government targeting the 
United States. However, U.S. government employees and U.S. government contractors 
have been implicated in economic espionage activity in the United States to benefit 
Israel, including as recently as 2011. The United States remains concerned about Israeli 
settlements, Israel’s military sales to other countries such as China, and Israel’s 
inadequate protection of U.S. intellectual property. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s and his spouse’s family members or close 
friends in Israel have been targeted or pressured. Considering the nature of the Israeli 
government and society, it is unlikely that the Israeli government would attempt coercive 
means to obtain sensitive information. There is no evidence that Israel has used 
coercive methods. However, it does not eliminate the possibility that Israel would 
employ some non-coercive measures in an attempt to exploit a relative. Israel faces 
threats by jihadist groups, other terrorist organizations, and states in the region that are 
avowedly anti-Israel. Within Israel, many of those attacks are directed at, not only 
Jewish or Israeli interests, but American interests as well. However, a distinction must 
 
 16 
be made between the risk to physical security that may exist and the types of concern 
that rise to the level of compromising Applicant’s ability to safeguard national security. 
Israel does not condone the indiscriminate acts of violence against its citizens or tourists 
in Israel and strictly enforces security measures designed to combat and minimize the 
risk presented by terrorism. Also, there is no evidence that terrorists have approached 
or threatened Applicant’s and his spouse’s family members or their friends in Israel. 
 
Yet, there are several factors, which collectively if not also on their own, create 
the heightened risk addressed in AG ¶ 7(a). Applicant, his spouse, and the elder of their 
two daughters enjoy the protections of U.S. citizenship and residency. This daughter’s 
husband is an Israeli citizen with U.S. permanent residency. Although Applicant’s 
younger daughter and son have dual citizenship, they are actively exercising their Israeli 
citizenship over their U.S. citizenship. Applicant’s daughter has been a resident of Israel 
since 2006. She works for a nonprofit helping others find employment. She lives in, and 
pays the property taxes for, an apartment in which Applicant and his sister have an 
unsettled inheritance interest. Applicant’s son moved to Israel in 2014. His current 
military service for Israel heightens the risk of undue influence. Little is known about his 
son’s duties or his future plans. 
 
Applicant’s sister and her husband are retirees who receive a benefit akin to U.S. 
social security from the Israeli government. There is nothing about their previous 
occupations as a secretary and as a bus driver that heighten the security risk. Similarly, 
there is no indication that Applicant’s cousin’s present occupation as a physical 
education teacher or his brother-in-law’s previous occupation as a manager in a 
telephone company brought any undue attention from the Israeli government, 
intelligence services, or military. Likewise, Applicant’s close friend owned a scrap 
salvage business before he retired. His friend’s wife is a nurse. One of Applicant’s high 
school friends works for a bank. The other is a retired mechanic. To the extent that any 
risk of undue foreign influence remains from these family members and friends, it is 
because they reside in a country where there is a risk of them being random victims of a 
terrorist act. 
 
AG ¶ 7(b), “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, 
group, or country by providing that information,” and AG ¶ 7(d), “sharing living quarters 
with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” largely 
apply because of the close bonds that Applicant and his spouse share to their children 
in Israel. Applicant and his spouse understandably have regular contact with their adult 
children. They also have ongoing correspondence with his sister, her brother, and their 
close friends. They visit these family members and friends when they are in Israel, 
including as recently as July 2015. 
 
The Government has not alleged that Applicant has any substantial financial 
asset in Israel. He testified, with no evidence to the contrary, that he has an inheritance 
 
 17 
interest in his mother’s apartment in Israel, which currently serves as his daughter’s 
residence. He provided no value for the interest because the conflict between rabbinical 
law and civil law needs a legal resolution. Certainly, when compared with his U.S. 
assets, which include his employment income and home ownership, the property is 
unlikely to be a source of manipulation or inducement, even with his daughter living in 
the apartment. His daughter rented an apartment in Israel between 2006 and 2008, and 
there is no reason to indicate she would be unwilling to rent in the future if need be. AG 
¶ 7(e), “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation,” is not a consideration in this case. 
 
Concerning AG ¶ 7(i), “conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which 
may make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country,” there is no indication that Applicant has 
engaged in any untoward conduct during any of his trips to Israel. Yet, his previous 
business trips to Israel in 2008 took him to several Israeli air bases, and Israel is well 
aware that he needs a DOD security clearance for his current work as an advanced 
engineer for a defense contractor. The Government did not move to amend the SOR to 
note the apparent exception which allowed him to surrender his Israeli passport as an 
Israeli citizen, so it cannot provide a separate basis for disqualification. Even so, it 
cannot be ignored in assessing the risk of undue foreign influence in light of his strong 
bonds with Israeli resident citizens and the likelihood of future travel to Israel to visit 
them.6 
 
Concerning potential factors in mitigation, AG ¶ 8(a) provides as follows:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) is difficult to satisfy because of the closeness of Applicant’s foreign ties, 
especially to his daughter and son in Israel; his son’s current military service for Israel; 
Israel’s history of economic espionage directed at the United States; and the risk of 
terrorist activity in Israel that has led the U.S. State Department to caution travelers to 
the country.  
 
                                                 
6 
The DOHA Appeal Board has long held that the administrative judge may consider non-alleged conduct 
to assess an applicant’s credibility; to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or 
changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; to 
decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or to provide evidence 
for a whole-person analysis under Directive Section 6.3. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-07218 (App. Bd. 
Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 09-07219 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 27, 2012). 
 
 
 18 
Applicant has had limited contact with his two high school friends who are Israel 
resident citizens. However, AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is 
so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation,” cannot reasonably mitigate the risk of undue foreign influence 
because of the close parental, sibling, and friendship relations that exist to other Israeli 
residents with Israeli or dual Israeli-U.S. citizenship. The family bonds that Applicant has 
to his children, sister, brother-in-law, and, to a lesser extent his cousin, cannot be 
considered casual. The longevity of his and his spouse’s friendship with the Israeli 
couple belies any claim that their relationship is so casual as to be covered under AG ¶ 
8(c). 
 
Applicant asserts allegiance to the United States, where he has lived since 1978, 
pursued his career, and raised his children. He described his affinity to Israel as cultural, 
although his dual citizenship and his compliance with Israeli law regarding passport use 
by Israeli citizens take his case beyond that of an immigrant who is merely trying to stay 
in touch with family and friends. His active exercise of Israeli citizenship for so many 
years makes it difficult to conclude that he has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States that he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict in the United States interest, particularly in the case of any undue influence or 
pressure against his children in Israel. Applicant may have no control over the decisions 
of his adult son and daughter, who as of now have chosen to live as Israeli citizens. For 
Applicant’s son, it means fulfilling his military duty to Israel. Mitigating condition AG ¶ 
8(b) does not fully apply: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Applicant’s surrender of his foreign passport is consistent with his U.S. 
citizenship and DOD requirements. At the same time, concerns arise about what he 
would do if placed in the untenable position of having to choose between his family and 
friends in Israel and his security responsibilities. As stated by the DOHA Appeal Board 
in ISCR Case No. 08-10025 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009), “Application of the guidelines is 
not a comment on an applicant’s patriotism but merely an acknowledgment that people 
may act in unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a 
loved-one, such as a family member.” 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
 
 19 
AG ¶ 2(a).7 Furthermore, in weighing these whole-person factors in a foreign influence 
case, the Appeal Board has held that: 
 
Evidence of good character and personal integrity is relevant and material 
under the whole person concept. However, a finding that an applicant 
possesses good character and integrity does not preclude the government 
from considering whether the applicant's facts and circumstances still 
pose a security risk. Stated otherwise, the government need not prove that 
an applicant is a bad person before it can deny or revoke access to 
classified information. Even good people can pose a security risk because 
of facts and circumstances not under their control. See ISCR Case No. 
01-26893 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002). 
 
There is no indication that any of Applicant’s family members or friends have 
acted for Israel to the detriment of the United States. That does not end the inquiry, 
however. Due to persistent Guideline B concerns, I am unable find it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a(1): For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a(2): For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:  Against Applicant 
  
                                                 
7
 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 
 20 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
