 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-02599 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and J (criminal conduct), but failed to mitigate security concerns 
under Guideline G (alcohol consumption). 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 30, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On March 18, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines G, H, and J. The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be continued. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 13, 2015. He elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated August 28, 2015, was 
provided to him by letter dated September 2, 2015. Applicant received the FORM 
on September 11, 2015. He was given 30 days to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit any 
additional information. The case was assigned to me on November 12, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the 
record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old refueler employed by a defense contractor since 
November 2012. He seeks a security clearance. Applicant held a security 
clearance while he was in the U.S. Navy, discussed infra. (Item 2) 
 
Applicant was awarded his high school diploma in July 2005. At the time he 
completed his SF-86, he had been attending a community college since March 
2010. (Item 2) Applicant served in the Navy from September 2007 to October 
2012, and received a general under honorable conditions discharge as a result of 
alcohol rehabilitation failure. At the time of his discharge, he was an engineman 
third class (pay grade E-4) (Items 2, 3) He married in May 2009, and has a five-
year-old son.1  
 
Alcohol Consumption/Drug Involvement/Criminal Conduct2 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges a history of two pre-service drug-related incidents, 
one in-service misconduct incident, and five in-service alcohol-related incidents or 
events. 
                                                          
1
Unless otherwise indicated, background information was derived from Applicant’s SF-86. 
(Item 2) 
   
2
Applicant’s alcohol, drug, and criminal conduct incidents are discussed in chronological 
order versus the order discussed in his SOR. 
 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In October 1999, while still in high school, Applicant was involved in a 
verbal confrontation at a nightclub with his then girlfriend. His girlfriend left the 
nightclub and drove off in Applicant’s car without his permission. Applicant chased 
her to a gas station and when he caught up with her, their verbal confrontation 
continued. The police were summoned and they searched Applicant’s vehicle. 
They discovered a pipe containing marijuana. Applicant was charged with 
misdemeanor possession of a controlled substance and drug paraphernalia. The 
charges were dismissed “because the officers illegally searched [my] vehicle.”3 
(SOR ¶ 2.b; SOR answer; Items 2, 3) 
 
The SOR alleges that in September 2006, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with possession of marijuana and possession of controlled substance 
paraphernalia. He purportedly pled nolo contendere and paid $190 in fines and 
fees. There are no primary source documents that substantiate this allegation in 
the FORM. See fn 4, infra. (SOR ¶ 2.a; SOR answer; Items 3, 4)4 
 
In July 2008, Applicant was involved in an altercation with a shipmate who 
blocked his view while he was watching television in the ship’s galley. When his 
shipmate continued to block his view, words were exchanged and Applicant 
“flicked” his shipmate’s nametag and the shipmate “smacked” him. Applicant was 
awarded non-judicial punishment. He was found guilty of simple assault and 
received 30 days restriction and 30 days extra duty. (SOR ¶ 3.b; SOR answer; 
Items 2, 3) 
 
In 2010, Applicant was involved in an alcohol-related verbal altercation with 
another crew member witnessed by a senior officer at a bar during an overseas 
port call. As a result of the altercation, Applicant was referred to a one-week class 
at Navy Substance Abuse Rehabilitation Program (NSARP). (SOR ¶ 1.e; SOR 
answer; Item 3) 
 
In May 2012, after a day of overexposure to the sun and heavy drinking 
during an overseas port call, Applicant became severely sunburned and when he 
                                                          
3
The FORM does not contain any information whether Applicant received a drug waiver 
before entering the Navy or whether his previous drug involvement was vetted at the time he 
received his security clearance in the Navy. 
  
4
This SOR allegation conflicts with Applicant’s March 1, 2013 Office of Personnel 
Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI) and follow-up May 10, 2013 OPM PSI. In his 
May 2013 OPM PSI, Applicant asserted that he was not charged with possession of marijuana or 
a controlled substance in 2006. He stated he was charged with a similar offense in 1999, which 
was his only drug-related charge. He corroborated this version in his DOHA interrogatories. There 
is no FBI “rap sheet” in the FORM to substantiate this SOR allegation, but there is a rap sheet that 
substantiates the 1999 arrest. (Items 3, 4) 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
returned to his ship, he was in severe pain. The ship’s corpsman suspected that 
he may have been drugged. An investigation ensued, but Applicant does not 
know the outcome of the investigation. As a result of the incident, Applicant 
received documented counseling regarding his alcohol consumption. (SOR ¶ 1.a; 
SOR answer; Item 3) 
 
In June 2012, after a day of drinking during an overseas port call, Applicant 
was involved in a physical altercation while re-boarding his ship. He was awarded 
non-judicial punishment. He was found guilty of drunk and disorderly conduct and 
simple assault. He was reduced from pay grade E-5 to E-4, given 45 days 
restriction, 45 days extra duty, and ordered to attend NSARP. Applicant 
completed all of the program requirements. (SOR ¶ 1.b; SOR answer; Item 3) 
 
In September 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged off-base with 
driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). He had gone to a Japanese 
restaurant to pick up take-out dinner and while waiting consumed two Long Island 
ice tea drinks. Applicant was unable to start his car when he left the restaurant 
and was approached by a police officer and questioned. The officer concluded 
that Applicant had been drinking and ordered him to participate in a field sobriety 
test. When Applicant refused, he was arrested for DUI. In October 2012, he was 
convicted of DUI and sentenced to 12 months confinement, which was 
suspended, unsupervised probation for two years, a $500 fine, and his driver’s 
license was suspended for 12 months. He was also ordered to participate in a ten-
week alcohol safety action program once a week from November 2012 to 
February 2013. (SOR ¶ 1.c; SOR answer; Item 3) 
 
In October 2012, Applicant was discharged from the Navy with a general 
under honorable conditions discharge as a result of alcohol rehabilitation failure. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d; SOR answer; Item 3) 
 
During Applicant’s March 2013 OPM PSI, Applicant stated since separating 
from the Navy, he has consumed a half of a bottle of wine or three beers at home 
on weekends. His future intent is to maintain or decrease his alcohol consumption 
because alcohol makes him tired. He claimed that he does not drink to the point of 
intoxication and does not believe that he has a problem with alcohol. Applicant 
acknowledged that his alcohol consumption has had a negative impact on his 
military career, but claims it does not affect his personal life. (SOR ¶ 1.f; SOR 
answer; Item 3) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Although Applicant did not submit any reference letters, his OPM PSI 
states that he went on three deployments in 2008, 2010, and 2012. According to 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
his DD-214, he was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal, the 
Navy Good Conduct Medal, the National Defense Service Medal, the Global War 
on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, 
and two Sea Service Deployment Ribbons. (Items 2, 3) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national 
security emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of 
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have 
access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has authorized the 
Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting 
the criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole 
person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons 
with access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty 
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 
12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or 
implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, 
conditions in the personal or professional history of the applicant that may 
disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified information. The 
Government has the burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 
1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue her security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
  AG ¶ 21 articulates the security concern relating to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of 
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
AG ¶ 22 provides three alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, AG ¶ 22(a) “alcohol-
related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence . . . ”; 
AG ¶ 22(c) “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser 
or alcohol dependent”; and AG ¶ 22(f) “relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or 
dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program.” 
 
The Government established AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(c), and 22(f) as a result of 
Applicant’s September 2012 DUI, his repeated alcohol-related incidents while in 
the Navy requiring command involvement, and his general under honorable 
conditions discharge in October 2012 as a result of alcohol rehabilitation failure.  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  Four alcohol consumption mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 (c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a 
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous 
treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program. 
 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find none of the 
mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant has a history of documented alcohol-
related incidents that began in 2010 during an overseas port call. Alcohol played a 
significant role in the demise of Applicant’s Navy career in 2012. His command 
counseled him following overseas port call drinking episodes, he was reduced 
from pay grade E-5 to E-4 at non-judicial punishment in June 2012 as a result of 
alcohol-related misconduct, he was convicted of an off-base DUI in October 2012, 
and he was discharged from the Navy as an alcohol rehabilitation failure in 
October 2012.  
 
In addition to whatever informal counseling and non-judicial punishment 
Applicant received, the Navy required him to attend NSARP in 2010 and 2012. 
After he was discharged from the Navy, he was required to attend a ten-week 
alcohol safety action program by the local authorities as a result of his September 
2012 off-base DUI. However, despite the adverse effects alcohol has had on 
Applicant, he continues to believe that he does not have a problem with alcohol.                                      
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 provides one drug involvement disqualifying condition that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug 
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture purchase, sale, or 
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.”5 The Government established 
AG ¶ 22(c) as a result of Applicant’s October 1999 drug-related arrest. For 
reasons discussed, supra, there is insufficient corroborating evidence to establish 
Applicant’s purported 2006 drug-related arrest. 
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such 
as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; 
  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
                                                          
5
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and 
other similar substances. 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged 
illness during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has 
since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional. 
  
Applicant’s 1999 drug-related arrest occurred when he was 18 years old, 
while he was in high school, and was pre-service. The charges against him were 
dismissed. As noted, I find the 2006 drug-related arrest to be unsubstantiated. 
With the 2006 arrest unsubstantiated, that leaves a one-time 1999 arrest – an 
arrest that occurred 17 years ago and the charges were dismissed. Apart from 
Applicant’s 1999 drug-related arrest, there is no evidence that Applicant had any 
further involvement with drugs. Full application of AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 26(b) (3) is 
warranted. 
   
Criminal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 30 articulates the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a 
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations. 
 
  Alcohol consumption concerns under SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b as well as drug 
involvement concerns under SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b were cross-alleged under this 
concern.  
 
AG ¶ 31 provides two criminal conduct disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, AG ¶ 31(a) “a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses”; and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.”  
 
The Government established AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) as a result of 
Applicant’s June 2012 non-judicial punishment for being drunk and disorderly and 
simple assault. (SOR ¶ 1.b) However, the evidence contained in the FORM 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
regarding Applicant’s May 2012 alcohol consumption during an overseas port visit 
does not substantiate criminal conduct as envisioned by the Directive. (SOR ¶ 
1.a)  
 
The evidence that supports Applicant’s eight-year-old July 2008 non-
judicial punishment describes an incident between two shipmates that began by 
one shipmate blocking the view of another shipmate trying to watch television and 
resulting in a minor altercation. (SOR ¶ 3.b) This incident led to Applicant being 
found guilty of simple assault at non-judicial punishment.6 
 
As noted supra, I found the September 2006 drug-related charge to be 
unsubstantiated based on lack of FORM evidence. The October 1999 drug-
related pre-service arrest resulted in charges being dismissed and occurred when 
Applicant was 18 years old, in high school, and some 17 years ago.  (SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
and 2) 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions for potentially applicable criminal conduct 
mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
The comments discussed in the alcohol consumption and drug involvement 
analysis section above are applicable. For reasons discussed supra, AG ¶¶ 32(a) 
and 32(d) are fully applicable.  
 
                                                          
6
Non-judicial punishment, authorized under Article 15, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), designed to dispose of minor offenses, is administrative in nature, and does not result in 
a federal conviction. See Article 15, UCMJ, Commanding Officer’s Non-judicial Punishment; and 
Section 0109, Advice to Accused Prior to Initiation of Article 15, UCMJ, Proceedings, Navy Manual 
of the Judge Advocate General, JAGINST 5800.7F. 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge 
should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). My 
comments in the Analysis section are incorporated in the whole-person 
discussion. 
A security clearance adjudication is aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. I considered the potentially disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding 
this case. Applicant receives credit for his five years of military service and his 
three years of employment as a defense contractor. Applicant provided no 
evidence corroborating rehabilitation. If other favorable evidence exists, Applicant 
did not provide it.  
 
The gravamen of this case centers on Applicant’s alcohol-related issues. It 
is clear from the record that alcohol was involved in the majority of problems 
Applicant experienced in the Navy leading to the early termination of his 
enlistment. This occurred after considerable command counseling, two referrals to 
NSARP, and an alcohol-related non-judicial punishment. After all of these events, 
Applicant was arrested for an off-base DUI. In spite of this history, Applicant does 
not believe he has a problem with alcohol and continues to drink. Applicant is a 
relative newlywed and the father of a young child. He appears to be a talented 
individual with considerable potential, who had at one time held the rank of 
engineman second class. He has yet to come to terms with the adverse impact 
alcohol has had on him. 
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Lastly, in requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to 
rely on the written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient 
information or evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding his circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the security 
concerns. By failing to provide such information, security concerns remain.  
   
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors 
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the 
adjudicative process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
adjudicative guidelines. Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the 
Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
     Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f: Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT 
     Subparagraph 2.a – 2.b: For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT 
     Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.c: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
