 
  1
           
             
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
                        
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 14-05115 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on November 1, 
2013. On December 13, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR and answered it on January 13, 2015, requesting a 
decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on April 24, 2015, and a complete copy of the file of relevant 
 
  2
material (FORM,) which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7, was sent to 
Applicant on May 8, 2015. He was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the 
FORM on May 13, 2015, and did not respond.1 The case was assigned to me on March 
3, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges two delinquent debts:  A charged-off account for a voluntary 
vehicle repossession for $22,463 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and a collection account for a cellular 
company for $936 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant admits that the account in SOR ¶ 1.a was his 
account and that it was charged off, but denies that he owes any balance. He denies 
the account in SOR ¶ 1.b, stating that it was opened in his name by his ex-wife while he 
was deployed and that he has disputed it. The 2013 credit bureau report (CBR) (GX 5) 
shows that the debt was disputed. The debt does not appear on the 2014 and 2015 
CBRs. (GX 6; GX 7.) Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
The account referenced in SOR ¶ 1.a is reflected in Applicant’s 2013, 2014, and 
2015 credit bureau reports (CBR) (GX 5; GX 6; GX 7.) The account referenced in SOR 
¶ 1.b is reflected on Applicant’s 2013 CBR. (GX 7.) Applicant explained the vehicle loan 
on his e-QIP (GX 3) and in his responses to interrogatories. (GX 4.)  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old networker administrator employed by a defense 
contractor since February 2013. He served honorably on active duty in the U.S. Army 
from August 1998 until August 2006, to include four deployments. He held a security 
clearance during part of his enlistment. He attended community college from January 
2010 until he graduated with an associate’s degree in May 2013. Applicant and his 
current wife married in October 2008, and she brought her son, now 13, and daughter, 
now 12, into their family. They also have a ten-year-old son and a three-year-old son. 
(GX 3.) 
 
 In about March 2006, Applicant acquired a vehicle loan for approximately 
$22,463, and made monthly payments of $516 until about October 2008. (GX 4; GX 7.) 
From August 2006 until mid-2008, Applicant worked full time for a company that sold 
products used in residential construction.  At the downturn of the housing market in 
2008, his work hours were decreased to part time, drastically reducing his income. As a 
result of this loss of income, he was concerned that he would default on his vehicle 
loan. While still current on his payments, he preemptively contacted the loan creditor, 
which agreed to accept the voluntary surrender of the vehicle. (GX 2; GX 3.) It was 
Applicant’s understanding that the creditor would sell the vehicle at auction for the 
approximate loan balance, about $10,000, apply the resale amount to the loan, and 
close the account. (GX 2; GX 4.) There is no record evidence of a deficiency balance or 
                                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated May 8, 2015, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated May 13, 2015. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 
days after receiving it to submit information.  The DOHA transmittal letter and receipt are marked as 
Administrative Exhibit 1. 
 
  3
that the original or a subsequent creditor attempted to collect any payments from 
Applicant following the resale of the vehicle.  
 
 The 2013 CBR (GX 5) lists the original loan amount of the vehicle loan (SOR ¶ 
1.a) as charged off in December 2008 with $0 balance and a $0 past-due amount. The 
status of “charged off” indicates that the vehicle-loan account is no longer included in 
the lender’s accounts receivable. The 2014 CBR (GX 6) lists the same information and 
a date of last activity as October 2008. The 2015 CBR shows a $0 balance and $0 past 
due, but also shows a scheduled payment of $516 and an actual payment of $9,850. 
Applicant made about 31 payments that total approximately $15,996. In 2012, Applicant 
sought financing from a lender for the purchase of a house. He states that the lender 
confirmed that Applicant did not owe a balance on the vehicle loan. (GX 2; GX 4.) His 
2015 CBR also shows that he is current on all his ongoing financial obligations. (GX 7.) 
    
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
  4
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBRs, e-QIP, and interrogatory 
responses establish two potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 
19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
 
  5
meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline 
are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is established. Applicant experienced a loss of income in 2008 under 
unusual circumstances and his resulting inability to satisfy his financial obligations is 
unlikely to recur. His behavior in 2008 does not cast doubt on his “current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
  
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant experienced a downturn in employment that 
resulted in his inability to afford his vehicle-loan payments. He acted responsibly by 
contacting the creditor and returning the vehicle. He also successfully disputed the debt 
alleged in SOR 1.b. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is established. Applicant has not received financial counseling; 
however, he has resolved his debts and is current on all his ongoing financial 
obligations. There is a “clear indication” that his financial problems are under control.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant acted in good faith in resolving his debts. He 
paid his vehicle loan for approximately 31 months, for about $15,996. Unable to sustain 
the payments, he contacted his vehicle-loan creditor, which agreed to accept the 
voluntary surrender of the vehicle.  The lender resold the vehicle and Applicant’s CBRs 
have reflected a $0 balance due since at least 2013. The 2015 CBR shows an actual 
payment of $9,850, which is likely the amount applied to the loan from the resale of the 
vehicle. Applicant understood that the balance would be satisfied by the proceeds from 
 
  6
the resale. He has not been contacted by any creditor attempting to collect a balance. 
Applicant successfully disputed the other debt alleged in the SOR. He maintains his 
current financial obligations. “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant took 
reasonable actions to meet his financial obligations. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is established.  Applicant disputed the debt alleged in SOR 1.b and it 
has not appeared on his CBRs since 2013.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Army for eight years, where he was first 
granted a security clearance. He was deployed on four separate occasions. He is 
married with four dependent children. He lives within his means and is current on all his 
ongoing financial obligations.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has  
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
  7
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:    For Applicant. 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
