1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-05793 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on March 4, 2014. On April 
27, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) 
sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B.1 
The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 25, 2015, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on November 4, 
                                                          
1 The SOR also alleged security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), but those allegations 
were withdrawn on November 2, 2015. 
2 
 
2015, and the case was assigned to me on November 23, 2015. On January 20, 2016, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing 
was scheduled for February 9, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on February 16, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d-1.f. He 
denied SOR ¶ 1.c, explaining that one of his two brothers is a citizen and resident of the 
United States. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old linguist employed by defense contractors since April 
2005. He was unemployed from January to May 2008 and March to August 2010, 
between jobs with defense contractors. He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant was born in Afghanistan, where he attended high school and college. 
He received an associate’s degree from Kabul University in December 2007, and he 
worked as a linguist for a defense contractor in Afghanistan from April 2005 to January 
2008. In January 2008, he entered the United States with his wife under a special visa 
program for linguists serving with the U.S. Armed Forces in Afghanistan. (AX A at 8; 
Tr.32.) Their two children, ages seven and six, are native-born U.S. citizens. His wife is 
the only member of his family who knows that he is applying for a security clearance. 
(Tr. 21.) 
 
 Applicant’s father, mother, four sisters, father-in-law, mother-in-law, and three 
sisters-in-law are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. One of his brothers is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen and lives in the United States. His other brother resides in the 
United States and has applied for U.S. citizenship. (Tr. 33.) His brothers also worked as 
linguists for the U.S. Armed Forces before coming to the United States. (Tr. 39.) 
 
Applicant’s father is a retired police officer. He was a member of the Afghan 
National Police until the Taliban took over the government. He was unemployed under 
the Taliban regime. He rejoined the Afghan National Police in 2001 after the fall of the 
Taliban and served until he retired in 2002 or 2003 (Tr. 40-41.) Applicant’s mother has 
never worked outside the home.  
 
 Applicant’s four sisters are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. They are all 
married and live in Kabul. Applicant does not know the specific occupations of their 
husbands, but he knows that none of them are connected to the Afghan military or 
security forces. (Tr. 43.) His family members believe he works as an administrator for 
defense contractors, but they do not know that he works as a linguist. (Tr. 58.) 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s sisters-in-law live in Kabul and are citizens of Afghanistan. They are 
all students and unmarried. (Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is a retired public school teacher. His father-in-law is an 
officer in the Afghan National Army. Applicant does not know his father-in-law’s rank or 
duties. (Tr. 41-43.) 
 
Applicant also has extended family members (aunts, uncles, and cousins) who 
are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. They all live in Kabul. Applicant does not 
believe that any of them are connected to the Afghan military, security forces, or 
intelligence community. He has virtually no contact with them. (Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 Applicant has no property or assets in Afghanistan. (Tr. 47.) He has contact by 
telephone or Skype with family and in-laws in Afghanistan about four times a year. (Tr. 
48) He never visits them in person because it would be a security breach and cause for 
termination of his employment. (Tr. 48-49.) 
 
 Applicant began working as a linguist for U.S. Armed Forces in Afghanistan 
around 2003, when he was 16 or 17 years old. He had learned English through private 
learning centers, because English was banned under the Taliban regime. (Tr. 35-36.) 
His family risked being punished by the Taliban for allowing him and his brothers to 
learn English. (Tr. 55-56.) 
 
 While working as a linguist in Afghanistan, Applicant worked with U.S. soldiers 
who were “embedded trainers.” They trained the Afghan soldiers and accompanied 
them on operational missions. Applicant wore a helmet and body armor but was not 
allowed to carry a weapon. He came under fire for the first time when he was 17 years 
old. He testified, “It’s not a very good feeling when you think that you’re going to die. But 
there was always something inside me that would tell me that, no, you know, be brave. 
Everything will be fine.” (Tr. 61.) In later assignments, he participated in training Afghan 
soldiers “inside the wire,” but then accompanied them on operational missions. (Tr. 61-
62.) He received numerous accolades for his performance of duty between 2003 and 
2008, including a strong letter of recommendation from a U.S. Army brigadier general. 
(AX A.) 
 
 Applicant deployed to Afghanistan again in 2012 and 2014. He was scheduled to 
deploy again shortly after the hearing. (Tr. 47, 69; GX 1 at 12-14.) 
 
 In accordance with Department Counsel’s request (GX 3), I have taken 
administrative notice that Afghanistan has been an independent nation since 1919, and 
it was a monarchy until a military coup in 1973. Following a second military coup in 
1978, a Marxist government emerged. In December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded 
and occupied Afghanistan, but they were resisted by the Afghan mujahedeen. The 
Soviet Union withdrew in February 1989 pursuant to an agreement signed by Pakistan, 
Afghanistan, the United States, and the Soviet Union. The mujahedeen were not a party 
to the agreement and refused to abide by it. The result was a civil war among several 
4 
 
factions, including the Taliban. By the end of 1998, the Taliban controlled most of 
Afghanistan, committed atrocities against minority populations, and provided sanctuary 
to terrorist organizations. U.S. military forces, along with forces from a coalition 
partnership, forced the Taliban out of power by November 2001. With the assistance 
and support of the United States, a new democratic government took office in 2004. The 
effectiveness of the central government of Afghanistan has increased, but local 
governments are weak and corruption is widespread. 
 
 I also have noted that Afghanistan’s human rights record is generally poor, due to 
the continuing insurgency, the weak government, and ongoing recovery efforts from two 
decades of war. In spite of efforts by the U.S. and the government of Afghanistan, it 
continues to be a violent, unsafe, unstable country. The border area between 
Afghanistan and Pakistan remains a safe haven for insurgents and criminal groups. The 
weak government and internal instability have enabled hostile states, non-state actors, 
terrorists, and insurgents to continue operating in Afghanistan, including groups hostile 
to the United States. Insurgents use narcotics trafficking and kidnapping to finance their 
military and technical capabilities. Suicide bombing attacks continue to inflict large 
numbers of casualties. Insurgent groups encourage Afghan security personnel to 
conduct insider attacks (“green on blue” attacks) to undermine the trust between the 
U.S. forces and contractors and their Afghan partners. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
5 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s father, mother, and four sisters are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d); and his two brothers are citizens of 
Afghanistan living in the United States (SOR ¶ 1.c). It also alleges that his father-in-law 
is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan and currently serves in the Afghan military (SOR 
¶ 1.e). Finally, it alleges that Applicant has extended family members who are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan (SOR ¶ 1.f). 
  
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
6 
 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and  
 
AG ¶ 7(d): sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government.  
 
 When family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign 
country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-
22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person 
has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's 
spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 
2002); see also ISCR Case No. 09-06457 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011). Applicant has 
not rebutted this presumption.  
 
The ineffectiveness of the Afghan government, continuing threats from insurgent 
and extremist groups, and the government’s poor human rights record are sufficient to 
establish the heightened risk required by AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) and the potential conflict 
of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). All three disqualifying conditions are established. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
7 
 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(a) is not established, for the reasons set out in the above discussion of 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d). AG ¶ 8(c) is established for Applicant’s in-laws and extended 
family members in Afghanistan, but it is not established for his parents and four sisters, 
because he has not rebutted the presumption that contacts with an immediate family 
member in a foreign country are not casual. ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 1, 2002). 
 
 AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Applicant and his wife became U.S. citizens as soon as 
they were eligible. Their two children are native-born U.S. citizens. Applicant’s brothers 
8 
 
reside in the United States. One brother is a U.S. citizen, and the other has applied for 
U.S. citizenship. Applicant has worked for defense contractors for many years, and he 
has served reliably and faithfully under dangerous conditions. He and his wife qualified 
for special visas, due in large part to the recommendation of a U.S. Army brigadier 
general who was personally aware of Applicant’s service in combat.  
 
 Generally, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security procedures and 
regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative value for the purposes of 
refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security concerns raised by that applicant’s more 
immediate disqualifying circumstances. However, where an applicant has established 
by credible, independent evidence that his or her compliance with security procedures 
and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which 
the applicant made a significant contribution to the national security, such 
circumstances give credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he or she will recognize, 
resist, and report a foreign power or terrorist’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. In 
this case, Applicant has a track record of complying with security regulations and 
procedures in high-risk circumstances in which he made significant contributions to 
national security. See ISCR Case No. 07-06030 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 19, 2008); ISCR 
Case No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 2008).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He and his family 
have demonstrated an affinity for the United States since he was a student in high 
9 
 
school. He has demonstrated his reliability and trustworthiness by repeatedly putting 
himself in harm’s way in support of U.S. interests in Afghanistan.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his family ties to Afghanistan. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
