 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01113 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 
20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant a security clearance. On September 18, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR 
and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on November 12, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on 
 
2 
 
 
November 19, 2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 9, 
2015.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B. All 
exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on December 18, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 70-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He began working 
in his current job in 2016 after having worked for another defense contractor from 1997 
to 2016. He graduated from high school in 1964 and completed two years of college. He 
served in the U.S. Air Force for 30 years and retired honorably in the grade of chief 
master sergeant (E-9) in 1994. He has been married for almost 50 years and has two 
adult children. He has held a security clearance for about 50 years.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had 20 delinquent debts totaling $20,711. In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied each debt, claiming they were not his debts. His 
credit reports (GE 2 and 3) contain entries that reflect the alleged debts.2  
 
Applicant contended that each of the alleged debts was the result of the theft of 
his identity. He claimed that a number of people stole his identity, including one of his 
sons. He indicated that he did not report the identity theft to the police because he did 
not want his son arrested. He highlighted that he has been living at the same address 
for the past 35 years, but his credit reports incorrectly reflect that he lived at six other 
addresses during the past seven years. He stated that he never received any bills in the 
mail for the delinquent debts. One credit report reflected four variations of his name (i.e., 
without middle initial, with middle initial, with middle name spelled out, and with middle 
name spelled out plus “Sr.”) and each had a different “name identification number.” One 
credit report reflected that Applicant had three telephone numbers. He indicated that 
one of those telephone numbers was his cell number, and he did not recognize the 
other two numbers. The credit report further listed that Applicant’s “former or current 
employer” was a company where he never worked. Another credit report indicated his 
birthday was in February 1976, which was 30 years after his actual birthday.3    
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-7, 36-39; GE 1. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
3 Tr. 5, 16, 21-36; GE 1-4; AE A.  A name identification number and address identification number are 
means by which the reporting bureau identifies variations of an individual’s name and address in the 
credit report.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant hired an attorney to assist him in disputing and resolving the alleged 
debts. His most recent credit report lists only six delinquent debts that he contends are 
not his debts. I found Applicant was a credible witness.4   
  
Applicant provided documentation showing that his adjusted gross income was 
$138,132 for 2011, $149,798 for 2012, $172,354 for 2013, and $169,260 for 2014. He 
also provided documentation showing that he pays the debts for which he is 
responsible.5 
 
While in the Air Force, Applicant received two Meritorious Service Medals, two 
Air Force Commendation Medals, as well as other personal and unit awards. He served 
in support of Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm from August 1990 to 
December 1993.6 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
4 Tr. 21-23, 25-27. Applicant testified that the attorney was no longer assisting him. 
 
5 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; AE A.         
 
6 Tr. 36-38; AE B.  
 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a clearance 
decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
5 
 
 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s credits reports contain information pertaining to other individuals. He 
provided sufficient evidence to establish that the alleged debts are not his responsibility.  
I find that none of the disqualifying conditions are established. 
 
 Recognizing that the Appeal Board has held that entries in credit reports are 
sufficient to establish substantial evidence of alleged debts, I also considered AG ¶ 
20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due 
debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate 
the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue) and find 
that it also mitigates any security concerns arising from the alleged debts. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In conducting the whole-
person analysis, I have considered Applicant’s military and work history and other 
information about him in the record.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence still leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I find that Applicant refuted 
the security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  For Applicant  
 
6 
 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.t:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
