 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01218 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 23, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On August 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated April 23, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 25, 2015. On September 15, 2015, 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to 
proceed on October 19, 2015. The case was assigned to me on October 26, 2015. A 
Notice of Hearing was issued on October 28, 2015. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on November 19, 2015. 
 
 During the hearing, four Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 4) and two 
Applicant exhibits (AE A and AE B) were admitted into evidence without objection.2 
Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 2, 2015. I kept the 
record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that 
opportunity. He timely submitted a number of documents, which were marked as 
Applicant exhibits (AE) C through AE O and admitted into evidence without objection. 
The record closed on January 27, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, while not specifically using the terms “admit” or “deny,” 
Applicant superficially acknowledged and generally addressed, through a statement 
from his sister, the factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR 
(¶¶ 1.a. through 1.k.). During the hearing, Applicant entered denials for all of the 
allegations.3 Applicant’s answers are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a 
sheet metal mechanic since April 2014.4 A 1993 high school graduate,5 Applicant 
subsequently completed one year of a technical course, but did not complete the 
requirements for a degree.6 He enlisted in the U.S. Naval Reserve in August 1993 and 
served honorably on active duty until he was released in August 1995 and transferred to 
                                                          
2
 AE A was a Discharge Application from the U.S. Department of Education, signed by Applicant’s sister, 
dated November 3, 2015, consisting of three pages. Because there were no duplicating facilities available in the 
courthouse and it was unclear if AE A was the original or a duplicate, AE A was returned to Applicant, on loan, to be 
returned once its significance was established. See Tr. at 58-59. AE A was never returned by Applicant. 
Nevertheless, while it was never returned, the significance of AE A was minimalized by subsequent documentation 
reflecting approval of the application that was eventually admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
3
 Tr. at 11-12. 
 
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
5
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated June 16, 2014), at 3. 
 
6
 Tr. at 5. 
 
3 
                                      
 
the U.S. Naval Reserve (inactive) where he remained until August 2000.7 He has never 
held a security clearance.8 Applicant has never been married, but he has resided with 
his fiancée/cohabitant since March 2005.9 He has two children, born in 1997 and 2002, 
respectively.10 
 
Military Service 
 
During his military service, Applicant deployed to the Persian Gulf for six months 
in 1994.11 He was awarded the National Defense Service Medal, the Sea Service 
Deployment Ribbon, and the Southwest Asia Service Medal with Bronze Star.12 
 
Financial Considerations13 
Although Applicant was the youngest sibling, he was generally considered the 
most stable family member – an easy target – because he had good credit, money 
saved, and a good job. In that vein, there was nothing unusual about Applicant’s 
finances until he responded positively to the request of his wheelchair-bound disabled 
older sister in 2006 that he co-sign on educational loans for what he was told were 
grants for disabled students.14 It was his intention to help her, but never to support 
her.15 After his sister withdrew from college in 2011, he learned that the grants were 
actually loans.16 He first learned that the loans were not being addressed when he 
started to receive delinquency letters from Sallie Mae and its successor organization 
Navient. Applicant tried to persuade his sister to resolve her student loans, but she 
informed him that she was unable to do so because she was disabled and could not find 
a good job to generate funds sufficient to pay her loans. At that point, it appears that 
she was eligible for forbearance – a cessation of payment for a limited period of time for 
borrowers experiencing short-term problems managing student loan payments – or 
even other possible alternatives. But, she took no action. In addition, Applicant’s mother 
                                                          
7
 AE H (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty, dated August 1, 1995); GE 1, supra note 1, at 
16-17; GE 2, supra note 5, at 4; Tr. at 29. 
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 29-30. 
 
9
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 19. 
 
10
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 23-24. 
 
11
 Tr. at 49. 
 
12
 AE H, supra note 7. 
 
13
 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits:  GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated May 17, 2014); GE 4 
(Equifax Credit Report, dated December 22, 2014); GE 2, supra note 5. More recent information can be found in the 
exhibits furnished and individually identified. 
 
14
 Tr. at 30-32. 
 
15
 Tr. at 33. 
 
16
 Tr. at 33. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
kept cautioning, pleading, and begging him to be patient, and to give her daughter the 
opportunity to resolve the issue. Applicant was in no position to take over the debts 
because of his own family obligations.  
As a result of his sister’s withdrawal from school and her failure to make the 
required monthly payments on her student loans, those loans became delinquent and 
were placed into a default status. Loans were churned: charged off and transferred to 
other servicing agents, repeatedly. Applicant’s May 2014 and December 2014 credit 
reports reflect nine separate student loans with Sallie Mae/Navient that had been 
charged off in August 2010: (SOR ¶ 1.b.) with a high credit of $41,760, a past-due 
balance of $14,260, and a charged-off amount of $41,928, with an increased unpaid 
balance of $50,116; (SOR ¶ 1.c.) with a high credit of $19,096, a past-due balance of 
$8,409, and a charged-off amount of $24,382, with an increased unpaid balance of 
$25,204; (SOR ¶ 1.d.) with a high credit of $20,206, a past-due balance of $6,900, and 
a charged-off amount of $23,705, with an increased unpaid balance of $24,249; (SOR ¶ 
1.e.) with a high credit of $19,081, a past due balance of $7,406, and a charged off 
amount of $23,404, with an increased unpaid balance of $24,073; (SOR ¶ 1.f.) with a 
high credit of $15,871, a past-due balance of $6,160, and a charged-off amount of 
$15,956, with an increased unpaid balance of $20,022; (SOR ¶ 1.g.) with a high credit 
of $7,789, a past-due balance of $3,891, and a charged-off amount of $7,820, with an 
increased unpaid balance of $9,346; (SOR ¶ 1.h.) with a high credit of $6,438, a past- 
due balance of $1,838, and a charged-off amount of $7,322, with an increased unpaid 
balance of $7,460; (SOR ¶ 1.j.) with a high credit of $4,436, a past-due balance of 
$1,870, and a charged-off amount of $5,045, with an increased unpaid balance of 
$5,139; and (SOR ¶ 1.k.) with a high credit of $2,298, a past-due balance of $1,067, 
and a charged-off amount of $2,733, with an increased unpaid balance of $2,800. 
Those same credit reports list student loans with a variety of lenders and 
servicing agents reflecting accounts that were charged off, transferred to other servicing 
agents, transferred to recovery, returned as government claims, or sold, for which there 
are no remaining balances. There are three separate education loan accounts with 
National Collegiate Trust, not a lender or a guarantor, but an entity that files student 
loan lawsuits on private student loans against borrowers. There is a 2013 judgment for 
$55,070 on a loan with a high credit of $47,700 and an unpaid balance of $59,869 (SOR 
¶ 1.a.).   
In early 2014, Applicant’s sister returned to school, and Applicant did not hear 
anything further about the loans. As a result of his sister’s actions and subsequent 
inaction, as well as his mother’s attitude in protecting her daughter but not caring about 
Applicant’s credit and good name, relations between Applicant and his mother and 
sister became strained. He distanced himself from them and found it too uncomfortable 
to visit the family home where his mother and sister resided.  
It is unclear when Applicant’s sister became aware of the possibility of loan 
forgiveness, cancellation, and discharge options. She advised Applicant that she was 
working with a government agency that would assist her in getting the student loans 
resolved. In June 2014, she was directed to seek medical confirmation of a total and 
 
5 
                                      
 
permanent disability (TPD). On November 3, 2015, Applicant’s sister applied for relief 
under the TPD discharge program, claiming to be disabled and on disability. Under that 
program, a physician must certify that the borrower (Applicant’s sister) is unable to 
engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of a medically determinable physical 
or mental impairment that (1) can be expected to result in death; (2) has lasted for a 
continuous period of not less than 60 months; or (3) can be expected to last for a 
continuous period of not less than 60 months. On December 11, 2015, the student 
loans were placed into a forbearance status until November 18, 2018.17 On December 
28, 2015, the application under TPD was approved.18  The effect of the discharge is as 
follows:19 
After being notified that the Department has approved [the] discharge 
request, [the borrower’s] loan holders will transfer [the] loans . . . to [the 
Department] for discharge. [The borrower] will then be subject to a 3-year 
post-discharge monitoring period that begins on the date the discharge is 
approved. There are requirements that [the borrower] must meet during 
the post-discharge monitoring period. . . . 
Applicant also experienced another financial problem because of the actions of 
his mother and his sister. In 1996, he opened and briefly used a department store 
charge account with a low credit limit. He routinely paid it off.  His mother had access to 
the account card and he thought she had closed it. However, at some point, Applicant’s 
mother shared his personal data, and possibly the card, with his sister, and without his 
knowledge or permission, his sister either reopened the account or simply used the 
account card to make substantial purchases without Applicant’s knowledge or 
authorization. Applicant’s sister apparently failed to make any payments, and the 
account, with a past-due balance of $1,602 and an unpaid balance of $6,509 was 
charged off in 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.i.). When Applicant learned what had happened, he 
threatened to press charges against his sister, but his mother urged him not to and 
talked him out of it. The two credit reports list three accounts with the same department 
store, all with different account numbers, and all opened in 1996. One of the cards was 
apparently reported lost and the account was closed in 2009. On November 18, 2015, 
                                                          
17
 AE C (Account Details – Stafford Loans, dated December 11, 2015); AE D (Account Details – 
Consolidation Loans, dated December 11, 2015); AE E (Student Loan Obligation Statement, dated December 11, 
2015). 
 
18
 AE G (Disability Discharge, dated December 28, 2015). 
 
19
 U.S. Department of Education, Federal Student Aid website at www.disabilitydischarge.com/faqs, at 6-7. 
Because there are no consistent, market-wide federal standards for student loan servicing and servicers generally 
have discretion to determine policies related to many aspects of servicing operations; and because student loan 
borrowers encounter servicing problems or practices that discourage utilization of alternative repayment plans, 
including income-driven repayment plans, in September 2015, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), 
the U.S. Department of Education, and the U.S. Department of the Treasury issued a Joint Statement of Principles on 
Student Loan Servicing. That same month, the CFPB issued a lengthy analysis entitled Student Loan Servicing. That 
analysis discussed many aspects of the problems involved in student loan borrowing and servicing facing borrowers. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
the department store reported that Applicant’s account, with an account number 
different from the three in the credit reports, had been closed with a zero balance.20 
In December 2015, Applicant completed a series of finance-related courses: wise 
use of credit; road map to financial freedom; preventing foreclosure; understanding 
credit reports; budget 911; identity theft prevention; budgeting 101; and power of 
paycheck planning.21  
On December 16, 2015, Applicant completed a Personal Financial Statement 
which reflected a net monthly income of $4,862.40; normal monthly expenses of $1,653; 
and other financial obligations (credit cards and a loan) of $314. His net monthly 
remainder was approximately $3,291.70, available for discretionary savings or 
spending.22 He noted that because he is not married, he did not include the finances of 
his fiancée/cohabitant. He has no other delinquent accounts. 
Work Performance and Character References 
 Applicant’s 2015 annual performance evaluation indicates that he has met or 
exceeded all goals.23 A project supervisor is effusive in his praise for Applicant. He 
characterized Applicant as sticking out from the crowd because of his dedication and 
astute execution of duties, who can be trusted with anything he says.24 Other individuals 
describe Applicant’s importance to the community, especially dealing with children, 
where he mentors and volunteers as the head coach of his son’s basketball team.25  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”26 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
                                                          
20
 AE K (Letter, dated November 18, 2015). 
 
21
 AE J (Certificates of Achievement, dated December 14, 2015). 
 
22
 AE I (Personal Financial Statement, dated December 15, 2015). 
 
23
 AE B (Performance Evaluation, dated October 29, 2015). 
 
24
 AE O (Character Reference, dated November 19, 2015). 
 
25
 AE L (Character Reference, dated July 21, 2015); AE M (Character Reference, dated July 24, 2015); AE 
N (Character Reference, dated November 23, 2015). 
 
26
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”27   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”28 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.29  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”30  
                                                          
27
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
28
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
29
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
30
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
8 
                                      
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”31 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a “history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems arose after he agreed to co-sign 
educational loans for his older sister. The loans became delinquent and were charged 
off and placed into a default status. A charge account also became delinquent. AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
                                                          
31
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”32 Under AG ¶ 20(e) it is potentially mitigating if “the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) apply. Applicant’s financial problems 
were not caused by his frivolous or irresponsible spending, and he did not spend 
beyond his means. Instead, those financial problems were largely beyond his control. 
The youngest sibling, he was generally considered the most stable family member – an 
easy target – because he had good credit, money saved, and a good job. In that vein, 
there was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until he responded positively to 
the request of his wheelchair-bound disabled older sister in 2006 that he co-sign on 
educational loans for what he was told were grants for disabled students. It was his 
intention to help her, but never to support her. He subsequently learned that the grants 
were actually loans. Applicant tried to persuade his sister to resolve her student loans, 
but she could not. His mother kept pleading with him to be patient in dealing with his 
sister, and he tried. The loans were churned. Different lenders and servicing agents 
entered the picture, making his credit reports reflect many more loans than there 
actually were. Eventually, his sister learned of some alternative resolution plans and she 
applied for discharge under the federal TPD discharge program. Her application was 
granted, and the student loans were discharged, along with Applicant’s responsibility 
under them.  
 
Applicant also experienced problems when his mother allowed his sister to gain 
access to his personal data or gave her one of Applicant’s department store charge 
cards. Applicant had not given them permission to share his information or account. His 
sister’s actions in using the card and running up the balance was without Applicant’s 
knowledge or permission. The account is now closed and the balance is zero. While it 
does not appear that Applicant made any payments on the student loans or the 
department store account, he seemingly managed to motivate his sister to somehow 
resolve everything.  
Applicant received financial counseling on a number of different issues. He has 
no other delinquent accounts in his name. There are clear indications that Applicant’s 
                                                          
32
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
financial problems are under control. Applicant’s actions, under the circumstances 
confronting him, do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.33 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.34       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant co-
signed student loans and was presumed to be aware of his responsibilities as a co-
signer. When those loans became delinquent, he became jointly and severally 
responsible for satisfying the repayment conditions. The loans were placed into a default 
status. A department store charge account also became delinquent. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a military veteran, a good and involved parent, and a family member who 
offered assistance to his wheelchair-bound disabled older sister. Applicant has an 
outstanding reputation in the workplace and in the community in which he has resided. 
Upon learning of his financial situation, Applicant urged his sister to address and resolve 
it. He received financial counseling. The student loans and the department store charge 
account delinquencies have been resolved. There are clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are under control for there are no other delinquencies. His actions 
under the circumstances confronting him do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
                                                          
33
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
34
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
 
Applicant was, and is, generally considered the most stable family member 
because he had good credit, money saved, and a good job. Nothing discussed above 
has caused that reputation to change. Overall, the evidence leaves me without 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
