 Exhibit 3 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 15-00856
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. A 56-year-old employee, Applicant was born
and raised in India. He has lived and worked in the United States since 2000. He did not
meet his burden to present sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate the foreign
influence security concern stemming from his ties to India. Accordingly, this case is
decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on April 4, 2014.  After reviewing the application and1
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).     
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 4
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some5
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 See Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9  ed., W est 2009), for a definition of waiver. 6 th
2
(DOD),  on August 9, 2015, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it2
was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him
eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It3
detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline known as Guideline B for
foreign influence. He answered the SOR in writing on August 27, 2015; he admitted
each of the SOR allegations; and he submitted a two-page memorandum wherein he
gave a brief explanation for each admission. 
       
Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so the case
will be decided on the written record.  On December 30, 2015, Department Counsel4
submitted all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This5
file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on January 8,
2016. He did not reply within the 30-day period from receipt of the FORM. The case was
assigned to me on March 14, 2016.   
  
Procedural Matters 
The FORM includes Exhibit 4, which is a report of investigation (ROI)
summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the May 2014 background
investigation. The summary, Exhibit 4, is not authenticated by a witness as required
under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote
advising Applicant that the summary was not authenticated and that failure to object
may constitute a waiver of the authentication requirement. Nevertheless, a pro se
applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM does not equate to a waiver of the
authentication requirement.  The written record does not demonstrate that Applicant6
understood the legal concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does
not establish that he understood the implications of waiving an objection to the
admissibility of the summary. Accordingly, Exhibit 4 is inadmissible and I have not
considered it.
 Exhibit 5. 7
 Exhibit 3. 8
 See https://my.uscis.gov/helpcenter/article/what-is-the-difference-between-a-certificate-of-citizenship-and-9
a-certificate-of-naturalization. (Certificates of citizenship and naturalization both serve as proof of U.S.
citizenship, but the eligibility requirements are different. A citizenship certificate is available for people who
were born abroad and automatically acquired or derived U.S. citizenship through birth to or adoption by a U.S.
citizen parent or parents. A naturalization certificate is given to a lawful permanent resident after they fulfill the
various requirements established by law.)
 See ISCR Case No. 14-03629 at 5 (Mar. 17, 2015) (noting that India does not recognize or permit duel10
citizenship).
3
In addition, I granted Department Counsel’s written request to take administrative
notice of facts concerning the country of India.7
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security clearance
for the first time. He is employed in the field of information technology (IT) for a large
technology and consulting company. He has worked for this company since 2007. He
was born and raised in India. He entered the United States in August 2000, when he
was about 41 years old. He has been employed as an IT professional since at least
2001. 
There is some confusion or uncertainty about when Applicant became a U.S.
citizen. His security clearance application indicates the following: (1) he obtained a
naturalization certificate in June 2007; (2) he obtained a citizenship certificate in August
2013; and (3) he obtained his current U.S. passport in August 2013.  The confusion or8
uncertainty exists because a person does not hold both types of certificates.  Since9
Applicant’s parents were born in India, I presume Applicant was eligible for a certificate
of naturalization, not citizenship. Further confusing the matter, his security clearance
application indicates he obtained an Indian passport in 2011 and then used it to travel to
India in June–July 2013,  although those matters were not alleged in the SOR.10
As set forth in the SOR, Applicant has a number of family and financial ties to
India. He is married to an Indian citizen who lives in the United States. He has one adult
child who is a U.S. citizen and two children who are Indian citizens living in the United
States. His brother is a citizen of India who lives in the United States. All of the
aforementioned Indian citizens are U.S. permanent resident aliens (the so-called Green
card). His mother, father, sister, mother-in-law, and father-in-law are citizens of and
residents in India. Applicant owns property in India valued at approximately U.S.
$50,000, and has a bank account worth about U.S. $2,000. In his answer to the SOR,
Applicant provided the following explanations about his ties to India.
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to11
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
4
Applicant’s father is a 93-year-old citizen of and resident in India. His father
obtained a Green card at age 90. He elected to return to India for medical care. He is no
longer in a position to travel to the United States.
Applicant’s mother is an 80-year-old citizen of and resident in India. She obtained
a Green card at age 70. She elected to return to India for medical care.
Applicant’s brother is a citizen of India as well as a lawful resident of the United
States. He obtained a Green card in 2012 and is waiting the required period before
applying for U.S. citizenship.
Applicant’s sister is a citizen of and resident in India. She has been married to an
Indian citizen since 1977. Applicant described his sister as a well-regarded attorney who
practices law in a particular court. 
Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of India as well as a lawful resident of the United
States. She is not yet eligible to apply for U.S. citizenship, but she intends to do so.
Applicant’s son is a citizen of India as well as a lawful resident of the United
States who is in the process of applying to become a naturalized citizen. He attended
high school in the United States and is attending college here.
Applicant’s daughter is a citizen of India as well as a lawful resident of the United
States. Still a minor at age 17, she is not eligible to apply for naturalization until age 18
unless both parents are U.S. citizens. She is currently attending high school in the
United States.
Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens of and residents in India. His mother-in-law
is a senior citizen who is enjoying a retired life. His father-in-law is also retired after
working many years working as a veterinarian. 
Applicant owns property (not otherwise described but presumed to be real
estate) in India valued at about U.S. $50,000. He made the purchase by obtaining a
$30,000 loan from his 401(k) account as well as by using proceeds from the sale of an
ancestral property. The bank account is tied to the ancestral property too, as it was
used to deposit his share of the sale proceeds. He does not earn income in India. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As11
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
 484 U.S. at 531.12
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 13
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 14
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.18
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 19
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).20
5
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt12
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An13
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  14
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting15
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An16
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate17
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  18
In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a
preponderance of the evidence.  The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s19
reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence
standard.20
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.21
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 22
 AG ¶ 6. 23
6
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it21
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline B is whether Applicant’s ties to India
disqualify him from eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline B for
foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into doubt22
due to foreign connections and interests. The overall concern is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.23
The guideline contains several disqualifying conditions. Given the evidence of
Applicant’s ties to India, I have considered the following disqualifying conditions: 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information; and
AG ¶ 7(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or
exploitation.  
 Exhibit 5; see generally ISCR Case No. 14-03629 at 6-7 (Mar. 17, 2015) (discussing background information24
on India, including information of the nature of Indian’s government, which is a parliamentary democracy, as
well as the U.S.-Indian relationship, which President Obama stated will be vital to the U.S. strategic interests
in Asia-Pacific and across the globe).
7
Based on U.S. concerns about (1) industrial and economic espionage, (2) the risk of
terrorism in India, (3) India’s relationships with Iran, Pakistan, and Russia, and (4)
human-rights matters, India meets the heightened-risk standard in AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (e).
This conclusion is based on the facts set forth in Department Counsel’s administrative
notice request.   24
Likewise, the guideline contains several mitigating conditions. Given the evidence
here, I have considered the following mitigating conditions:  
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and
AG ¶ 8(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the
individual. 
Applicant’s family and financial ties to India are sufficient to raise a concern.
Applicant is a U.S. citizen living in the United States, but many of his immediate and
extended family members are Indian citizens, Indian residents, or both. In addition,
although $2,000 in a foreign bank account is a minor sum of money, Applicant has a
foreign property interest valued at about $50,000, which cannot be considered minor.
This is especially so given that I know nothing about Applicant’s business, financial, or
property interests in the United States. Taken together, his ties to India are sufficient to
raise a concern or a potential conflict of interest due to foreign influence.  
Applicant appears to be a successful IT professional who has spent the last 15
years or so living and working in the United States. He obtained U.S. citizenship in 2007
or 2013, the record is not clear. It also appears that he, his spouse, and three children
intend to make the United States their home. Nevertheless, deciding this case is
hindered by the lack of information, because the written record concerning Applicant is
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).25
8
limited to the SOR, Applicant’s answer to the SOR, and Applicant’s security clearance
application. He did not take advantage of the opportunity to respond to the FORM. 
The security clearance process is not a zero-risk program, because nearly every
person presents some risk or concern. Many cases come down to balancing that risk or
concern. Here, Applicant has family and financial ties to India. Those circumstances
should not be dismissed or overlooked as fanciful or unrealistic, especially considering
the matters the United States views of concern in India. Given the dearth of the written
record, I am not satisfied that Applicant’s ties to the United States are strong enough to
outweigh and overcome the concern or potential conflict of interest presented by his
family and financial ties to India. Accordingly, I cannot be confident that Applicant can
be expected to resolve such a concern or potential conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest. 
Applicant did not meet his burden to present sufficient evidence to explain and
mitigate the foreign influence security concern stemming from his ties or connections to
India. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if
the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave
due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I conclude that he did not25
meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.k: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
