 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-00525 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position to work in the defense industry. Although Applicant has filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection to resolve the $65,500 in delinquent debt alleged in 
the Statement of Reasons, this is not enough to mitigate the security concerns raised by 
her history of financial problems. Accordingly, her eligibility to occupy a positon of trust 
is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons SOR detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with national security to 
grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive information and recommended that the 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or 
deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position. 
  
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on September 24, 2015. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. She 
received the FORM on October 7, 2015, and did not respond. The case was assigned 
to me on December 1, 2015. The documents appended to the FORM are admitted as 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 and 5 through 7, without objection.  GE 4 is 
omitted for the reasons explained below.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 GE 4 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing the interview Applicant had 
with a background investigator during her October 2013 investigation. The interview is 
not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Footnote 1 of the FORM 
advises Applicant of that fact and further cautions Applicant that if she fails to object to 
the admission of the interview summary in her response to the FORM that her failure 
may be taken as a waiver of the authentication requirement. Applicant’s failure to 
respond to the FORM does not demonstrate that she understands the concepts of 
authentication, or waiver and admissibility. It also does not establish that she 
understands the implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the interview. 
Accordingly, GE 4 is inadmissible and I have not considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 36, has worked for a federal contractor since February 2012. Her 
position requires access to personally identifiable information (PII), and requires her to 
obtain eligibility to occupy a public trust position. Based on the disclosures in her 
September 2014 eligibility application and information discovered during her 
background investigation, the SOR alleges that Applicant has a history of financial 
problems, including one foreclosure, six charged-off accounts, and $65,500 in 
delinquent debt.3  
 
 Applicant blames her financial problems on living beyond her means between 
2008 and 2012, after she received a large inheritance from her grandparents’ estate. 
Her financial problems became acute in 2011, after she was laid off from a job. She 
began to rely on credit cards to pay for food and other necessities. She also claims to 
have lost $75,000 in investments as a result of a stock market crash. Applicant began to 
have difficulty paying her bills and eventually lost her home of seven years to 
foreclosure in August 2012. After Applicant returned to work in February 2012, she 
learned she was pregnant. Her pregnancy was difficult, and her son was born 
premature in 2013. He remained in the neo-natal intensive care unit for a month after 
                                                          
2 GE 2. 
 
3 GE 1, 3. 
 
3 
 
his birth. As a result, she incurred at least $7,500 in medical bills, which she could not 
afford to pay.4  
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in August 2015, seeking to a 
plan to repay $113,000 in debt. The debts alleged in the SOR are included in her 
petition. Applicant has not provided any current information on the status of her 
bankruptcy petition, the plan payment schedule, or any information about her current 
finances.5  
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”6 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.”7 Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to 
the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made.8 An administrative judge’s objective is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision that embraces all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 GE 2, 5-6. 
 
5 GE 7. 
 
6 DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation) ¶¶ 
C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
7 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
8 See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”9  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has five charged-off accounts and owes 
approximately $65,500 in delinquent debt. She also filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
protection seeking relief from $113,000 in debt in August 2015. The record supports a 
prima facie case that Applicant has a history of not meeting her financial obligations and 
that she has demonstrated an inability to do so.10 Applicant’s financial problems were 
not entirely beyond her control. Applicant admits that she incurred the debt during a 
four-year period of living beyond her means after receiving a substantial windfall.  
However, her debt became delinquent as a result of events beyond her control, a layoff 
in 2011 and the accumulation of medical debt related to the birth of her child. Her 
decision to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection is reasonable given her amount of 
total debt. While bankruptcy is a legitimate method of resolving debt, it does not mitigate 
the concerns alleged in the SOR. 
 
Applicant did not provide any information about her current finances or the status 
of the bankruptcy’s payment plan. As a result, I have no way to determine if she is in 
compliance with the terms of her bankruptcy payment plan or even if she has the means 
to comply. Furthermore, I cannot determine if she has reformed her financial habits and 
will avoid similar financial problems in the future. Accordingly, doubts remain about 
Applicant’s security worthiness. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2. Ultimately, Applicant failed to meet her burdens of production 
and persuasion. Because the security concerns raised in the SOR remain, following 
Egan11 and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting 
national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.gg:    Against Applicant 
                                                          
9  AG ¶ 18. 
 
10 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
11 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
