 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 15-00014 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Meg Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges and the record establishes that 
Applicant used marijuana on about 10 occasions in early 2007. He intentionally failed to 
provide accurate information about his illegal drug use on his February 24, 2011 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions or security clearance application (SCA). 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1) Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On February 24, 2011, and April 16, 2014, Applicant completed and signed two 
SCAs. (GE 1; GE 2) On August 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF could not make the affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
 
2 
                                         
 
revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns 
arising under Guideline E (personal conduct).  
  
On August 20, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR and waived his right to a 
hearing. (HE 3) On November 23, 2015, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On 
January 4, 2016, the case was assigned to me. On February 5, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing 
for February 25, 2016. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. During the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered three exhibits, and Applicant did not offer any documents. 
(Tr. 11, 16; GE 1-3) The three exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. 
(Transcript (Tr.) 16; GE 1-3) On March 1, 2016, I received a transcript of the hearing.   
 
Procedural Issue 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the date of Applicant’s Office of Personnel 
Management personal subject interview (OPM PSI) in SOR ¶ 1.c to conform with the 
evidence. (Tr. 13) Applicant did not object, and I granted the motion. (Tr. 13) 
  
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.c. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old computer science engineer, who is seeking to retain 
his security clearance. (Tr. 6-7) He has worked to support the DOD for the previous five 
years. (Tr. 8) In 2006, he graduated from high school, and in 2010, he received a 
bachelor of arts degree in computer science. (Tr. 7) He has never been married, and he 
does not have any children. (Tr. 7; GE 1; GE 2) He has never served in the military. (Tr. 
7; GE 1; GE 2) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
In June 2007, Applicant completed his first SCA in connection with applying for 
summer employment. (Tr. 21) That SCA is not part of the record, and it is not known 
how he answered the questions concerning his involvement with illegal drugs. Applicant 
believed the SCA was not processed to completion because he returned to college. (Tr. 
22) 
 
 On February 24, 2011, Applicant completed his SCA. Section 23 asks about 
illegal use of drugs or controlled substances, including marijuana, hashish, or THC, in 
the previous seven years. Applicant answered “No” to this question. (Tr. 18, 24-26; GE 
1; SOR response; SOR ¶ 1.a) He used marijuana on about 10 occasions in early 2007. 
(Tr. 18)  
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3 
                                         
 
 Prior to obtaining employment where he needed a security clearance, Applicant 
was working in a call center. (Tr. 19) He had an opportunity for better employment as a 
DOD contractor. (Tr. 19) At the time he was completing his February 24, 2011 SCA, he 
believed that if he revealed his marijuana use, his illegal drug use would preclude his 
employment as a DOD contractor. (Tr. 19) He admitted that he read the question about 
illegal drug use carefully, and he intentionally provided a false answer. (Tr. 26) He 
acknowledged that he lied when he completed his SCA. (Tr. 27) After completion of his 
February 24, 2011 SCA, he was awarded a secret security clearance. (Tr. 22) He did 
not receive a follow-up OPM PSI after completion of his February 24, 2011 SCA. (Tr. 
23) 
 
When Applicant completed his April 16, 2014 SCA, he was again asked whether 
he used any illegal drugs in the previous seven years. (Tr. 20; GE 2; SOR response; 
SOR ¶ 1.b) He answered, “No.” He said this answer was correct because his marijuana 
use was in 2007, but prior to April 16, 2007. (Tr. 20, 28-29, 35-36)  
 
On May 12, 2014, an OPM investigator interviewed Applicant. (GE 3) At page 6 
of his OPM PSI, the summary indicates, “Subject has had no illegal use of drugs or drug 
activity.” (GE 3) Applicant said the OPM investigator asked him whether he used illegal 
drugs in the previous seven years, and he truthfully answered, “No.” (Tr. 29-30)  
 
On September 29, 2014, an OPM investigator conducted a “Special Investigation 
Interview” of Applicant. (GE 3) Applicant told the OPM investigator that he used 
marijuana about ten times while in college in 2007. (Tr. 34; GE 3) His most recent 
marijuana use was in the spring of 2007. (GE 3) He did not disclose the marijuana use 
on his security forms because of fear. He “was concerned and afraid that if he had listed 
the marijuana use he would not have been able to gain this employment position. 
Additionally, [he] reasoned that he did not think he needed to include the marijuana use 
if he did not hold a security clearance at the time of the marijuana use.” (GE 3 at 9)        
 
Applicant has worked diligently for his employer and for DOD. (Tr. 35) He does 
not associate with drug users. (Tr. 35) He promised not to use illegal drugs in the future. 
(GE 3) He expressed his remorse about his false February 24, 2011 SCA.  
   
Policies 
  
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
 
4 
                                         
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
This decision is not based, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. Thus, any decision to deny a security 
clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
  
 
5 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying with respect to the falsification of Applicant’s February 24, 2011 SF 86, 
which was used to process the adjudication of his security clearance in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.2 
 
When Applicant completed his February 24, 2011 SCA, he was asked about 
illegal drug use in the previous seven years, and he denied any illegal drug use. He 
used marijuana in 2007 about 10 times. He acknowledged that he intentionally lied on 
his SCA because he believed he would lose his employment. He said he ended his 
marijuana use before April 16, 2007. 
 
Applicant made a technically accurate statement on his April 16, 2014 SCA when 
he denied marijuana use in the previous seven years. On May 12, 2014, an OPM 
investigator interviewed Applicant, and Applicant said the OPM investigator only asked 
him about marijuana use in the previous seven years. At page 6 of his May 12, 2014, 
OPM PSI, the summary indicates, “Subject has had no illegal use of drugs or drug 
                                            
2The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
6 
                                         
 
activity.” Applicant did not adopt the OPM interview summary at the time it was 
transcribed. I accept Applicant’s statement that the interview summary is incomplete, 
and he did not lie to the OPM investigator on May 12, 2014. Applicant has refuted SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c.  
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s failure to be fully frank about 
his drug use on his February 24, 2011 SCA is too recent and serious to be mitigated. 
From 2011 to 2014, Applicant’s false SCA was part of the basis for approval of 
 
7 
                                         
 
Applicant’s access to classified information. He did not disclose that his February 24, 
2011 SCA contained false information about his drug-use history until September 2014.  
Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has achieved important education and employment goals, 
demonstrating some self-discipline, responsibility, and dedication; however, this 
evidence is insufficient to mitigate security concerns. Applicant is a 28-year-old 
computer science engineer. He has worked to support the DOD for the previous five 
years. In 2010, he received a bachelor of arts degree in computer science. There are no 
allegations of security violations, arrests, convictions, or alcohol abuse. 
 
The adverse information is more significant. In early 2007, Applicant possessed 
and used marijuana on about 10 occasions. He intentionally and falsely denied any 
illegal drug use on his February 24, 2011 SCA. The protection of national security 
requires that those entrusted with access to classified information self-report derogatory 
information. Should a security violation occur, security clearance holders with 
knowledge of the facts must be sufficiently reliable and responsible to disclose the 
security violation, even if it reflects poorly on the security clearance holder. Applicant’s 
failure to disclose facts about his history of marijuana use on his February 24, 2011 
SCA raises unresolved questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information.   
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated personal conduct 
 
8 
                                         
 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant or continuation of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. In the future, he may well be able to 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
  
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c: For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
