 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-02019 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 14, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 5, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on 
the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
December 3, 2015.  Applicant received the FORM on December 14, 2015. She had 30 
days from the receipt of the FORM to submit matters in response to the FORM. 
Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM. The case was forwarded to the 
Hearing Office on February 1, 2016, and assigned to me on March 1, 2016. Based upon 
a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admits to all SOR allegations with the 
exception SOR ¶ 1.j, which she denied. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain her security 
clearance. She has worked for her current employer since July 2012.  She is a high 
school graduate. Since August 2009, she has been separated from her husband and 
has two children, a daughter, age 25 and a son, age 15. (Item 3)   
 
On August 1, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). (Item 2) In “Section 26, Financial Record – 
Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts,” Applicant indicated that she had several 
delinquent accounts, including a car repossession. She had co-signed on an automobile 
loan for her nephew. He did not make the payments and the car was repossessed.  
Another account involved the purchase of a lap top computer. Applicant also listed 
several delinquent credit card accounts. She indicated that she became behind on her 
bills when she separated from her husband. (Item 2, section 26)   
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed the following delinquent 
accounts: a $19,606 charged-off account as a result of the car repossession, date of 
last action May 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 4 at 6; Item 5 at 2); a $1,461 medical account 
placed for collection in May 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 5 at 2); a $1,441 medical account 
placed for collection in February 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 4 at 7; Item 5 at 2); a $332 
medical account placed for collection in January 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 5 at 2); a $218 
medical account placed for collection in June 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 5 at 2); and a $130 
medical account placed for collection in March 2014. (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 5 at 2)  
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $75 medical account placed for 
collection in March 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 5 at 2); a $43 medical account placed for 
collection in March 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 4 at 8; Item 5 at 2); a $550 satellite television 
account placed for collection in October 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 4 at 5); a $152 medical 
account placed for collection in May 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.j: Item 4 at 7); a $366 account 
placed for collection in July 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.k: Item 4 at 7; Item 5 at 2); and a $466 
department store credit card that was charged off in October 2011. (SOR ¶ 1.l: Item 4 at 
8) 
   
In her Response to the SOR Applicant states that the $19,606 owed after the car 
repossession was “Charged OFF CLOSED 9-8-10.”  She admits that the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.f remain “OPEN.” She claims the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.d, and 1.g – 1.j  and 1.l “DIDN’T SHOW ON MY CREDIT REPORT.” She indicates the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k is “PAID IN FULL.” (Item 2) The February 15, 2015, credit 
report indicates that this debt is paid.  SOR ¶1.k is found for Applicant. (Item 5 at 2) 
 
Applicant did not explain how she encountered financial problems. She did not 
indicate what her plans were to resolve her outstanding delinquent debts. She did not 
 
3 
 
 
provide information on her current financial situation such as her monthly income and 
monthly expenses. She did not provide any character references, performance 
evaluations, or awards that could be considered under the whole-person concept.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
4 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has 
12 delinquent debts, owing approximately $24,840. The largest debt was for an 
automobile repossession with a balance of $19,606.  The delinquent debts were 
incurred between February 2009 and March 2014. Applicant has a history of financial 
irresponsibility.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
AG & 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG & 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
  
AG & 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG &  20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
& 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s financial problems continue. While she 
resolved one of the debts, the remaining delinquent debts are unresolved. She did not 
mention how she plans to resolve these debts. Most of the debts have relatively small 
balances, but Applicant has done nothing to resolve them. Questions about Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment remain.  
 
The first part AG & 20(b) applies because Applicant indicates that her marital 
separation caused financial problems. According to her e-QIP, she and her husband 
separated in August 2009, which explains several of the delinquent debts incurred in 
2009 and 2010. This is considered a circumstance beyond Applicant’s control. 
However, I cannot conclude that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances 
because Applicant continued to incur delinquent debts between 2011 and 2014. She 
also has not taken action towards resolving her delinquent accounts with the exception 
of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k.  
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant attended 
financial counseling. Applicant did not indicate whether she had a plan to resolve her 
delinquent accounts. She did not provide information about her current financial status. 
Applicant’s financial problems are unlikely to be resolved in the near future.   
 
 
6 
 
 
AG & 20(d) partially applies because Applicant resolved the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.k. Applicant did not demonstrate that she made a good-faith effort to resolve her 
remaining delinquent accounts. Several of the accounts had relatively low balances 
which could have been resolved within a reasonable time period.  For this reason AG & 
20(d) is given less weight.  
 
AG & 20(e) does not apply, although Applicant disputes the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.j, she did not provide information as to why she disputes it other than stating it does 
not appear on her credit report. She did not provide information as to whether she 
formally disputed the debt and what actions were taken to resolve the debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, she failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances that 
would mitigate financial considerations security concerns. While Applicant resolved one 
of the debts, the remaining 11 debts are unresolved. It is unknown whether Applicant 
has sufficient income to meet her financial obligations.  
   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant may be able to 
demonstrate a track record of resolving her financial obligations at some point in the 
future. At present, it is too soon to make this conclusion. The security concerns raised 
under financial considerations are not mitigated.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j, 1.l:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.k:     For Applicant  
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
