 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02442 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana three times in early January 2013 and has not 
used it since then. He disclosed the misconduct in his security clearance application. He 
mitigated the drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 28, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 
86). (Item 3.) On September 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. It 
detailed reasons why the DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be denied, granted, continued, or revoked.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On November 2, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested 
that his case be decided on the written record rather than a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
January 13, 2016, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) 
containing four Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy of it. Applicant received the 
copy on January 29, 2016, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. Applicant timely filed a Response to the FORM, and submitted a 
document, which I marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. He did not file any objections to 
the Government’s Items, and the Government did not object to Applicant’s submission. 
All four Items and AE A are admitted into the record.  On March 7, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in the SOR ¶ 1.a, and denied the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. His admission is accepted as a factual finding.   
 
Applicant is 36 years old, married, and a new father. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in 2003 and a master’s degree in 2012. He served on active duty in the Air 
Force from 2003 to 2007, when he received an honorable discharge. He held a security 
clearance while serving in the military. Since 2007 he has worked for a defense 
contractor, assisting the Air Force. (Item 3.)  
 
When Applicant completed his January 28, 2013 SF 86, he disclosed that he 
illegally used tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a chemical in marijuana, three times in early 
January 2013 for recreational purposes.1 He explained that he tried it in baked goods 
because it was legalized in his state. He also stated that “If Federal and State legislation 
agree on the legality of THC I may choose to use very sparingly for recreational use. I 
do not smoke.” (Item 3.) Based on this information, DOD issued the SOR. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant clarified his statement. He said he has not 
used marijuana since the incidents in 2013 and has no intention to do so. He meant that 
only if Federal and state law were consistent on its legality would he ever consider it. 
(Item 2.)  
 
In his Response to the FORM, Applicant further explained that when he tried 
marijuana in 2013, he was in another’s person’s house and did not leave after ingesting 
it. The three incidents occurred within a three-day time period, and the person who gave 
him the drug has since moved to another state. Applicant’s friends and family do not 
engage in drug abuse. He recently took a new leadership position with his employer and 
wants to do a good job. He wrote, “I have learned and grown from my experiences and 
am fully aware of the consequences of any further recurrence. My internal desire to 
support the USAF, or DOD, outweighs any curiosity to use THC in any form or 
situation.” (AE A.)  
 
 
                                            
1 THC will be referred to as marijuana in this Decision. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
 Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995) § 3. Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] 
security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the drug involvement security concerns: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse.2   
This disqualifying condition applies because Applicant admitted that he illegally 
used THC three times in January 2013.   
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
                                            
2AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004.) In his January 2013 SF 86, Applicant disclosed that he illegally used marijuana 
three times earlier that month. He has not used marijuana since then, more than three 
years ago. Based on his honest disclosures and remorse, the circumstances 
surrounding his misconduct, his promotion, and the recent birth of his child, similar 
conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 26(a) provides mitigation.  
 
Applicant no longer associates with the person who supplied, and with whom he 
used, the illegal drugs. His family and friends do not engage in drug abuse. He has not 
used any illegal drugs for three years, and does not intend to use them in the future. 
The evidence establishes mitigation under AG ¶¶ 26 (b) (1), (2), and (3). 
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse drugs 
after being issued a lawful prescription under federal law. He did not need or participate 
in a drug abuse treatment program, and hence did not provide proof of satisfactory 
completion, including rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, or a favorable prognosis 
by a duly qualified medical professional.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 The factors in favor of granting Applicant access to classified information are 
persuasive. Applicant honestly disclosed using marijuana three times in 2013 with a 
former associate. While his illegal drug use in 2013 raised a security concern, his 
statements of remorse about his misconduct, along with a recent promotion and 
commitment to his work with the Air Force, lead me to believe that he has sufficiently 
matured in the past three years, and will not use marijuana or other illegal substances in 
the future. He must realize at this time that similar conduct in the future may result in the 
loss of his security clearance and employment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without concerns as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:       For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:       For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
