 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01866 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding criminal conduct and 
personal conduct considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 31, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On August 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 Item 3 (e-QIP, dated March 31, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was 
unable to make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a statement notarized September 28, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.2 A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant on November 4, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within 
a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished 
a copy of the Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant 
received the FORM on November 12, 2015. A response was due by December 12, 
2015. As of February 29, 2016, I have not received a response to the FORM. The case 
was assigned to me on February 17, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of the factual 
allegations pertaining to criminal conduct (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.k.) in the SOR. He failed to 
answer the conclusory allegation pertaining to personal conduct (¶ 2.a.). After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as an avionics specialist with his current employer since September 1997.3 A 
1987 high school graduate, Applicant continued his education online in an aeronautical 
discipline, but has not earned a degree.4 Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Air Force 
Reserve in an inactive capacity in September 1987, and he was honorably discharged 
in June 1996.5 He has a Department of Veterans Affairs rated disability. He was granted 
a secret security clearance in October 1994.6 He was married in July 1991 and divorced 
in October 2007.7 He has three children, born in 1992, 1993, and 1995.8 In December 
2008, Applicant was given custody of his then minor children when his former wife was 
                                                          
2
 Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated September 28, 2015). 
 
3
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
4
 Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview, dated April 29, 2014), at 1; Item 3, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
5
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 14-15. 
 
6
 Item 4, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
7
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 18-19. 
 
8
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 24-25. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
arrested and charged with possession of narcotics with intent to distribute, possession 
of a firearm, and child endangerment.9 
 
Criminal Conduct and Personal Conduct10 
 
Applicant has a lengthy history of criminal conduct and questionable personal 
behavior, commencing in August 1993, when he was 24 years old, and continuing 
through at least June 2015. Included in that history are various arrests for 
misdemeanors and felonies, as well as citations for traffic infractions. The incidents 
leading to those arrests and charges involved driving under the influence (DUI); driving 
while under the influence of alcohol (DWI); unlawful use of weapon; 
possession/discharge of loaded weapon while intoxicated; possession of up to 35 
grams of marijuana; aggravated domestic battery; driving while revoked/driving while 
suspended; traffic offense - DUI Alcohol or drugs; resisting arrest without violence; 
resist officer – obstruct without violence; proof of insurance required; no valid certificate 
of registration; and a parking violation. There are a number of convictions, several 
charges were dismissed or otherwise not prosecuted, and one resulted in an acquittal. 
The final disposition is not known for some of the incidents, and some charges were still 
pending as of the date of the SOR. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): In August 1993, after consuming two or three beers, Applicant was 
stopped by the county sheriff, administered a field sobriety test, which he failed, and 
arrested for DUI. The charge was reduced to reckless driving, and he was subsequently 
fined $478, ordered to attend a DUI school, placed on probation for six months, and his 
base driving privileges were suspended for one year. He purportedly completed the DUI 
school. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): In January 2006, after consuming two beers at a bar, engaging in a 
verbal argument with his girlfriend, and leaving the bar on his motorcycle, Applicant was 
stopped by the police, administered a field sobriety test, which he failed, and arrested 
for (1) DWI, a misdemeanor; (2) unlawful use of a firearm, a felony; (3) 
possession/discharge of loaded weapon while intoxicated, a felony; and (4) possession 
of 35 grams of marijuana, a misdemeanor. The weapon was Applicant’s unloaded .45 
caliber handgun which his girlfriend purportedly had placed in his motorcycle saddlebag, 
without his knowledge, because she no longer wanted it in her home. Applicant 
contended the marijuana was his girlfriend’s, and that she had placed it into his 
motorcycle saddlebag, also without his knowledge. The state took no further action on 
the firearm charges, and it is unclear what the result was regarding the drug charge. 
                                                          
9
 Item 4, supra note 4, at 7. 
 
10
 General source information pertaining to Applicant’s criminal conduct discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: Item 2, supra note 2; Item 4, supra note 4; Item 3, supra note 3; Item 6 (Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) Identification Record, dated April 17, 2014); Item 7 (Case Progress Docket, dated January 6, 
2014); Item 8 (Case Progress Docket, dated August 25, 2014); Item 9 (Case Progress Docket, dated August 8, 
2014); Item 10 (Case Progress Docket, dated October 22, 2014); Item 11 (Case Progress Docket, dated February 18, 
2015); Item 12 (Case Progress Docket, dated June 6, 2015). The described FBI Identification Record is incomplete, 
and the information appearing in the various case progress dockets reflects court actions, but not even superficial 
information regarding the individual criminal incidents. There are no police incident reports in evidence. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
Applicant was convicted of DWI, placed on probation for two years (to be completed on 
July 24, 2008), fined, and ordered to perform 40 hours of community service. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): In March 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with one count 
of aggravated domestic battery. He offered two different explanations regarding the 
incident. He initially told an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) that his dog bit his wife, and that he was arrested and spent the night in jail. He 
later said in his Answer to the SOR that something (otherwise unspecified) took place 
after he had informed his wife that he wanted a divorce. She was under the belief that 
she could receive monetary benefits if she claimed abuse had occurred, but a 
subsequent physical examination could not support the alleged abuse. The charges 
were eventually dismissed, nolle prosequi. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): On July 23, 2008, one day before his probation for the 2006 
conviction was to have been completed, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
driving while revoked/driving while suspended. Applicant acknowledged that his driving 
privileges limited him to driving to and from work, but contended the suspension had 
already expired the same day.  The record is silent as to the result of the arrest. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): In September 2009, after a verbal dispute with his supposedly 
intoxicated girlfriend (who had an abrasion on her face from an earlier fall) in her home, 
which included being punched in the face by her brother, Applicant was arrested for (1) 
domestic assault 3rd degree, 1st and 2nd offense, a misdemeanor; (2) assault 3rd degree, 
a misdemeanor; and (3) unlawful use of weapon, a felony. Applicant’s girlfriend 
subsequently denied being harmed by him. No charges were filed.  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.): In January 2014, after consuming two beers and two “shots” of an 
unspecified substance over a five-hour period at a bar, Applicant and his girlfriend left 
the bar and drove to a restaurant. A dispute ensued in the parking lot as she wanted to 
eat and he did not. They departed the parking lot and drove towards home when his 
girlfriend interfered with his operation of the motor vehicle by jerking the steering wheel, 
pulling on the emergency brake, and attempting to put the vehicle in park, all while 
Applicant was driving. He pulled over to the side of the road in an effort to calm her 
down. The sheriff arrived at the scene and administered Applicant a field sobriety test, 
which he failed. He was arrested and charged with traffic offense - DUI alcohol or drugs, 
a misdemeanor. He refused to take a breathalyzer test. Applicant pled not guilty to the 
charge and elected a jury trial. He was acquitted on May 29, 2014.  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.): In August 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving 
while license suspended 1st offense.  He was under the mistaken belief that his May 
2014 acquittal had absolved him of all issues associated with the DUI, but his earlier 
refusal to take the breathalyzer test caused his operator’s license to remain suspended. 
He entered a plea of nolo-contendere. Adjudication was withheld, and he was 
sentenced to 15 days house arrest and fined $298. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.h.): In August 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged with resisting 
arrest without violence when he refused the sheriff’s request to produce his 
 
5 
                                      
 
identification during an investigation into allegations that Applicant was harassing his 
former girlfriend. Applicant entered a plea of not guilty. The matter was subsequently 
dismissed when the prosecutor chose not to prosecute.   
 
(SOR ¶ 1.i.): In October 2014, Applicant’s girlfriend obtained a temporary 
restraining order against Applicant, alleging domestic violence. In July 2015, after 
several hearing delays and postponements, the order was dismissed. It appears that 
Applicant and his girlfriend had reconciled. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.j.): In February 2015, Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) 
traffic offense – DUI alcohol or drugs, a misdemeanor; (2) resist officer – obstruct 
without violence, a misdemeanor; (3) proof of insurance required; and (4) no valid 
certification of registration. There is no evidence of the circumstances which led up to 
the arrest. Applicant filed a motion to suppress unspecified evidence pertaining to 
charges (1) and (2). Further actions on those two counts remain unresolved, and the 
charges are still pending. Applicant entered pleas of guilty to charges (3) and (4), and 
was assessed fines. The charges were dismissed. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.k.): In June 2015, Applicant was issued a citation for a parking 
violation. He contended that the front tire of his parked motorcycle was on the painted 
dividing line between a parking space and a designated no-parking area. He entered a 
plea of no plea, and was fined $130.  
 
Applicant contends that it takes seven or eight beers to make him intoxicated. He 
does not believe he has an issue with alcohol, and he plans to continue his alcohol 
consumption of about two beers per week in social settings. In April 2014, he indicated 
no plan to drive and consume alcohol.11 
 
Character References and Job Performance 
 
 Applicant failed to submit any character references or employment assessments. 
Nevertheless, he self-characterized himself as an honorably discharged, disabled 
veteran who has, since 2005, supported numerous volunteer efforts with his employer, 
and he is currently the focal for his employer’s participation in a particular community 
improvement program. He acknowledged that his accumulation of events “paints an 
unflattering picture” that is but a small part of his total character. He indicated he has 
received counseling over the past two years to improve his relationship and 
communication skills, but he failed to submit any documentation to support his claims 
pertaining to counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
                                                          
11
 Item 4, supra note 4, at 4-5. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”12 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”13   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”14 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.15  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
                                                          
12
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
13
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
14
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
15
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”16 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”17 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), if there is an “allegation of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted,” security concerns may be raised. Applicant’s history of criminal conduct, 
domestic issues, and traffic infractions, over a 22-year period, consists of 10 incidents 
involving criminal charges, arrests, convictions, or traffic citations, for a variety of 
actions, plus one parking violation. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) have been established.  
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” Similarly, AG ¶ 32(c) may apply where there is “evidence that the person did 
not commit the offense.” Also, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply when “there is evidence of 
                                                          
16
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
17
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, 
good employment record, or constructive community involvement.”  
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s conduct occurred over a 
period of 22 years, with the most recent serious incident (the February 2015 arrest and 
charge of (1) traffic offense – DUI alcohol or drugs, a misdemeanor; and (2) resist 
officer – obstruct without violence, a misdemeanor) still unresolved. The June 2015 
parking violation is not a crime, but merely a civil infraction, and is relatively 
insignificant. Most of Applicant’s incidents were associated with two rather common 
themes: his consumption of alcohol and his strained relationship with his girlfriend. Even 
after realizing the problems his girlfriend created for him, Applicant reconciled with her. 
That factor, added to his failure to recognize the negative impact alcohol has had on 
him, and his refusal to abstain from further alcohol consumption, raise the likelihood that 
additional criminal conduct will recur. Furthermore, those continuing relationships cast 
doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
While there is evidence that certain charges have been dismissed or otherwise 
not prosecuted, as well as one acquittal, those dismissals, non-prosecutions, and the 
acquittal, do not, without substantially more, necessarily reflect that Applicant did not 
commit the individual offenses charged. Generally, the passage of time without 
recurrence of additional criminal activity, can be construed as some evidence of 
successful rehabilitation. However, in this instance, the criminal activities have 
continued over time. Applicant’s employment record is unknown. While a person should 
not be held forever accountable for misconduct from the distant past, in this instance the 
past is recent, and the concerns about future criminal conduct are continuing.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(e), security concerns may be raised when there is a “personal conduct, or 
concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. . . .”  As noted 
above, Applicant’s continuing history of criminal conduct, domestic issues, and traffic 
infractions, over a 22-year period, consists of 10 incidents involving criminal charges, 
arrests, convictions, or citations, for a variety of actions, plus one parking violation. 
 
9 
                                      
 
Police and judicial authorities were involved in those incidents. Applicant was convicted 
of DUI (1993) and DWI (2006), and fined for driving while license suspended 1st offense 
(2014). And, there is his more recent other parking violation (2015). The two relatively 
recent serious charges, traffic offense – DUI alcohol or drugs; and resist officer – 
obstruct without violence, are still pending court action, and have not been resolved. 
Applicant’s underlying conduct with a number of these incidents involved questionable 
judgment or an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. Likewise, his 
continued association with his girlfriend and alcohol increase the probability of 
recurrence.  AG ¶ 16(e) has been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(c) may apply if “the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, AG ¶ 17(d) may 
apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” Similarly, if “the individual has taken 
positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress,” AG ¶ 17(e) may apply.  
 
AG ¶ 17(c) applies only to the parking citation. AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) do not 
apply. Applicant acknowledged that his accumulation of events “paints an unflattering 
picture” that is but a small part of his total character. He indicated he has received 
counseling over the past two years to improve his relationship and communication skills, 
but he failed to submit any documentation to support his claims pertaining to 
counseling. Furthermore, it should be noted that despite his purported counseling 
efforts, Applicant’s involvement in questionable and criminal conduct has increased over 
the past two years, with five incidents (not counting the 2015 parking infraction) 
occurring since January 2014. In the absence of some significant emotional and 
attitudinal changes by Applicant, it appears that such overall behavior is likely to recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
10 
                                      
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated this case in 
light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.18    
    
 There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He is an 
honorably discharged, disabled veteran.  He has been with his current employer since 
September 1997. He claims that he is an active participant in a particular community 
improvement program. He was awarded custody of his then minor children. He claims 
to have received counseling over the past two years to improve his relationship and 
communication skills. Although there were several charges filed against him over the 
years, some of those charges were subsequently dismissed for various reasons, and he 
was acquitted of one alcohol-related traffic offense.  
 
 The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s conduct occurred over a period of 22 years. He has been convicted of some 
charges, fined, ordered into house arrest, placed on probation, ordered to attend DUI 
school, required to perform community service, had his operator’s license suspended, 
and had a temporary restraining order issued against him. As noted above, his 
consumption of alcohol and his strained relationship with his girlfriend are generally 
common themes. Although Applicant seemingly recognized his issues regarding his 
girlfriend, nevertheless, he reconciled with her. That, added to his minimizing the 
significance of alcohol on his conduct, raises the likelihood that additional criminal 
conduct will recur. Those continuing relationships cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g. through 1.j:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:    For Applicant 
  
  
                                                          
18
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against  Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
