 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-00193 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison Patricia O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the allegation that he deliberately falsified his security 
clearance application. However, he did not mitigate security concerns raised by his 
delinquent debts. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his conduct 
and circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations and 
personal conduct guidelines.1 Applicant answered the SOR, waived his right to a 
hearing, and elected to have his case decided on the written record (Answer).  
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On October 7, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM lists and references eleven documentary 
exhibits, which are admitted into the record without objection as Exhibits 1 – 11.  
 
 On October 19, 2005, Applicant received the FORM and the referenced exhibits. 
He was advised that he had 30 days to submit a response and any additional matters in 
support of his case. (Appellate Exhibit (Ax.) I) He did not submit a response or any 
additional matters within the 30-day time period.  
 
 On January 20, 2016, I was assigned Applicant’s case. On my own motion, I 
opened the record to provide him a final opportunity to submit matters in support of his 
case, to include documentation to corroborate his claim that his former wife was 
responsible for paying the major debt referenced in SOR 1.c. (Ax. II) Initially, February 
5, 2016, was set as the deadline for the submission of any such materials, but at 
Applicant’s request, I extended the deadline to February 19, 2016. (Ax. III) Applicant 
submitted an e-mail noting he had no additional documents to submit. His e-mail is 
admitted into the record as Exhibit (Ex.) 12. The record closed on February 19, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, who is in his forties, is a college graduate. He has been married and 
divorced three times. He is the father of three children. He served in the U.S. military 
from approximately 1990 to 2005, with some breaks in service. His military service 
included deployments, but the record is devoid of any information as to when, where, or 
the number of deployments. No evidence was submitted regarding Applicant’s combat 
record, if any, or military duty performance. Applicant left the military in 2005 due to a 
physical injury, but no information regarding the injury or whether it was service-related 
was provided. (Ex. 5; Ex. 10; Ex. 11)  
 
Applicant indicated on a recent security clearance application that he received an 
Honorable discharge following the completion of each period of military service. 
However, during a security clearance background interview, Applicant acknowledged 
that upon completion of one of his terms of enlistment he received a General (under 
honorable conditions) discharge. Compare, Ex. 5 at 16-18, with, Ex. 11 at 2. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems date back to at least 2003, as evidenced by an 
April 2003 credit report. This credit report reflects 20 accounts that were in collection 
status, charged-off, or had been reduced to judgment or lien. Applicant’s past-due 
debts, at the time, totaled nearly $60,000. (Ex. 9 at 1 – 7)  
 
During a 2004 security clearance background interview, Applicant acknowledged 
he had numerous past-due debts, including over $15,000 in back child support for his 
two oldest children. He told the background investigator that his financial problems were 
caused by his former spouses’ mismanagement of their finances while he was 
deployed. He promised to contact his overdue creditors and resolve his debts. (Ex. 10) 
Applicant was subsequently granted a security clearance. (Ex. 5 at 31) 
 
3 
 
 
In May 2014, Applicant submitted his current security clearance application in 
connection with his job as a federal contractor. He only listed his youngest child, not the 
two oldest children for whom he previously owed a significant amount of back child 
support. His application reflects full-time employment since at least 2002, except for a 
three-month period from October 2005 – January 2006 when he was unemployed.  
 
In response to questions on the security clearance application regarding his 
financial record, Applicant denied having any past-due debts that needed to be 
disclosed. (Ex. 5 at 33) A credit check revealed that he had two medical collection 
accounts for $51 and $91, respectively. Applicant was asked about these two collection 
accounts during his background interview in June 2014. He told the investigator he was 
unaware of the two accounts prior to the interview, but promised to address them 
following the interview. (Ex. 8 at 6, 8; Ex. 11 at 4)2  
 
 The SOR lists the two medical collection accounts at SOR 1.a and 1.d. It also 
references another medical collection account for $40 at SOR 1.b. This medical debt 
first appears on a June 2015 credit report (or, over a year after Applicant submitted his 
security clearance application). (Ex. 6 at 1) Applicant admits all three medical debts in 
his Answer. He did not supply any information as to what efforts he has taken to 
address them. As of the close of the record, SOR 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d remain unresolved.  
 
 In addition to these three debts, the SOR lists a $9,239 charged-off account. This 
account is also reflected on the June 2015 credit report. Based on a review of the credit 
reports, Applicant stopped making the monthly payments due on the account shortly 
after his background interview and the creditor eventually charged off the account.3 
Applicant claims that his former wife (spouse number 3) is responsible for the account. 
The credit reports reflect that it was a joint account. Applicant, however, provided no 
documentation, such as a settlement agreement or a divorce decree, to corroborate his 
claim that his former spouse is solely responsible for the debt. As of the close of the 
record, SOR 1.c also remains unresolved. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
                                                          
2 The 2014 credit report also reflects two additional collection accounts totaling over $16,000, including a 
$13,730 collection account owed to the Government for past-due child support. (Ex. 8 at 4 – 5). Applicant 
was confronted about these two additional debts during his background interview. (Ex. 11 at 4) Neither 
debt is alleged in the SOR. Accordingly, as with all such non-alleged matters, I have only considered 
these debts in assessing Applicant’s mitigation case, credibility, and the whole-person factors. 
 
3 See Ex. 6 at 4 (2015 credit report reflects that the last payment on the account was made in August 
2014, or three months after the security clearance application was submitted); Ex. 8 (2014 credit report 
reflects that, as of the time of the background interview, Applicant was paying as agreed with no prior 
reported delinquencies). 
 
4 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that applicants are afforded 
the due process provided by the Directive. Judges make certain that an applicant 
receives fair notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those 
issues, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty in accurately assessing the security suitability of an 
individual and the paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme 
Court has held that “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The financial considerations security concern is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s accumulation of nearly $10,000 in delinquent debt, as established by 
his admissions and the other record evidence, raises this concern. The record evidence 
also raises the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19(a), inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts, and 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The financial considerations guideline lists a number of conditions that could 
mitigate the security concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions in 
assessing Applicant’s case, including the following:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Although there is some evidence to 
suggest that Applicant’s overall financial situation has improved since 2003, the recent 
accumulation of nearly $10,000 in delinquent debt raises concerns he may be returning 
to the poor financial habits of the past. Furthermore, the timing of when some of the 
SOR debts became delinquent is also disconcerting, as it occurred after the background 
interview. This interview, in part, touched upon Applicant’s finances. Applicant should 
have been aware from the interview and his prior experience that an individual’s failure 
to pay their financial obligations may place their eligibility for a security clearance in 
jeopardy. Despite this, two of the SOR debts became delinquent after the interview and, 
as of the close of the record, remain unresolved. 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant did not supply documentation to support his claim that his wife was 
responsible for the debt referenced in SOR 1.c. He also did not provide information 
regarding the current state of his finances or evidence of having received financial 
counseling. He failed to submit documentation of what efforts, if any, he has made to 
address the SOR debts, including the two relatively minor debts he was made aware of 
during his background interview 20 months ago.  
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to this nation’s secrets.4 Applicant failed to meet his burden. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his security clearance 
application by failing to disclose the past-due debts referenced in SOR 1.a – 1.d. An 
allegation of falsification requires consideration of the personal conduct security 
concern, which is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Individuals seeking a security clearance must provide truthful responses to 
questions asked of them during their background investigation, including in responding 
to questions on the security clearance application. However, the omission of material 
information standing alone is not enough to establish that an individual intentionally 
falsified their application. Instead, an administrative judge must examine the facts and 
circumstances surrounding the omission to determine an individual’s true intent.5  
 
Applicant denies he deliberately falsified his security clearance application and, 
as such, the Government bears the burden of establishing the allegation by substantial 
evidence. Based on a review of the record evidence, I find that the Government did not 
meet its burden. Of note, only the two minor debts referenced in SOR 1.a and 1.d, 
totaling less than $150, would presumably have been in collection status and required 
disclosure when the application was submitted. The other two SOR debts were not 
delinquent at the time the application was submitted. As for the two minor medical 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005).  
 
7 
 
 
collection accounts referenced in SOR 1.a and 1.d, Applicant’s statement to the 
investigator that he was unaware of these two debts at the time he submitted his 
application is plausible and consistent with his SOR answer. Accordingly, SOR 2.a is 
decided in Applicant’s favor.6  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my comments under Guideline F 
and highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 I gave due consideration to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case, 
to include Applicant’s military service. However, he has a lengthy history of financial 
problems and he has started to once again accumulate delinquent debt, raising 
concerns about his judgment, reliability, and the other pertinent character traits required 
of those granted access to classified information. Applicant did not take advantage of 
the multiple opportunities provided to him to submit evidence of having addressed his 
past-due debts and to show that he manages his current finances in a responsible 
fashion. Accordingly, notwithstanding the favorable information in the record, the 
security concerns raised by his finances remain. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with doubts about his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:         Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct)        FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:          For Applicant 
                                                          
6 In reaching this favorable finding, I considered that Applicant may not have provided fully accurate 
information about his background during the present and past background investigations. Notably, he did 
not list his children on his current application – the very same children that he previously owed a 
significant amount of back child support. His current application also does not appear to accurately reflect 
the characterization of all his military discharges. Also, at least two significant collection accounts should 
have been listed on the current security clearance application. However, based on the record evidence, it 
is unclear whether these two debts were accurately reflected on the June 2014 credit report or, even if 
accurately reported, whether Applicant was aware of the debts. Furthermore, this potentially adverse 
information does not alter the fact that the Government failed to establish the falsification allegation, as 
drafted; nor does it elevate the omission of two medical debts totaling less than $150 sufficiently high 
enough to qualify as a material omission.  
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
