 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 15-00312 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 1, 2011, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On August 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
                                                          
1
 Item 3 (e-QIP, dated December 1, 2011). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR, as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated September 15, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.2 A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant on December 2, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within 
a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished 
a copy of the Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant 
received the FORM on December 8, 2015. A response was due by January 7, 2016. On 
January 6, 2016, Applicant submitted his response with attachments. Department 
Counsel had no objections to the documents submitted, and I marked them as Applicant 
Items (AI) A through F. He also resubmitted a copy of his Answer to the SOR, but it was 
not marked as it was already part of the record. The case was assigned to me on 
February 17, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, while not specifically using the terms “admit” or “deny,” 
Applicant acknowledged and addressed the sole factual allegation pertaining to financial 
considerations in the SOR (¶ 1.a.). Applicant’s admission is incorporated herein as a 
finding of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and 
upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as an engineering staff analyst with his current employer since August 2002.3 
He received a bachelor’s degree in business administration in May 1980.4 He has never 
served with the U.S. military.5 Applicant has held a secret security clearance since 
1984.6 Applicant was married in December 1984.7 He has one daughter, born in 1991.8 
                                                          
2
 Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated September 15, 2015). 
 
3
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 9-10. 
 
4
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 8. 
 
5
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
6
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 25-26. 
 
7
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 14. 
 
8
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 16-17. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations9 
 
Although Applicant experienced some periodic financial difficulties as early as 
late 2006 and early 2007, there was essentially nothing unusual about his finances until 
mid-2007. In May 2007, Applicant’s wife was injured at work when an item weighing 
one-half ton was dropped on her foot. During the ensuing two years, she received a 
worker’s compensation package of partial wages. The payments ceased in May 2009. 
Two months later, her employer terminated her employment, thus denying her a 
pension accumulated over 27 years of employment. The following year, her state 
disability payments ended in May 2010. Applicant contends his financial problems 
commenced in 2010 when the payments ceased and the family monthly income was 
reduced by $1,600. Family finances recently improved when Applicant’s wife was 
awarded monthly Social Security disability insurance (SSDI) benefits of $1,500. 
 
At about the same time his financial problems started, the large national bank 
(Bank A) that had absorbed his original home mortgage lender invoked a clause which 
allowed them to add an escrow account plus homeowners insurance which added 
$1,290 to the monthly payment, making the new amount $3,200. Since he was already 
paying homeowners insurance and escrow taxes, it was easier to manage the new 
schedule. However, the bank required 24 months’ worth of escrow payments rather 
than the normal 12 months, and that action negatively impacted the family budget even 
further. With the reduced income, some monthly mortgage payments were missed 
during 2010, but all 2011 payments were timely made. Other accounts became 
delinquent as well, and they were placed for collection and, in some cases, charged off. 
Applicant also lost two cars in accidents in 2011 and 2012, and replaced one with an 
approved loan, and he has never missed a timely payment. In 2013, a shared 80-foot 
fence was destroyed by storms, and was rebuilt. Applicant’s portion of the shared-cost 
was $6,360, setting his finances back even further. 
 
Applicant engaged the professional services of an attorney to assist him in 
dealing with the mortgage lender. Two years later, a settlement with Bank A was 
achieved, and Applicant was awarded $12,500.10 Bank A transferred the mortgage to 
                                                          
9
 General source information pertaining to the financial account discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: Item 3, supra note 1, at 29; Item 2, supra note 2, at 1; Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, 
and Equifax Credit Report, dated December 8, 2011); Item 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated December 11, 2014); Item 
6 (U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Order Confirming Chapter 13 Plan, dated September 16, 2015). More recent information 
can be found in the exhibits furnished and individually identified. 
  
10
 Although not in evidence, I have taken administrative notice of a certain well-known fact regarding the 
bank in question. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. 
See McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 
at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-
18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to 
notice facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 
25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Administrative notice may utilize 
authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 126 S.Ct. 2749 (2006) (citing 
internet sources for numerous documents). 
  
In December 2014, as a result of a successful class-action lawsuit, the bank in question and an insurance 
company agreed to pay $228 million to settle claims that they engaged in a kickback scheme called "force-placed" 
insurance, inflating the cost of insurance that homeowners were forced to buy, even though routine mortgage 
 
4 
                                      
 
another large bank (Bank B), and Applicant’s problems increased, rather than 
decreased. Bank B carried over the stale balance from Bank A, and Applicant’s first 
payment coupon required a six-figure payment. Applicant then engaged the assistance 
of another law firm to assist him. The earlier award settlement contained a “fail-safe” 
clause which purportedly prevented Applicant from suing Bank B for any fraudulent 
activities it had inherited. He had tried working with the banks under the Home 
Affordable Modification Program (HAMP), but that effort was unsuccessful. Applicant’s 
application for a loan modification was denied after two months, purportedly because 
his home value (between $675,000 and $700,000) was too high to qualify.11 It also 
meant that Applicant could not seek a short sale. It did not prevent Bank B from 
attempting to auction the home for a fraction of the equity.  
 
Applicant’s attorney recommended a Chapter 13 bankruptcy to halt any 
foreclosure or auction, and to afford Applicant an opportunity to resolve the issues with 
Bank B over a five-year plan of payments. Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition on August 6, 2015, nearly two weeks before the SOR was issued. That plan 
was confirmed on September 16, 2015. Under the plan, Applicant was to pay the 
Trustee $3,059 on September 6, 2015, and make subsequent monthly payments of 
$7,132 each month thereafter. The duration of the plan was 60 months. Per the plan, 
Applicant paid his attorney $4,000 prior to the filing of the bankruptcy case; and the 
Trustee was to pay the mortgage lender (Bank B) $2,658.53 per month. On August 28, 
2015, Applicant also paid Bank B $3,407.21.12 
  
Applicant made his initial payment, as well as three subsequent monthly 
payments in October, November, and December 2015, totaling $21,396, and his 
January 2016 payment was scheduled to be made on January 7, 2016.13 On January 6, 
2016, Applicant indicated he had paid the Trustee $34,634.21, of which $32,331.05 was 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
agreements do allow lenders to charge homeowners for the insurance. See Cheryl Hall, et al. v. [Bank A], et al., Case 
No. 12-cv-22700-FAM (S.D. Fla. 2014). 
 
Also, in August 2014, the U.S. Department of Justice reached a $16.65 billion settlement with Bank A – the 
largest civil settlement with a single entity in American history — to resolve federal and state claims against the bank 
and its former and current subsidiaries. The bank agreed to provide $7 billion of relief to struggling homeowners, 
including funds that will help defray tax liability as a result of mortgage modification, forbearance or forgiveness.  That 
relief was to take various forms, including principal reduction loan modifications that result in numerous homeowners 
no longer being underwater on their mortgages and finally having substantial equity in their homes. See Department 
of Justice, Office of Public Affairs, Press Release, [ - - ] to Pay $16.65 Billion in Historic Justice Department 
Settlement for Financial Fraud Leading Up to and During the Financial Crisis, dated August 21, 2014. 
   
11
 The HAMP is an official program of the U.S. Department of the Treasury & the U.S. Department of 
Housing and Urban Development. A homeowner may be eligible for HAMP if he or she meets the following basic 
criteria: (a) is struggling to make mortgage payments due to financial hardship; (b) are delinquent or in danger of 
falling behind on the mortgage; (c) the mortgage was obtained on or before January 1, 2009; (d) the property has not 
been condemned; and (e) up to $729,750 is owed on the primary residence. For a full description of HAMP, see 
https://www.makinghomeaffordable.gov/steps/Pages/step-2-program-hamp.aspx 
 
12
 AI D (Money Transfer, dated August 28, 2015); AI E (Money Transfer, dated August 28, 2015); AI F 
(Receipt, dated September 16, 2015); Item 2 (Check, dated September 15, 2015). 
 
13
 AI C (Transactions, undated); Trustee Pay Summary, undated). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
obligated to the mortgage lender, with the balance applied to other debts in the plan. 
Applicant included several creditors, including Bank B, in the bankruptcy plan.  
 
On January 7, 2016, attorneys for Bank B filed a Notice of Motion and Motion for 
Relief from the Automatic Stay, alleging that the post-petition mortgage payments due 
on the note secured by a deed of trust on the property had not been made to Bank B. 
Bank B sought to terminate the bankruptcy as it pertains to the property, and sought 
permission to proceed directly to foreclosure.14 The declared costs on the original 
mortgage of $333,000 were listed by Bank B as follows: principal was $345,637; 
accrued interest was $128,998.14; costs were $6,200.99; advances for property taxes 
and insurance were $25,400.89; minus a partial balance of $2,915.23 already paid; and 
the total claim was $503,357.79. Bank B failed to credit Applicant with any of his post-
petition payments. Applicant’s attorney filed an opposition to the Motion, and no 
decision had yet been made with respect to the motion.15  
 
Applicant listed the residence for sale with a realtor in December 2015 with the 
expectation that it should sell relatively quickly. Once the sale is approved by the 
Trustee, Applicant plans to use any remaining proceeds from the sale to apply to any 
remaining non-SOR delinquent debt.16 In this regard, Applicant’s December 2011 credit 
report notes that several formerly delinquent debts that had been charged off are no 
longer in that status in that those charged-off debts have been paid.17 Applicant is in the 
process of resolving his SOR-related mortgage account. 
Applicant did not submit a Personal Financial Statement reflecting his net 
monthly income, his estimated monthly expenses, his total debt payments (aside from 
the monthly payments made to the Trustee), or any monthly remainder available for 
discretionary spending or savings. There is no evidence that Applicant ever received 
financial counseling. While he is in the process of resolving the one delinquent 
mortgage account, it appears that Applicant’s financial problems are under control and 
that his financial status has improved significantly. 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”18 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
                                                          
14
 Item 7 (Notice of Motion and Motion for Relief from the Automatic Stay, dated January 7, 2016). 
 
15
 AI A (Applicant’s Response to the FORM, dated January 6, 2016). 
 
16
 AI A, supra note 14. 
 
17
 See Item 5, supra note 9. 
 
18
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”19   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”20 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.21  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”22 
                                                          
19
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
20
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
21
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
22
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
7 
                                      
 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”23 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s significant financial problems arose in 2010 when he had 
insufficient money to maintain all of his monthly payments. He was apparently forced to 
prioritize his bills, and his home mortgage with Bank A and various non-SOR accounts 
became delinquent. Some of those non-SOR accounts were placed for collection and 
charged off, and the residence went into pre-foreclosure. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
                                                          
23
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”24 Under AG ¶ 20(e) it is potentially mitigating if “the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) apply. Applicant’s financial problems 
were not caused by his frivolous or irresponsible spending, and he did not spend 
beyond his means. Instead, those financial problems were largely beyond his control. 
The activities and actions leading up to the period of financial difficulty actually started 
to develop in May 2007 when Applicant’s wife was injured on the job. During the 
ensuing two years, she received a worker’s compensation package of partial wages. 
The payments ceased in May 2009. Two months later, her employer terminated her 
employment, thus denying her a pension accumulated over 27 years of employment. 
The following year, her state disability payments ended. When the payments ceased 
and the family monthly income was reduced by $1,600, the financial problems 
commenced. They were exacerbated by the loss of two cars in accidents and when an 
80-foot fence was destroyed by storms and rebuilt for $6,360.  
 
The family finances were even further negatively impacted by the questionable 
and illegal actions of Bank A that absorbed his original home mortgage lender. Those 
actions increased Applicant’s monthly payments an additional $1,290, and required 24 
months’ worth of escrow payments rather than the normal 12 months. His loan 
modification efforts under HAMP were denied.  
 
Applicant never shied away from his fiscal responsibilities. He did not ignore his 
creditors. While attempting to work with Bank A and its eventual successor, Bank B, 
Applicant addressed non-SOR accounts. Applicant resolved a number of those 
accounts well before the SOR was issued. The biggest hurdle was Applicant’s home 
mortgage account, which Banks A and B made nearly impossible to resolve. Following 
the guidance received from his attorney, Applicant filed for a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, not 
to avoid his financial responsibility, but to enable him the time and opportunity to resolve 
the delinquency. Applicant complied with the bankruptcy plan and has made large 
                                                          
24
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
monthly payments to the Trustee since the plan was approved. Applicant furnished 
documentary proof of those payments. Nevertheless, Bank B denied that any such 
payments had been received. Instead of resolving the issue amicably, Bank B has 
inflated the value of the mortgage and is seeking to terminate the bankruptcy plan as it 
pertains to the mortgage, and it wants to foreclose on the property and sell it.  
 
Applicant’s house is now on the market. Once it is sold, the issue will be 
resolved. Family finances recently improved when Applicant’s wife was awarded 
monthly SSDI benefits of $1,500. The non-SOR accounts are currently in the process of 
being resolved or are awaiting their turn in the process. Applicant’s financial problems 
are being resolved and are under control. While Applicant may not have enjoyed the 
benefit of financial counseling, he appears to have acted prudently and responsibly with 
the assistance of attorneys. Applicant’s actions, under the circumstances confronting 
him, do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.25 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.26   
     
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant failed 
to insure that his home mortgage account was kept current. As a result, the mortgage 
went into a pre-foreclosure status. He filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 13. 
 
                                                          
25
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
26
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966). See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. June 2, 2006). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
The mitigating evidence is more substantial and compelling. Applicant has been 
with his current employer since August 2002. He has held a secret security clearance 
since 1984. There is no evidence of misuse of information technology systems, 
mishandling protected information, substance abuse, or criminal conduct. Applicant’s 
financial problems were not caused by his frivolous or irresponsible spending, and he 
did not spend beyond his means. Rather, they were largely beyond his control. The 
activities and actions leading up to the period of financial difficulty actually started to 
develop in May 2007 when Applicant’s wife was injured on the job. For two years, she 
received a worker’s compensation package of partial wages. The payments ceased in 
May 2009. Two months later, her employer terminated her employment, thus denying 
her a pension accumulated over 27 years of employment. The following year, her state 
disability payments ended. When the payments ceased and the family monthly income 
was reduced, the financial problems commenced. They were exacerbated by the loss of 
two cars in accidents; the costs of rebuilding a destroyed fence; and the questionable 
and illegal actions of two banks holding the mortgage.  
 
Applicant applied for HAMP, but his application was denied. He subsequently 
filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 13 to enable him the time and opportunity to resolve 
the delinquency. He complied with the bankruptcy plan and has made large monthly 
payments to the Trustee since the plan was approved, and payments are continuing. 
The house is now on the market, and once it is sold, the issue will be resolved. Also, 
family finances recently improved when Applicant’s wife was awarded her monthly SSDI 
benefits. The non-SOR accounts are currently in the process of being resolved or are 
awaiting their turn in the process. There are clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are being resolved and are under control.  
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
   
  
 
11 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
