KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: The Appeal Board evaluates a Judge’s language in light of the entirety of the Decision. 
The Judge’s characterization of Applicant’s conduct as “drug abuse” was not error.  The Judge’s
finding about Applicant’s having received training regarding the inconsistency between drug
abuse and holding a clearance was a reasonable inference.  The Board cannot consider new
evidence on appeal.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 15-00207.a1
DATE: 03/28/2016
DATE: March 28, 2016
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-00207
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Sean M. Bigley, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
6, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case
be decided on the written record.  On January 28, 2016, after the close of the record, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert E. Coacher denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge made the following findings:  Applicant is 38 years old and has held a security
clearance since 2006.  He admitted using marijuana approximately three times between August 2013
and February 2014.  Applicant obtained it from a friend.  He explained that his marijuana use during
that time frame was related to an emotional and stressful period in his life when he was going
through a divorce.  The divorce took place in August 2013.  He stated his uses of marijuana during
that time were “in celebration of my divorce, a life changing event that has restored my peace of
mind and happiness. . . .”  He further stated that he discontinued his use when he realized it no
longer contributed to his peace of mind and happiness.  He did not report his use of marijuana to his
security manager at the time he used it.  He reported it when he completed his security clearance
reinvestigation application in June 2014.  He claims that he “didn’t think about it [using marijuana]
as being an illegal act and he did not realize it was in conflict with his security clearance.”  He
received annual training from his company on the prohibition of using illegal drugs and the reporting
requirements for someone who engages in such use.  Applicant provided a written statement of
intent not to smoke marijuana in the future.  He has received contribution awards and awards for
excellence from his company.
 
 The Judge concluded: Applicant’s drug use at his age, education level, and security
background is troubling and a cause for concern.  His claim of ignorance of the impact of using
marijuana on his security clearance is not persuasive, nor is his stated lack of realization that using
marijuana was illegal.  Using the drug to celebrate his divorce was demonstrative of poor judgment. 
He has participated in annual training, which explains the consequences of illegal drug use and
reporting requirements.  His actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and his
judgment.  Applicant receives partial credit in mitigation for completing a statement of intent not
to smoke marijuana in the future, but there is no evidence that he terminated his friendship with his
neighbor who supplied him with the marijuana.  He did not mitigate the concerns under Guideline
H.
Applicant asserts that the Judge erred because he made a key factual misstatement and took
other information out of context.  He notes that the Judge accurately quoted Applicant when
Applicant stated he used marijuana “in celebration” of his divorce, but that the Judge ignored a
qualifying statement that made his “celebration” comment, and his conduct, less flippant.1  Applicant
asserts that as the Judge presents the quote, it appears that Applicant remains flippant over his
conduct and is lacking in remorse.  After reviewing the Judge’s decision and the record evidence,
the Board concludes that the Judge did not err.
There is no requirement that a judge discuss each and every piece of evidence in his or her
decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007).  There is nothing
intrinsically significant about the omitted quote that required its inclusion in the Judge’s decision. 
1The statement reads, “I mistook the elation of finally being done with a personal disaster with a reason for
celebration with drug use.”
2
Moreover, the Board will not evaluate language in a Judge’s decision in isolation, but rather will
consider the decision in its entirety to discern what the Judge found and concluded.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 01-22311 at 4 ( App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2003).  A review of the Judge’s decision does not
indicate that the Judge viewed Applicant’s behavior as flippant or lacking in remorse.  The Judge
cites to Applicant’s assertion that his marijuana use was related to an emotional and stressful period
in his life when he was going through his divorce.  The Judge accepts without comment Applicant’s
assertion that his marijuana use stemmed from something serious.  In his analysis section, the
Judge’s only comment about Applicant using marijuana to celebrate his divorce was his conclusion
that such use was demonstrative of poor judgment.  Applicant concedes the accuracy of this
assessment on appeal.
Similarly, Applicant takes issue with the Judge’s finding that Applicant discontinued his use
when he realized that it “no longer” contributed to his peace of mind and happiness.2  He asserts that
such wording by the Judge implies a concession by Applicant that, at some time, he did find
marijuana use a contributing factor to his peace of mind and happiness, and this outlook shifts
Applicant’s casual use to some form of drug abuse or dependence.  Applicant’s argument lacks
merit.  While the Judge did not get the quote from Applicant precisely right, the Board detects no
harmful error.  Contrary to Applicant’s appeal argument, nothing in the Judge’s decision suggests
that he based his ultimate conclusion on a perception that Applicant was at any time dependent upon
the drug for a general state of well being.  Rather, he based his conclusions in part by applying a
portion of Guideline H that defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug
in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction (emphasis added).”3  Thus, it was not
necessary for the Judge to find that Applicant had a psychological dependency on marijuana to
conclude that he had engaged in drug abuse, as defined by the Directive.  The Board notes that the
Judge also based his conclusions on a Guideline H disqualifying condition that references any illegal
drug use (emphasis added) after being granted a security clearance.4   
Applicant argues that there is no basis in the record for the Judge’s finding that he received
annual training from his company on the prohibition of using illegal drugs and the reporting
requirements for someone who engages in such use.  Applicant’s argument lacks merit.  It is true
that while the Government’s evidence references annual refresher training, it does not establish that
the training specifically dealt with drug use and the reporting requirements relating to it.  However,
Applicant’s Exhibit C contains a statement by Applicant where he indicates, “Although I took the
annual refresher training, I had never used illegal drugs before, and never planned to use them, so
when I took the training, I honestly did not take note on what to do in the event I did use them.” 
Given such a statement, which strongly suggests that the topic of illegal drug use was included in
2The actual wording of Applicant’s comment, taken from his answer to the SOR, was, “I. . . discontinued the
marijuana use after I discovered that the drug use did NOT (emphasis in original) contribute to my peace of mind and
happiness.”  
3Directive, Enclosure 2  ¶ 24(b).  Thus, Applicant’s apparent argument that there is no basis for the Judge’s
application of the disqualifying condition at ¶ 25(a) is without merit.  
4Directive, Enclosure 2  ¶ 25(g).
3
the training, the Judge, under the substantial evidence standard, could reasonably infer that
Applicant had received such training.  In any event, Applicant’s prior completion of a security
clearance application should have placed him on notice that drug use was incompatible with holding
a clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03450 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015).
 Applicant asserts that the Judge failed to apply appropriate weight to his unusual life
circumstances at the time as well as the passage of time since his marijuana use when evaluating the
case for mitigation.  The Board finds no reason to believe that the Judge did not properly weigh the
evidence or that he failed to consider all the evidence of record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06622
at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2012).  We have considered the totality of Applicant’s arguments on appeal
and find no error in the Judge’s ultimate conclusions regarding mitigation.  The gravamen of the
Judge’s decision was the troubling nature of Applicant’s marijuana use, notwithstanding the fact that
he used it only about three times.  This included consideration of Applicant’s age, education level,
and status as the holder of a security clearance.  Additionally, the Judge did not find persuasive
Applicant’s claims of ignorance regarding the legal status of marijuana use and its effect on his
clearance.  Given this record, notwithstanding some evidence of mitigation, the Judge’s ultimate
conclusion that Applicant had not overcome the Government’s security concerns was sustainable. 
 
Applicant’s brief is accompanied by a  volume of material that is not part of the record below
and therefore constitutes new evidence.  The Board cannot consider such evidence.  Directive ¶ E3.
1.29.  Applicant’s stated reason for considering the evidence notwithstanding the prohibition is not
persuasive.  
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett         
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
