 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-01446 
  ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 26, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. DOD CAF took that action under 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
Department of Defense 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as 
amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a position of trust. On September 22, 
2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. This case was assigned 
 
2 
 
 
to me on January 7, 2016. On February 2, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for February 25, 
2015. The hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4 that were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered no 
exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on March 4, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been 
working for that employer since February 2013. She graduated from high school in 1996 
and earned an associate degree in 2004. She is married and has two children, ages 15 
and 21. She has served in a position of trust since February 2013.1 
  
The SOR alleged that Applicant had 25 delinquent debts totaling $25,982 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a –1.y). In her Answer to the SOR, she admitted each allegation. Her admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to periods of unemployment for her 
and her husband, having low-paying jobs, and the burden of raising two children. She 
was unemployed from November 2011 to February 2013 when her contract with a 
company ended. She also was unemployed from January 2011 to July 2011 and from 
June 2005 to October 2005. She received unemployment compensation during her 
periods of unemployment. Her husband is a machine operator who was unemployed for 
a couple of months in 2011 when they moved to their present location. At their prior 
residence, he worked off and on at temporary jobs. Applicant also mentioned that she 
suffered from medical problems that have caused her to miss work.3  
 
Applicant testified that she had not recently made any payments toward the 
alleged debts. She believed she made the last payment on those debts in 2013. She 
has not received any financial counseling. In her Office of Personnel Management 
interview in January 2013, she indicated that she would contact creditors in an attempt 
to make payment arrangements, but has not done so. She has not contacted a debt 
consolidation company, but indicated she planned to do so in the next month or so. She 
does not currently use credit cards. She stated that she and her husband are paying 
their everyday bills and have not incurred any new delinquent debts in the past two 
years.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-7, 21; GE 1. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2, 3. 
3 Tr. 20-21, 26-28; GE 1, 4. 
4 Tr. 20-21, 24-26; GE 4. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s annual salary is $21,000. Her husband’s annual salary is $36,000. 
They currently rent a home, but are planning to buy one. She estimated that her net 
monthly remainder (monthly income minus monthly expenses and debt payments) was 
about $300 to $400 a month. At the time of the hearing, she had about $35 in a 
checking account and $4,000 in a savings account. She recently received the $4,000 as 
a settlement on an insurance claim. 5 
 
Policies 
  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) In a memorandum dated November 19, 2004, the Deputy Under 
Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) indicated that trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply the procedures contained in the Directive before making a 
determination. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
5 Tr. 21-26. 
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 sets forth the trustworthiness concern for financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 lists several disqualifying conditions that could raise trustworthiness 
concerns. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 In this case, Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that she was unable or 
unwilling to satisfy for an extended period. The evidence is sufficient to establish the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant and her husband have experienced periods of unemployment. 
Additionally, she has suffered from medical problems. While their periods of 
unemployment and her medical problems were conditions beyond her control that 
contributed to her financial problems, she failed to establish that she acted responsibly 
under the circumstances for AG ¶ 20(b) to fully apply. Even though she and her 
husband have been employed for the past three years, she failed to initiate contact with 
the creditors, make payments toward the alleged debts, or take any other meaningful 
steps to resolve them. Her financial problems remain ongoing and significant. From the 
evidence presented, I am unable to find that her financial problems will be resolved 
within a reasonable period. Her financial problems continue to cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. AG ¶¶ 
20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In positon of trust adjudications, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.6 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, does not outweigh the trustworthiness concerns at issue. Applicant failed to 
meet her burden of persuasion. Her unresolved financial problems leave me with doubts 
as to her current eligibility to occupy a position of trust. Following the “clearly consistent 
with national interests of national security” standard, such doubts must be resolved in 
favor of national security.  
 
                                                          
6 The nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.y:  Against Applicant 
   
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a 
position of trust. Eligibility to access sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
