 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-01057 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by personal conduct allegations, but 
he did not mitigate concerns raised by his financial issues. He accumulated a significant 
amount of delinquent debt after receiving a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge over 10 
years ago. He has not responsibly addressed his past-due debts, nor taken control of 
his financial situation. Applicant’s financial issues continue to raise a security concern. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his purported 
conduct and circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations 
and personal conduct guidelines.1  
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
On June 10, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to 
establish his eligibility for access to classified information (Answer). Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed on October 16, 2015 and, after coordinating with the 
parties, I scheduled the hearing for December 10, 2015.2 
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 – 6. Applicant testified, 
and offered Ex. A – C.3 I granted his request to keep the record open for the submission 
of additional evidence. He timely submitted Ex. D. All exhibits were admitted into the 
record.4 The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on December 18, 2015, and the 
record closed on January 7, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, who is in his late forties and a college graduate, has been employed 
as a federal contractor for over a decade. He has been with his current employer since 
2008. He holds a public trust position to handle sensitive, unclassified U.S. Government 
information related to his current work as a federal contractor.  
 
This is Applicant’s first application for a security clearance. When approached 
about applying for a security clearance, Applicant told his employer “no, thank you. . . . 
I’ve got financial issues that I know I have to deal with and it’s hard for me to deal with it 
because of my, my spouse support, child support situations.” (Tr. at 25)  
 
Notwithstanding Applicant’s initial hesitation, he submitted a security clearance 
application in February 2013. He answered questions about his financial record, 
disclosing a number of past-due debts. He noted his financial issues were related to a 
2002 divorce and the high cost of court-ordered child and spousal support. He also 
stated that he was receiving credit counseling. (Ex. 1)  
 
In 2005, or three years after the divorce, Applicant discharged his debts through 
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. After the bankruptcy, Applicant was unable to pay his debts 
because of the financial strain from the court-imposed support obligations. The SOR 
lists 24 debts for judgments and delinquent accounts placed for collection or charged off 
by the creditor for nonpayment. These 24 debts are established by Applicant’s 
admissions and the credit reports, Ex. 2 – 5, admitted into the record.5  
 
                                                          
2 See Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I (scheduling correspondence and case management order); Hx. II (hearing 
notice). 
 
3 Department Counsel and Applicant’s exhibit lists were marked Hx. III and IV, respectively.  
 
4 Applicant did not object to the offered exhibits, except Ex. 6, which he objected to on grounds of 
authenticity, reliability, and relevancy. Applicant’s objection was overruled and Ex. 6 was admitted as a 
DOD CAF business record, reflecting an interrogatory was sent and a response was purportedly not 
received. The interrogatory itself, to include the summary of background interview, was not considered.  
 
5 Applicant admits the debts listed at 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.i – 1.l, and 1.s. These nine SOR debts total over 
$10,000 and remain unresolved. SOR 1.n, which was also admitted, has now been satisfied 
 
3 
 
In October 2015, Applicant satisfied one of the SOR debts, a 2010 judgment for 
the nonpayment of legal fees related to his divorce. (Ex. 5; Ex. A) He submitted no 
documentation reflecting any efforts on his part to reach out to his other overdue 
creditors to settle and pay his longstanding debts. Instead, with the assistance of a debt 
validation firm, he recently filed form letters disputing each of the SOR debts, including 
those debts he admits in his Answer. (Ex. D) As of the close of the record, the debt 
validation process had yet to run its course and the remaining 23 SOR debts, totaling 
over $25,000, remain unresolved.  
 
Applicant has received financial counseling, but testified that “going forward” he 
was unsure of the best way to address his past-due debts. (Tr. at 41-42) His future 
plans depend in large measure upon the outcome of a family court hearing to modify his 
support obligation. The family court hearing was scheduled to take place shortly after 
his security clearance hearing, but before the record closed. If Applicant was successful 
in the family court matter, he anticipated having an additional $800 - $1,200, which he 
would use to resolve his delinquent debts. He did not submit any matters post-hearing 
indicating that his attempt to modify the court-mandated support obligation was 
successful or of having resolved any additional SOR debts.  
 
Applicant has taken some steps to reduce his recurring monthly expenses, such 
as by moving to less expensive housing. Notwithstanding these efforts to cut back on 
expenses, Applicant testified that he was currently “living paycheck to paycheck, without 
really being able to save much money.” (Tr. at 25) 
 
Applicant received an interrogatory from the DOD CAF, seeking further 
information to process his case. Applicant received the interrogatory in September 
2014. He sent in a response, but the DOD CAF never received it. Subsequently, the 
DOD CAF issued the SOR alleging, inter alia, that Applicant refused to cooperate with 
the processing of his security clearance application. No evidence was submitted that 
any efforts were taken before the issuance of the SOR to check with Applicant’s facility 
security manager (FSO) to see if an interrogatory response was submitted and, if not, to 
provide Applicant a last chance opportunity to respond.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
 
4 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that due process proceedings 
are conducted “in a fair, timely, and orderly manner.” Directive ¶ E3.1.10. Judges make 
certain that an applicant receives fair notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable 
opportunity to litigate those issues, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case 
No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The financial considerations security concern is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The security concern under Guideline F goes beyond whether an individual might 
be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their 
debts. It also addresses the extent to which an individual’s financial circumstances cast 
 
5 
 
doubt upon their judgment, self-control, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. ADP Case No. 14-01479 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 4, 2016).  
 
The record evidence raises the financial considerations security concern. 
Applicant has a long history of not paying his financial obligations, as evidenced by the 
accumulation of a significant amount of past-due debt after receiving a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy discharge over a decade ago. As of the close of the record, Applicant’s 
delinquent debts total over $25,000. This evidence also establishes the following 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a):  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The financial considerations guideline lists conditions that can mitigate the 
security concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions in assessing Applicant’s 
case, including the following:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant receives partial credit under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) for receiving 
financial counseling and satisfying the debt referenced in SOR 1.n. However, the extent 
of mitigation arising from this favorable evidence is heavily undercut by Applicant’s own 
testimony and current circumstances, which reflect that his receipt of financial 
counseling has had limited positive effect. He has yet to come up with a viable plan to 
address the multitude of past-due debts he has incurred since receiving a bankruptcy 
discharge. Furthermore, Applicant’s resolution of the debt referenced in SOR 1.n 
 
6 
 
occurred only after his overdue creditor secured a judgment against him. Satisfaction of 
a debt only after a creditor is forced to take legal action to require payment does not rise 
to the level of good-faith compliance with an individual’s financial obligations 
contemplated by AG ¶ 20(d). Nor is it consistent with the good judgment, reliability, and 
other pertinent character traits expected of clearance holders.6  
 
 Applicant’s past-due debts are numerous, substantial, and ongoing. Under the 
circumstances, his recent action to dispute the SOR debts by filing form letters with the 
creditors requesting that they validate the debts is insufficient to call into question the 
validity of the debts. Even if Applicant’s disputes are ultimately validated or some of the 
SOR debts are found unenforceable, he has yet to reach out to the creditors for those 
debts he acknowledges. None of the other mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to this nation’s secrets.7 Applicant failed to meet his burden. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct security concern is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are required to cooperate with the 
processing of their application, to include responding to official requests from the DOD 
CAF for further information. Failure to cooperate with the security clearance process 
“will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or administrative termination of 
further processing for clearance eligibility.” AG ¶ 15(a).  
 
 Here, the Government failed to establish a prima facie case for disqualification 
under Guideline E. Although Applicant was initially hesitant to apply for a security 
clearance, he complied with his employer’s request and submitted an application. He 
was honest about his financial problems from the start of the security clearance process 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 13-00311 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 24, 2014) (“In a Guideline F case, a Judge must evaluate 
an applicant’s financial condition for what it may reveal about the applicant’s self-control, judgment, and 
other pertinent qualities.”). See also, ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008).  
 
7 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
7 
 
and cooperative during the ensuing background investigation. (Tr. at 16, 42) 
Furthermore, contrary to the negative implications raised by the allegation, in all of 
Applicant’s interactions with the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals he has been 
cooperative and responsive. Accordingly, I find that Applicant submitted an interrogatory 
response, but it was not received by the DOD CAF or otherwise misfiled or lost.8  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my comments under both 
guidelines at issue, and highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 I gave due consideration to Applicant’s work as a federal contractor and that he 
holds a public trust position. I also took into account the financial constraints imposed 
on him by his circumstances. However, the circumstances that he labors under have 
existed since at least 2002, when he divorced and court orders for spousal and child 
support were put in place. He was subsequently granted a bankruptcy discharge and 
failed to take advantage of the financial reprieve to put his financial house in order. 
Instead, he started to accrue delinquent debts, which currently stand at over $25,000. 
 
 Applicant has yet to find a way to manage his finances in a manner that will allow 
him to meet his court-mandated obligations and pay his other debts. It appears that he 
has finally started to take some financially prudent steps. For instance, he recently 
satisfied a large judgment and filed disputes to verify his debts. However, it has been 
over three years since he submitted a security clearance application – an application he 
knew would be called into question due to his finances – and still his financial situation 
is far from under control. Notwithstanding Applicant’s recent efforts and other favorable 
record evidence, his finances continue to raise a security concern. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with doubts about his present eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.y:         Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:               For Applicant 
                                                          
8 It is beyond the scope of this decision whether this issue could have been resolved during the 
adjudication phase. 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
 
