KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant submitted documents which she states were provided to the Judge. 
However, at least one document post-dates the Judge’s decision.  We cannot consider new
evidence on appeal. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-00020.a1
DATE: 03/04/2016
DATE: March 4, 2016
In Re:
-------
Applicant for Public Trust Position 
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 15-00020
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On July 27, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On November 21,
2015, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative
Judge Robert E. Coacher denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in finding that her
omissions from the trustworthiness application were deliberate and whether the Judge’s adverse
decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Federal Contractor since 2014.  She was unemployed from
October 2010 until October 2011 and again in 2013.  She held a security clearance during her
employment by a Federal agency from 1988 to 1997.
Applicant’s SOR lists several delinquent debts, most of which are in collection status.  Two
of the allegations addressed the same debt, so the Judge resolved one of them in her favor. 
Applicant did not provide supporting documentation to corroborate her disputes of several of the
debts or otherwise to show that she had resolved them.  
Applicant’s questionnaire asked several questions about the status of her finances, such as
whether (1) she had ever had property repossessed; (2) any of her debts had been turned over to
collection agencies within the prior seven years; (3) she had defaulted on any loans in the prior
seven years; and/or (4) any account or credit card had been suspended, charged-off, or cancelled due
to failure to pay.  She answered “no” to each of the questions, when she should have answered
affirmatively.
  
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for her work ethic, loyalty, and trustworthiness.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s debts are recent and unresolved.  He stated that she
did not submit enough evidence to show that her financial problems are unlikely to recur.  Though
noting evidence that Applicant’s problems were affected by circumstances outside her control, the
Judge stated that she had failed to show responsible action.  He also stated that she had not
demonstrated  any action to resolve her debts, that she had received financial counseling, or that she
had a basis to dispute her debts.  
Regarding Guideline E, the Judge found that Applicant’s omissions were deliberate.  Though
noting her claim not to have understood the questions, he found that they were neither confusing nor
misleading.  He also concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from these
deliberate omissions.  
2
Discussion
Applicant challenges the finding that her omissions from the application were deliberate. 
When evaluating the deliberate nature of an applicant’s omissions or false statements, a Judge
should consider the applicant’s mens rea in light of the entirety of the record evidence.  See, e.g.,
ADP Case No. 11-06549 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2013).  The Judge’s characterization of the clarity
of the questions at issue is consistent with the record and supports the challenged finding.  The
finding of deliberate omission is sustainable.1  
Applicant cites to evidence that her finances were affected by unemployment, and she notes
that her record is clean of criminal or disciplinary actions.  She also states that she submitted
evidence of debt resolution that the Judge did not take into account.  The Judge noted that he
received the evidence that Applicant submitted in response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM). 
Decision at 2.  One of these documents was an offer for a settlement agreement from one of
Applicant’s creditors, included in the record as Applicant Exhibit (AE) B.  The Judge made findings
about this offer but noted that Applicant had provided no evidence of payments under the proposed
settlement plan.  This finding was consistent with the record that was before him.  Applicant has not
rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  ADP Case No.
14-03541 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 3, 2015).
Applicant submitted documents which she states were provided to the Judge.  However, at
least one document (a credit report) post-dates the Judge’s decision.  We cannot consider new
evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  
Applicant states that she believed that once she submitted evidence of debt resolution DOHA
officials would obtain a new credit report and conclude that she was taking care of her financial
problems.  However, in a DOHA proceeding, the applicant is responsible for submitting evidence
in mitigation and bears the burden of persuasion that he or she should have a clearance.  Directive
¶ E3.1.15.  If Applicant believed that a more recent credit report would strengthen her case, it was
her responsibility to provide it.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03030 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 2, 2015). 
In addition, Applicant was advised of her right to present documentary evidence in response to the
FORM.  This guidance was contained in the FORM itself, the DOHA cover letter that accompanied
it, and in the Directive and was sufficient to apprise a reasonable person of his or her rights and
responsibilities.  See ADP Case No. 10-07047 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2011).  To the extent that
Applicant is contending that she did not understand the procedures that would apply to her
adjudication, we conclude that any misunderstanding was not the result of the quality of guidance
that she received.  
1The multiple nature of the omissions also could persuade a reasonable person that they were deliberate.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-12407 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2014).  In addition, we note her interview summary:
“[Applicant] answered ‘No’ to the delinquency involving routine accounts question in the financial record section of the
case papers; however, [Applicant] provided the answer is actually ‘Yes.’”  Item 3, Interview Summary, at 5.  Applicant
then went on to discuss a loan upon which she defaulted and which had been turned over to a collection agency.  This
summary could raise in a reasonable mind the conclusion that at the time she completed the application she knew that
her negative answers were not truthful, at least as regards the loan.  
3
Applicant notes that her continued employment is contingent upon her receipt of a
trustworthiness designation.  However, the Directive does not permit us to consider the impact of
an adverse decision.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 14-02496 at 3 (App. Bd. May 14, 2015).  Applicant
requests to meet in person with the Appeal Board in order to present her appeal.  Our scope of
responsibility is set forth in Directive ¶¶ E3.1.29 - 34.  We decide appeals based upon the record and
the briefs of the parties.  The Directive does not authorize us to conduct in personam hearings.    
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness
cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding
security clearances:  such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’” See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2013). 
See also Kaplan v. Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert. denied.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan    
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields        
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
