1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-01802
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 29, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On April 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On May 12, 2015, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge (AJ). The case was assigned to
this AJ on July 13, 2015. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 24, 2015, and the
hearing was held as scheduled on September 10, 2015. At the hearing, the Government
offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection. Applicant testified
on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through I, which were also admitted without
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on September 21, 2015.
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied
2
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record as reviewed
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 62 years old.  He has been married two times, the first from 1972 to
1973, and the current marriage from 1985 to the present, and he has one son, who is a
current member of the United States Marine Corps. Applicant is a high school graduate
with one year of college. He is employed by a defense contractor as a truck driver, and
he is seeking a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the
defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists three allegations (1.a. through 1.c.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts totaling approximately $31,000, under Adjudicative Guideline
F. All of the SOR debts will be discussed below in the same order as they were listed on
the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a judgment filed against him in
2009 in the approximate amount of $17,572. Applicant admitted the allegation in the
RSOR. 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that this debt was incurred as a result of his
purchase of a television and amplifier in February 2005 in the amount of approximately
$8,400. Based on the arrangement, he could hold off making payments for a certain
amount of time. He started making payments in August 2006, and after three payments,
he received the first past due statement in November 15, 2006. The creditor of this debt
now has a lien against his house, and the creditor does make withdrawals from
Applicant’s bank account if there is an accumulation of funds in his account. (Tr at 33-
36, 66-67, Exhibit F.) 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a charged-off account in the
approximate amount of $5,930 for the purchase and subsequent repossession of a
vehicle. Applicant admitted the allegation in the RSOR. 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that the creditor received a judgment against
him for this debt, and it now has a lien on his house. This debt has not been paid. (Tr at
37, Exhibit E.) 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the
approximate amount of $7,481. Applicant admitted the allegation in the RSOR.  
Applicant testified that this debt was for a credit card, which he obtained to pay off
the amount owed on another credit card. Applicant made payments on this debt until he
received his first past due notice in July 2007. This debt has not been paid. (Tr at 39.) 
3
Applicant testified that while he has made no payment on any of these three debts
for many years, he does intend to eventually pay off all three of these debts. He stated
that he has an elderly father, and his wife has elderly parents, and he believes that when
they die he and his wife will inherit approximately $250,000 from each side, and he plans
to use these funds to resolve his overdue debts. He has no plans to satisfy the debts
before that time because he cannot afford to resolve them. (Tr at 61-62, 72, 76-77.) 
Applicant testified that he worked in the grocery business for 22 years, and
because the grocery business is physically demanding and damaging, he decided to
take an early retirement at age 48. Applicant stated that at that time he owned a home,
had excellent credit and was living according to a budget. He went back to work when he
was 49 as a truck driver, but he was involved in an accident, and he was off work from
approximately December 2002 to December 2003. Applicant started getting involved in
investing in the stock market as a day trader from 2004 through 2006, and in 2006 he
lost everything but his house. He stated that he was “trading hundreds of thousands of
shares of stock each week.” While he enjoyed it very much, he realized that he was “very
poor at it,” and he no longer does day trading. Based on Applicant’s testimony and
Exhibit G, it appears that Applicant lost approximately $150,000 in the stock market.
Applicant thereafter worked as a driver for a shuttle company from December 2006 to
January 2010. (Tr at 41-47.) 
Applicant and his wife both suffered injuries, which also hurt their finances.
Applicant had two surgeries for a rotator cuff injury, the first in August  2011, and the
second in April 2012. His wife had two hip replacement surgeries, the first in 2007, and
the second in 2011. (Tr at 55-57, Exhibit D.) 
Applicant considered filing for bankruptcy, and he paid $2,000 to an attorney for
that purpose. Ultimately he planned to file Chapter 13 Bankruptcy, but he was not able to
because he was informed he was earning too much money. He did receive financial
counseling in June 2010 as a requirement for filing for bankruptcy. (Tr at 49-52, Exhibit
A.) 
Applicant submitted a current budget that shows his net monthly income is $5,289
and his monthly expenses are $5,090 leaving him with a monthly net remainder of $199.
(Tr at 53-55, Exhibit C.) He currently does not have any credit cards.
Mitigation
Applicant submitted a very positive character letter from the President and Facility
Security Officer of his current employer. He was described as being “trustworthy,
professional and the model example of a U.S. citizen who will put national security as his
number one priority.” (Exhibit I.) Applicant also submitted his Performance Review for
9/1/2014 to 8/1/2015. His overall rating was, “Consistently Exceeds Expectations.”
(Exhibit H.) 
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt several years ago.  
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As reviewed
above, some of Applicant’s financial difficulties occurred as a result of the injuries
suffered by his wife and him, and the periods of unemployment that resulted. However,
Applicant lost approximately $150,000 due to his day trading, of which Applicant should
have had control. Also, I cannot find that Applicant has acted responsibly since these
debts have been overdue for many years, and Applicant has taken no steps to resolve
them. Accordingly, I find that this mitigating condition is not applicable in this case. 
Also, ¶ 20(d) could not be argued to be applicable, since Applicant has not taken
any action to “initiate a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts,” I also do not find any of the other mitigating conditions applicable.
Therefore, until Applicant can reduce or resolve a significant amount of his overdue
debts, I find Guideline F against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
6
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for
access to a classified position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited above
as to why the disqualifying conditions are applicable and controlling, I find that the record
evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-
person concept.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.- 1.c.  Against Applicant
 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
