Item 3.1
Item 1.2
1
                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-01031
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s failed to file his Federal income tax returns for 2011, 2012, and 2013
in a timely manner, but thought that would not be a problem since he was due a refund
for each year. He has since filed those returns and received substantial refunds.
Resulting security concerns were mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) on July 29, 2014.1
On September 15, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  The action was taken under2
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February
Item 2.3
Department Counsel submitted five Items in support of the SOR allegations.4
Item 3.5
Items 2 and 3.6
2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines that came into effect in the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted a written response to the SOR on October 14, 2015, and
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record
without a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on3
November 18, 2015. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM)  was4
received by Applicant on November 24, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity to file
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of
his receipt of the FORM. Applicant submitted additional material in response to the
FORM on December 18, 2015, to which Department Counsel did not object. I received
the case assignment on February 17, 2016. Applicant’s FORM response is admitted
into evidence as Exhibit (AE) A. Items 1 through 3 and Item 5 of the FORM are admitted
into evidence, without objection by Applicant. Item 4 in the FORM is a summary of
Applicant’s  interview on September 29, 2014, prepared by an investigator from the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) for the Report of Investigation. It was not
adopted by Applicant, and no witness authenticated its contents. Accordingly, it is
inadmissible per Directive E3.1.20, and will not be considered in determining Applicant’s
security clearance eligibility.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 58 years old. He started work as a software engineer for a defense
contractor in 2014. Since 1996 he has worked for several other companies as a
software engineer, with brief periods of unemployment between jobs. He has held a
security clearance in connection with some of his previous work, but has not served in
the military. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1993. He has never married, and has no
children.  5
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b in
part, and admitted the allegation in ¶ 1.c with an explanation. By the time of that
response he had filed each of the three untimely Federal income tax returns at issue, as
discussed below. He did not, however, provide corroborating evidence clarifying his tax
situation with that response. Applicant freely disclosed on his SF-86 that he had not filed
his 2011, 2012, or 2013 Federal tax returns in a timely manner, explaining that he had
calculated that he would be owed a refund for each of those years.6
AE A.7
AE A. His 2012 income was reduced by a period of unemployment between jobs. See Item 2.8
AE A.9
Item 2.10
3
SOR ¶ 1.a concerns Applicant’s 2011 Federal income tax return. He filed that
return on December 5, 2013. He owed $15,830 in Federal income tax for 2011, but had
$17,904 in tax withholdings. The IRS paid him a $2,074 refund for 2011.7
SOR ¶ 1.b concerns Applicant’s 2012 Federal income tax return. He filed that
return on September 17, 2014. He owed $7,624 in Federal income tax for 2012, but had
$11,288 in tax withholdings. The IRS paid him a $3,664 refund for 2012.  8
SOR ¶ 1.c concerns Applicant’s 2013 Federal income tax return. He filed that
return on October 8, 2015. He owed $14,473 in Federal income tax for 2013, but had
$15,486 in tax withholdings. The IRS paid him a $1,013 refund for 2013.9
In his response to the SOR, Applicant said that his “decision to delay filing was
completely unrelated to any financial over-extension or unpaid debt circumstances
encountered on [his] behalf. [He] delayed filing a tax return specifically due to the fact
that, in each case, [he] pre-determined that [he] would receive a tax refund. The pre-
determined calculation was based on [his] known tax deductions for each year.” He also
stated that he sincerely regrets his actions in failing to file his tax returns in a timely
manner, and now understands that filing late due to an expected refund is an
unacceptable practice. Accordingly, he pledged that he will file his future Federal tax
returns in advance of the April 15 deadline.10
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Department Counsel asserted, and the record evidence established, security
concerns under one Guideline F DC, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.
5
Applicant admittedly failed to timely file his Federal income tax returns for 2011,
2012, and 2013. These facts raise prima facie security concerns under DC 19(g), and
shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns. 
The guideline includes two conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s failure to timely file his Federal tax returns for those
years:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control. 
Applicant was under the impression that there was nothing legally wrong with
filing his income tax returns late as long as he had already paid more taxes than were
owing for that year. He had already filed his 2011 return by the time he submitted his
SF-86, and filed his other two returns after becoming aware that not having done so
raised potential security concerns. He correctly understood that he was entitled to
significant refunds for each of the years involved, and did not fail to file because he was
encountering any financial difficulties. He now realizes that, even though the
Government was the only beneficiary of his late filing, he should not repeat this
behavior. Under these circumstances, it did not cast doubt on his reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment, and is unlikely to recur. Furthermore, he has filed all
returns in question and received the resulting refunds, thereby fully resolving the
problem. Applicant established full mitigation of financial security concerns under the
two above-cited MCs.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
6
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an accountable
and experienced adult, who is responsible for the voluntary choices and conduct that
gave rise to the security concerns expressed in the SOR. His late filing of Federal tax
returns was not serious, since it merely delayed his receipt of substantial refunds for
each year. He did not realize at the time that such delays would be reason for concerns
by the Government. The potential for pressure, coercion, and duress from his financial
situation is eliminated by his submission of all returns in question. His credible
statement of intent to file timely returns in the future indicates that recurrence is unlikely.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility
and suitability for a security clearance. He fully met his burden to mitigate the security
concerns arising from the alleged financial considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
