                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------                   )       ISCR Case No. 15-01840
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant has
not mitigated security concerns regarding his drug use and personal conduct. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On August 26, 2015, Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 15, 2015, and elected to have
his case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 29, 2015, and did not
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on January 6, 2016.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly (a) purchased and used cocaine with
varying frequency while holding a security clearance between 2002 and 2012; (b)
purchased and used cocaine with varying frequency between 1984 and 2012; (c) and
used various prescription drugs without prescriptions, while holding a security
clearance, between 2006 and 2012. These allegations are realleged as personal
conduct under Guideline E.
Besides the drug-related allegations urged under Guidelines H and E, separate
allegations were advanced under Guideline E only: criminal charges and conviction for
entering an automobile (a felony) in June 1982 and three alcohol-related arrests
between 1984 and 1997.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations. He
offered no explanations or claims with respect to the allegations under each of the
guidelines. 
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 52-year-old technician for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant never married and has no children. He attended technical college
classes between September 1983 and May 1985 and earned an associate’s degree in
June 1985. (Item 4) He claimed no military service. Applicant worked for his current
employer since June 1985 and has held a security clearance since January 2002.
(Items 3 and 4)
Drug use
Applicant was introduced to cocaine in 1984 and used it randomly untill 1998
when he increased his use to sporadic use every two to three months. (Item 8) After
suspending his cocaine use between 1999 and 2008, he resumed his use in 2008 and
used it with varying frequency until April 2012. (Items 4 and 8)
Between 2002 and April 2012, while holding a security clearance, Applicant
purchased and used cocaine with varying frequency, typically four times a year. (Items
4-8) In an OPM interview, Applicant assured the agent he voluntarily quit using cocaine
3
in April 2012. (Item 8) He insisted he no longer has any intention of using cocaine in the
future. Without any evidence of continued cocaine use or purchases, Applicant’s claims
are accepted. 
Besides cocaine, Applicant used various prescription drugs without prescriptions
between 2006 and 2012. He used these prescription drugs while holding a security
clearance. Since his last use in 2012, he no longer uses any drug requiring a
prescription, without a prescription.
Criminal history
Applicant’s criminal history is considerable. It includes alcohol-related offenses,
three in all between 1984 and 1997. (Items 4-8) Since 1997, he has had no reported
alcohol-related incidents or reports of other types of criminal offenses. (Items 4-8)
Applicant’s criminal history also includes a 1982 felony conviction arising out of
his breaking into an automobile with a group of acquaintances with the intention of
stealing stereo equipment. (Item 8) Records document that the court ordered him to
pay restitution ($75) and spend two weeks in jail. Since 1997, he has had no reported
alcohol-related or other types of criminal offenses.
Endorsements
Applicant provided no character references. Nor did he furnish any performance
evaluations or evidence of contributions to his community. 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
4
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations.  AG, ¶ 24.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
                                  Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
5
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a technician for a defense contractor who purchased and used
cocaine over an 18--year period spanning 1984 and April 2012.  For much of this time
(i.e., between 2002 and 2012) he held a security clearance and presumably was aware
the DOD’s anti-drug policy in force. Besides his cocaine use and purchases, Applicant
used various prescription drugs without  prescriptions over a six-year period between
2006 and 2012. 
On the strength of the evidence presented, two disqualifying conditions of the
Adjudicative Guidelines for drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,”
and DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.” Because
Applicant’s cocaine use and non-prescribed prescription drug use is barred by state law
in Applicant’s state of residence as well as federal law, his use of these drugs are
covered by Guideline E as well. DC ¶ 16(c) of Guideline E, “credible adverse information
in several adjudicative areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any
other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that
the person may not properly safeguard protected information,” applies to Applicant’s
situation.
Considering the lengthy history of Applicant’s involvement with illegal drugs and
non-prescribed drugs, not enough time has elapsed to facilitate safe predictable
judgments that he will not return to illegal drug use in the foreseeable future. None of the
pertinent mitigating conditions covered by AG ¶ 24 of Guideline H are available to
Applicant under the facts of his case. Likewise, none of the mitigating conditions covered
by Guideline E are available to Applicant. His lengthy involvement with illegal drugs and
6
prescription drugs without prescriptions makes safe predictions of future avoidance
difficult to invoke. More time is needed to warrant inferences that Applicant is at no
reasonable risk to recurrence.
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established insufficient
probative evidence of his ability to abstain from purchasing and using illegal drugs and
non-prescribed drugs without risk of recurrence. Applicant’s own acknowledgments of
poor judgment in using cocaine and non-prescribed substances are encouraging, but not
enough at this time to absorb recurrence risks. Due to the substantial elapse of time
since Applicant last committed an alcohol-related or other criminal offense, predictions
are warranted that he is no longer at risk to recurrent incidents in the foreseeable future. 
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
lengthy history of illegal drug and non-prescribed drug involvement, he fails to mitigate
security concerns related to his drug use. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect
to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f of Guideline H and 2.a
through 2.f of Guideline E. Because of th age involved with Applicant’s reported alcohol-
related incidents without any recurrent offenses, favorable conclusions are warranted
with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 2-g through 2.j. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE H: (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):        AGAINST APPLIICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a-1.f:          Against Applicant
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparas. 2.a-2f:                                  Against Applicant
Subparas. 2.g-2.j:                    For Applicant
 
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
7
                                        
  
8
