 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-00445  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Between 2010 and 2014 Applicant accumulated 12 delinquent debts, totaling 
over $23,000. She did not present sufficient evidence to prove that they are resolved 
and that her current financial situation is stable. Resulting security concerns were not 
mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On August 6, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On July 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 21, 2015 (Answer), and requested that 
her case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.) On October 31, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five 
Items, was mailed to Applicant on November 3, 2015, and received by her on 
November 11, 2015. The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
her receipt of the FORM. She did not submit any additional exhibits nor object to the 
Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 5 in the FORM. Hence, those 
Items are admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on February 17, 
2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer, Applicant admitted all 12 of the allegations contained in 
Paragraph 1 of the SOR. (Item 1.) Her admissions are incorporated into these findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and married. She and her husband have two children, 
ages 12 and 14. Since February 2011 she has worked as a clerk for a federal 
contractor. Prior to this position she was steadily employed, except for a period from 
June 2009 to March 2010. (Item 2.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from August 2012 and December 2014, 
the SOR alleged 12 delinquent debts that totaled $23,581.1 The debts became 
delinquent between 2010 and 2014. (Items 3, 5.) In her SF-86, Applicant disclosed 
several delinquent debts and stated that they became delinquent because her husband 
purchased luxury items that they could not afford. She stated that those purchases 
caused them financial difficulties. (Item 2.)  
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that since submitting her SF-86 she 
filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. She submitted a copy of a discharge order entered in 
June 2015. (Item 1.)  She did not provide any other information regarding the 
bankruptcy, or which specific delinquent debts were included in it.   
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                 
1The allegation in SOR ¶ 1.i does not reflect an amount of the debt. Based on the August 2012 CBR the 
amount of the debt is $995. The allegation in SOR ¶ 1.j does not reflect an amount of the debt. Based on 
the December 2014 CBR the amount of the debt is $546.  
 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that an adverse 
decision to an applicant shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
 
4 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.2 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated 12 delinquent debts from 2010 to 2014, which she was 
unable or unwilling to resolve. The evidence raises both security concerns, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
According to the evidence in the case file, Applicant’s delinquent debts 
accumulated between 2010 and 2014, and continue to date. Because they are ongoing, 
AG ¶ 20(a) does apply. There is some evidence indicating that the debts occurred as a 
result of Applicant’s husband’s extravagant spending habits, which were circumstances 
beyond her control. However, there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that she took 
responsible action under the circumstances; thus, AG ¶ 20(b) establishes minimal 
mitigation.  
 
Applicant provided no evidence of credit counseling, budget planning, or changes 
to bring her financial situation under control. She submitted insufficient proof of progress 
toward overall debt resolution or a track record of financial responsibility. She did not 
establish mitigation of the delinquent debts under AG ¶ 20(c) or AG ¶ 20(d). Applicant 
admitted owing all debts alleged in the SOR; hence, AG ¶ 20(e) is not pertinent.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 39 years old. She 
began employment with a defense contractor in February 2011. She began to incur 
delinquent debts in 2010, as a result of her husband’s irresponsible spending. The only 
evidence that she submitted to address the status of her delinquent debts was a copy of 
a June 2015 court order discharging unspecified delinquent debts through a Chapter 7 
 
 
6 
 
 
bankruptcy. There is no evidence documenting the status of the 12 debts listed on the 
SOR. Nor does the the record contain evidence about Applicant’s current financial 
situation, including a budget. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. She did not meet 
her burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
