 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01777 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility and that his financial problems are under control. He failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F (financial considerations) security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 27, 
2012. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On September 18, 2015, the DOD Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F.1 Applicant answered the SOR on October 14, 
2015, and elected to have his case decided on the written record, in lieu of a hearing.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated December 4, 
2015, was provided to him by transmittal letter that same day. Applicant received the 
FORM on December 13, 2015. He was allowed 30 days to respond to the FORM and 
submit any objections, corrections, and to provide material in extenuation and 
mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM or submit any information. The case 
was assigned to me on March 3, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant did not admit or deny any of the SOR 
allegations. He wrote comments on the SOR admitting that the creditor alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.a was his mortgage lender, but denied he was delinquent on the account. He 
claimed that the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.f were paid. Additionally, he 
averred that SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d alleged the same account, and that SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 
1.f alleged the same account. Concerning SOR ¶ 1.g, he stated that his wife was in 
contact with the creditor making arrangements to pay the debt in full. In light of the 
comments made, I considered SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f denied, and that Applicant 
admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶ 1.g. Applicant’s admission is incorporated 
herein as a finding of fact. After a review of the record evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old pipefitter (shipbuilder) employed with a federal 
contractor. He graduated from high school in 1987. He then attended a technical-
vocational school and received his completion certificate in 1991. Applicant married his 
wife in December 1998. He has a 12-year-old daughter.  
 
Applicant’s employment record shows that he worked as an auto detailer from 
1989 to 2005. From 2005 to 2011, he worked as a plant supervisor. He was laid-off from 
his job at a concrete production plant when the plant closed, and was unemployed from 
November 2011 to May 2012. Applicant was hired by his current employer, a federal 
contractor, in May 2012. This is his first security clearance application. 
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s September 2012 SCA asked him to 
disclose whether he had any financial problems, including delinquent or in-collection 
debts; loan defaults; credit cards or accounts suspended, charged off, or cancelled; and 
whether he was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt, or had been over 120 
days delinquent on any debts during the last seven years. Applicant answered “yes” and 
disclosed that he had suffered a “financial hardship.” He disclosed five delinquent 
accounts in collection from the period 2007 through 2011. Applicant stated that he had 
ongoing payment agreements with two creditors, and promised to pay by December 
2012 the remaining three delinquent accounts.  
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in December 2012. He 
explained that he was laid-off from his job and was unemployed during a period of 
seven months. He received unemployment compensation, but the income was 
 
3 
 
 
insufficient to pay his family’s living expenses and his accumulated debts. His financial 
problems were caused by his period of unemployment. 
 
During the interview, Applicant was asked about two accounts owed to the same 
telephone services provider alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. He denied having any 
knowledge of these accounts, or having been contacted by anyone about them. He 
promised to investigate the accounts and pay them if they were his legal debts. 
Applicant claimed that unbeknown to him, his wife opened two accounts that were now 
delinquent, but that she was making payments on them. He denied having any 
knowledge of the 12 other delinquent accounts. He promised to investigate these 
accounts and pay them if they were his legal debts.   
 
The subsequent security clearance background investigation revealed the seven 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR, totaling about $20,000. The SOR allegations 
are established by Applicant’s admission and the two credit reports attached to the 
FORM.  
 
In his answer to the SOR (October 2015), Applicant claimed that he was current 
on his mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.a); that the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e had 
been paid in full; that SOR ¶ 1.d was duplicative of SOR ¶ 1.c; and that SOR ¶ 1.f was 
duplicative of SOR ¶ 1.e. He also alleged that he contacted the creditor alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.g to make payment arrangements. 
 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence to support any of these claims. He 
presented no documentary evidence of debts paid, contacts with creditors, payment 
agreements made, or of any efforts to otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. The 
FORM credit reports do not support his claims that he paid the accounts. On the 
contrary, the credit reports show the debts as delinquent.  
 
Applicant provided no information about his current earnings and financial 
position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current living 
expenses and debts. There is no information to indicate whether he participated in 
financial counseling or whether he follows a budget.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
4 
 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has a history of unresolved financial problems that date back to 2007-
2011. He has seven delinquent accounts totaling around $20,000 that have been 
outstanding since around 2007. His financial problems raise the applicability of the 
following financial considerations disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.”  
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are ongoing, and he presented insufficient evidence to show his 
debts were incurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant was unemployed from November 2011 through May 2012. His period 
of unemployment could establish circumstances beyond his control that may have 
contributed or aggravated his financial problems. Applicant averred, in general terms, 
that his financial problems resulted from his period of unemployment. However, he 
presented little evidence to show how he acquired the debts, what efforts he took to 
remain in contact with his creditors, or what efforts he has taken since becoming 
employed to try to pay or resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems date back to 2007-2011. He submitted his SCA in 
2012, and indicated that he was trying to resolve his financial problems. A government 
investigator asked Applicant about his delinquent debts and he promised to investigate 
 
6 
 
 
and resolve his financial problems. He was issued the SOR in September 2015 and the 
FORM in December 2015. Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to submit documentary 
evidence to show his efforts to contact creditors, establish payment plans, or of any 
payments made to resolve his delinquent debts. Moreover, he failed to provide any 
reasonable explanation for his failure to address his delinquent debts. 
 
 In sum, Applicant did not submit sufficient evidence to show he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances to warrant applicability of AG ¶ 20(b). He presented insufficient 
evidence to show that he initiated good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve his debts. 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant provided little information about his current earnings and 
financial position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current living 
expenses and debts. There is no information to show that he participated in financial 
counseling or that he follows a budget. The available information is insufficient to 
establish clear indications that he does not have a current financial problem, or that his 
financial problem is being resolved, or is under control. Applicant failed to establish that 
he has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant receives credit for his years working for a federal contractor. This is his 
first SCA. Nevertheless, he failed to submit sufficient evidence to show that he has a 
track record of financial responsibility. He failed to mitigate the Guideline F security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
