                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 04-12963 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On February 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 6, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 5, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on May 24, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. Applicant did not 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through I, 
which were admitted without objection. The record was held open until June 15, 2010, 
to allow Applicant to submit additional documents in support of her case. Department 
Counsel contacted Applicant on the date the record closed to confirm she did not have 
additional documents to submit. She confirmed she did not submit any documents and 
the record closed.1 Department DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 2, 
2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 68 years old. She has worked for a defense contractor for almost 26 
years. She is a senior administrative assistant and has held a secret security clearance 
since 1983. She married in 1964 and divorced in 1998. She has two adult sons, ages 42 
and 39.2  
 
 The SOR lists 67 delinquent debts in the form of foreclosed properties (four), 
judgments (25, aggregate balance $624,388), tax debts (13, aggregate balance 
$52,130), repossessed properties (24, aggregate value $1,135,000) and a charged-off 
credit card ($7,675). Applicant did not know which alleged debt applied to a specific 
property and she was unable to detail what tax debt was applied to a specific property.  
 
While married to her husband, Applicant jointly invested in real estate. She stated 
she signed the real estate documents and the closing contracts to purchase the 
proprieties. They jointly purchased approximately 40 properties for investment. They 
began making the purchases in 1985. She stated she did not participate or have 
knowledge about the properties and he did not keep her informed. She also participated 
in obtaining 35 jointly held credit cards. However, she was fully aware of what she was 
signing. She also jointly signed, with her husband, 15 lines of credit. She confirmed she 
signed the contracts over a 25-year period. She said that he purchased the properties 
against her wishes. When asked if she was coerced, she stated “no,” but she was 
“persuaded.” She admitted she was aware of all of the accounts. She confirmed she 
was the owner of the properties. She stated:  
 
I signed my name to all the credit cards and lines of credit that my 
husband opened while we were married. In hindsight, I would not do that, 
but he handled the finances and I took his advice. Also, until he went off 
his medication permanently when we divorced, he had handled our 
finances responsibly.3  
1 Hearing Exhibit I is an email confirmation from Department Counsel.  
 
2 Tr. 52-56. 
 
3 Tr. 27-28, 37-38, 49. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant’s husband requested a divorce and she filed for one in 1998. She was 
represented by a lawyer. The divorce decree made the husband responsible for the 
credit cards and lines of credit. However, the credit card companies would not remove 
her name from the cards. She closed the credit card accounts and her husband would 
reopen some of them, telling the companies that the cards were lost or stolen. He 
reopened credit card accounts and he used her name without her permission. She 
contacted the credit card companies and advised them of the circumstances and they 
closed the accounts. Applicant did not provide specific details as to which SOR 
allegations were accounts that her husband opened and she is not responsible for.4  
 
Also part of Applicant’s divorce settlement was that she would receive 20 of the 
properties she and her husband had jointly purchased. He would receive the other 20. 
Her name remained on the mortgages for the properties her husband received. She 
considered the 20 properties she received in the divorce settlement as investments that 
would help provide financial security for her when she retired. She stated she kept the 
properties for a few years, attempted to pay the mortgages, and would occasionally pay 
the taxes for a few years until she could no longer keep up with them. She knew she 
was behind in paying the taxes. She would pay the real estate taxes “piecemeal,”5 that 
is, when she could. She was receiving rental income at the time. At one point, she 
contacted the state tax department to work out a payment plan. The tax department 
wanted a lump-sum payment. She could not pay it, so she stopped paying completely. 
She admitted that she could have paid the taxes if she had used her personal funds. 
Applicant learned that the properties could not be sold because of the tax liens that 
were on them.6 
 
In approximately 2001, Applicant stopped paying the mortgages on most of her 
properties. She stated the mortgage companies and banks would not take the 
properties because she had tax liens on them. Applicant stated that she contacted one 
of the banks, but it considered some of the properties as a package. She held a portion 
of the properties in the package and her ex-husband held the other portion. The ex-
husband stopped paying the mortgages and Applicant stated the bank advised her that 
she should stop paying also. She decided to let the properties go to foreclosure. She 
stated all of her properties were foreclosed during the past eleven years. The last two 
were foreclosed in approximately November 2008. She continued to make mortgage 
payments on these properties until approximately 2003. She continued to rent the 
properties and had tenants in them as late as 2007, even though she stopped paying 
the mortgage in 2003. It is noted that for the last two properties, she cancelled the 
insurance on one in March 2009 and the other July 2009. She notes the deeds changed 
in 2009. She believes these properties were sold for an amount in excess of their 
mortgage and she may receive a profit from the sale, although she acknowledged it 
4 Tr. 27-51, 56. 
 
5 Tr. 58-60. 
 
6 Tr. 27-51, 56-60. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
would not be for a couple of years.7 No documents were provided to substantiate her 
position. 
 
Applicant explained the reason she held onto the properties even though she fell 
behind in the mortgage payments and taxes, and did not attempt to sell them was 
because: “I was trying to hang onto my properties because I felt that they would be my 
nest egg. I did try. I eventually gave up.” Applicant also agreed that had the properties 
been profitable she would have been happy to accept the windfall and she would have 
paid her debts. She concurred that it was a bad financial proposition that she was 
involved in, but blames her ex-husband for creating a situation which caused her 
hardship and her inability to maintain the property.8 
 
Applicant stated that all of the properties were sold by the sheriff’s office and 
none of them had deficiency balances owed and all of the tax liens were satisfied. GE 7 
reflects a current list of judgments and liens from the state. She did not do anything to 
dispute the judgments. The record was held open to allow Applicant the opportunity to 
contact the appropriate tax offices and provide documentation to show the tax liens 
were paid and the properties did not have a deficiency owed. She did not provide any 
documentary evidence to support her position.9  
 
Applicant stated that her ex-husband failed to maintain the properties that he 
obtained in the divorce settlement. He did not pay the taxes on the properties. She did 
not provide information as to which properties listed on the SOR were given to him and 
were his responsibility.10  
 
There were also five properties that were owned by Applicant, her ex-husband, 
and a partner. When the partner sued them, she ceded her interest in the properties to 
the partner. Applicant’s position was that her ex-husband did not maintain the 
properties. He abandoned them or left them in disrepair. He did not maintain the houses 
he owned and failed to pay the taxes. However, she did not provide any information to 
show which properties that were listed on the SOR belonged to her husband. She did 
provide a chart she made that lists properties, the dates they were foreclosed, when the 
insurance was cancelled and a column labeled “deed changed.” No official supporting 
documents were provided.11  
 
Applicant stated that her ex-husband was mentally ill. She provided a document 
from his doctor verifying his condition. She attempted to have the court order a guardian 
7 Tr. 27-51, 102-104, 107-113, 119-120; AE I. 
 
8 Tr. 62, 72-75. 
 
9 Tr. 41-51, 69. 
 
10 Tr. 61. 
 
11 Tr. 37, 44-48, 77-78; AE I. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
for him. Her request was originally denied. He stopped paying on the mortgages of the 
properties in December 1998, after they divorced. Later a guardian was appointed for 
him and bankruptcy was filed on his behalf. However, because Applicant’s name 
remained on the mortgage documents, the creditors looked to her for payment.12  
 
 Applicant hired lawyers to help her with her real estate problems. After her 
divorce she had property managers for the properties. She paid the mortgages from the 
rental income she received. She stated she filed the appropriate annual tax returns for 
the properties.13  
 
Applicant did not use any money she received from her salary or savings to pay 
any of the bills associated with the properties. She did not organize her properties to 
limit her personal liability. She used whatever income she received from the properties 
to pay the mortgages, expenses, and taxes. If the properties did not earn enough 
income, she did not pay the associated bills. She decided when she could no longer 
make the payments she would let the properties be foreclosed. She stated “I realized I 
would lose all my property.” Her position was that she was not going to commingle her 
business income and expenses with her personal finances. If her business was failing 
and she could not pay bills, she would not use her personal finances to pay them.14  
 
Applicant’s position is that everyone has been paid and all the liens satisfied. She 
did not submit any documented proof. Applicant provided a copy of a credit report. It 
included pages 1 through 8; pages 9 through 14 were not included. It did not list the tax 
liens or judgments alleged. The Government produced earlier credit reports reflecting 
judgments and liens. The Government also provided documents of the state’s judgment 
and lien filings.15 
  
 Applicant provided proof that she pays her monthly personal expenses on time. 
She has four credit cards that are paid every month. She stated she has a good credit 
rating and lives within her means. She owns a condominium and earns a good income. 
She also collects Social Security payments. She has a car loan that will be completely 
paid in October 2010. She stated: “Although I lost all my properties which formed the 
basis of my future nest egg, I completely built myself up from scratch with no help 
through hard work and saving.” She further stated: “I will be receiving funds from the city 
from the sale of my last two properties.” Applicant expects to receive a profit from the 
sale of the remaining property she owned.16  
 
12 Tr. 41-43. 
13 Tr. 41-43. 
 
14 Tr. 102-104. 
 
15 Tr. 82-85, 102-104; AE D, GE 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.  
 
16 Tr. 43-44; AE C, D. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 I considered all of the documents Applicant provided, to include performance 
assessments, awards, a budget, and character letters. Letters from her brother and 
sons confirm that her ex-husband had mental problems. They believed she had severed 
ties with the rental properties when she divorced. They believe her financial situation is 
stable and she demonstrated honorable behavior.17 
 
 Character letters were also provided by friends and co-workers. She is described 
as follows:  
 
• She is a financially responsible person and her performance is exemplary. 
• She achieves a high standard for efficiency, accuracy, and thoroughness.  
• She is a person of superb character, performance and professionalism.  
• She is a trustworthy person with strong moral character. 
• She is strong and independent.18  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
17 Tr. 27; AE A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H.  
 
18 AE A. 
 
7 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Appellant has a history of being unwilling or unable to meet her financial 
obligations. She has judgments, tax liens, and other debts that are not resolved. I find 
there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
8 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because she has not provided documented proof 
that she has resolved any of the alleged judgments, tax liens, or debts. I find AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributes the judgments, liens, and debts raised in the SOR to actions 
by her ex-husband in acquiring property and then defaulting on it. She provided 
evidence that he was mentally unstable. However, Applicant confirmed she was aware 
of the legal documents she was signing. She was not coerced into being a part of his 
business ventures. When Applicant and her husband divorced, as part of the property 
settlement, she received 20 properties. She viewed the properties as investments for 
her retirement. She kept the properties, hired property managers, and accepted rental 
income. All these actions were taken in her capacity as owner. Her last property was 
foreclosed in 2008, ten years after her divorce. Regardless of what transpired before the 
divorce, Applicant accepted properties as part of the marital settlement. She was given 
an opportunity to provide information to show which of the 67 alleged debts were for 
properties that were awarded to her husband in the divorce settlement and which were 
awarded to her. She did not provide that information. Applicant kept the properties she 
was awarded in the divorce settlement. When the properties were not profitable, she 
wanted to absolve herself of responsibility. She stated all the properties were sold, 
deficiencies were paid, taxes were satisfied, and she is not responsible for them any 
 
9 
 
 
longer. Perhaps that is the case, but she did not provide any documents to substantiate 
her statements, despite being afforded additional time to do so. To a small extent, her 
ex-husband’s condition was beyond her control. However, she signed legal and binding 
documents. She accepted property as part of a divorce settlement. Based on her 
actions she was the owner. Her ex-husband’s condition marginally raises the application 
of AG ¶ 20(b). In order for that mitigating condition to be fully applicable, Applicant must 
have acted responsibly under the circumstances. In this case, as addressed above, 
Applicant has not done so. AG ¶ 20(b) has limited application. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to detail which debts were for properties owned by her ex-
husband and which were hers, and her failure to provide proof that the tax liens were 
satisfied and other deficiencies were paid, indicate the problem is not resolved or under 
control. She has not made a good-faith effort to repay creditors or resolve the debts. I 
find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant disputes all of the debts alleged, but failed to provide any documents to 
support her position. She categorically stated the judgments were satisfied, the tax liens 
are paid, and there are no deficiencies on the foreclosed and repossessed properties. 
Despite being given an opportunity to provide proof, she failed to do so. I find AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
10 
 
 
Applicant has an excellent work record. She received many awards and 
accolades for her performance. She was married to a man that had a mental condition. 
Applicant contractually obligated herself by signing real estate contracts, lines of credits, 
and holding joint credit cards. She admitted she was not coerced into participating in her 
husband’s financial endeavors. Later, when they divorced, the property was divided. 
She accepted the properties as part of their divorce settlement. Applicant hoped the 
property would be a good investment for her retirement. When they proved not to be, 
she defaulted on the mortgages and failed to pay the taxes. Although not unsympathetic 
to the difficult familial situation Applicant was confronted with, the fact remains that 
when she divorced she accepted ownership of the property. She cannot, more than 
twelve years later, continue to absolve herself of financial responsibility for the 
properties she accepted and managed for the past years. She was given an opportunity 
to show which properties on the SOR belonged to her and which may have been 
awarded to her ex-husband, but she did not provide the information. She was given an 
opportunity to provide supporting documents to show the tax liens, judgments, and 
other debts were paid or resolved. She did not provide any documents. Therefore, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.bo:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
