 
 1
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-15402 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
_____________ 
 
Decision 
_____________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under personal conduct, but has not 
mitigated security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct, alcohol consumption, and 
drug involvement. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 5, 2006, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 24, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines J (criminal conduct), G (alcohol consumption), H (drug involvement, 
and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
 2
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 22, 2009. He answered the 
SOR on May 11, 2009, and DOHA received his answer on May 13, 2009. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 25, 2009. The case was previously 
assigned to two other administrative judges on August 26, 2009 and September 18, 
2009, respectively, before it was assigned to me on September 25, 2009. On October 
20, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the case for November 18, 2009. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, which 
were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. I held the record 
open until November 27, 2009, to afford Applicant the opportunity to submit additional 
evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE C through AE F, where were received without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 25, 2009. The 
record closed on November 27, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except for SOR ¶ 2.d., which he 
denied. His admissions are accepted as findings of fact. (Response to SOR, Tr. 66-68.) 
   
Applicant is a 29-year-old artillery tester, who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since January 2007. He is a first-time applicant for a security clearance and 
testified that obtaining a security clearance is a condition of his continued employment. 
(GE 1, Tr. 17-19.) 
 
Applicant was awarded his high school diploma in October 2006 and has no 
formal education beyond high school. (GE 1, Tr. 19-20, 22-23.) Applicant has never 
married. He has two sons, ages 12 and 8, from a previous relationship. Applicant has 
an informal support arrangement with the mother of his two children. (Tr. 20-22.) 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleged five separate incidents spanning a ten-year period. The first 
incident occurred in June 1997 and the fifth and most recent incident occurred in July 
2007. The five incidents are summarized below: 
 
(1) In June 1997, at age 17, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
driving while intoxicated (DWI). At the time, Applicant and his cousin 
were drinking beer in a lettuce field. At the conclusion of the evening, 
Applicant drove home and passed out in his car at a stop sign near his 
house. A policeman discovered Applicant asleep in his car and took 
him to the police station. At the police station, Applicant tested positive 
for marijuana. In addition to underage drinking, he had been smoking 
marijuana earlier in the day. Applicant went to juvenile court and pled 
guilty to DWI and was sentenced to two days in juvenile detention and 
 
 3
four months supervised probation, and ordered to attend a drug and 
alcohol awareness program. (GE 3, Tr. 23-28.) (SOR ¶ 1.a.) 
 
(2) In February 2004, at age 23, Applicant was charged with possession 
of marijuana and drug paraphernalia. Applicant and “a couple of his 
friends” were smoking marijuana in Applicant’s apartment when the 
police arrived in response to a noise complaint. The police seized 
29.35 grams of marijuana and drug paraphernalia from Applicant’s 
apartment. In March 2004, Applicant pled guilty to the charges and 
was sentenced to six months in jail (suspended), fined $1,355, and 
ordered to attend drug counseling. (GE 2, GE 5, Tr. 28-34, 55.) (SOR 
¶ 1.b.) 
 
(3) In November 2004, at age 24, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with DWI – Extreme (BAC > .15%). Applicant was drinking at a local 
bar with friends and was stopped for speeding while bringing a female 
friend home. Applicant pled guilty to DWI and was sentenced to 30 
days in jail (20 days suspended) and three years unsupervised 
probation, and fined $1,705. He was ordered to attend alcohol 
awareness classes and install an alcohol monitoring device on his 
vehicle for one year. He also lost his license for 90 days. He failed to 
attend the alcohol awareness because he “never got no information in 
the mail like saying, you have to go here or, you know – and I never 
got nothing else in the mail about it, so I just I guess left it alone and 
they didn’t get – call me back or anything about it.” He also failed to 
install the monitoring device because, “I didn’t get no paperwork either 
in the mail like saying, okay, you have to go here to get that installed. 
So I had gone a good two years without it and then I got pulled over 
and they said, you need to have that in your car,” discussed infra. (GE 
2, GE 3, GE 9, Tr. 35-40.) (SOR ¶ 1.c.) 
 
(4) In September 2006, at age 25, Applicant was cited for speeding (65 
MPH in 55 MPH zone) and driving on a suspended driver’s license. At 
the time he was pulled over, he did not have a driver’s license because 
he failed to get his license reinstated after losing his license in 
November 2004. When he went to the Department of Motor Vehicles  
(DMV) to get his license reinstated, the DMV noted that he failed to 
have the monitoring device installed following his November 2004 DWI 
and informed him that he could not receive his license until the 
monitoring device was installed. In October 2006, Applicant had the 
monitoring device installed on his vehicle and stated the reason he did 
not have the device installed was because he did not want to have to 
go through the hassle of dealing with the device if he had been 
drinking. Applicant subsequently showed the court that he had the 
monitoring device installed and the DMV reinstated his driver’s license. 
The court dismissed the speeding charge. (GE 2, Tr. 40-44) (SOR ¶ 
1.d.) 
 
 4
(5) In July 2007, at age 26, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
possession of alcohol in a park and drinking in public. In August 2007, 
he pled guilty and was sentenced to 12 days in jail (suspended) and 
one year of probation, and fined $380. (GE 8, Tr. 44-45.) (SOR ¶ 1.e.) 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The allegation under this concern, (SOR ¶ 2.a.), is cross-alleged under criminal 
conduct, (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 1.c. and 1.e.). The facts regarding this allegation discussed 
supra are incorporated under this concern. Applicant has been drinking since he was 
“14 [or] 15” years old. His drinking began with friends on weekends. He testified his last 
drink was two days before his hearing and his drink of choice is beer. (Tr. 45-46.) 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 The allegation under this concern, (SOR ¶ 3.b.), is cross-alleged under criminal 
conduct, (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.). Applicant began using marijuana when he was “13 [or] 
14,” “in his teens” (about 1994) and continued using marijuana until October 2006. 
Applicant remembers that date because “that’s the day I got fired and that’s the day I 
needed to stop to get another job.” (He continued smoking marijuana after his 1997 and 
2004 arrests. Both arrests involved use or possession of marijuana and his sentence 
after both arrests included a drug awareness program or drug counseling.) (Tr. 49-51.) 
(SOR ¶ 3.a.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
In his December 2006 e-QIP, Applicant disclosed, in response to a question 
regarding past drug use, that he last used marijuana in March 2004 when in fact he had 
last used marijuana in October 2006. (SOR ¶ 4.a.) Applicant credibly explained that he 
had been using marijuana since he was a teenager and “messed up” when completing 
his e-QIP. He added that he corrected himself during subsequent interviews and freely 
offered the correct date when questioned about past drug use. He readily 
acknowledged the March 2004 date is incorrect and the correct date is October 2006. A 
review of his Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview in July 2008 confirms 
this assertion. Applicant adamantly denied intentionally falsifying his e-QIP. He further 
stated that he “even let [his] mom proofread it or double-check it (e-QIP) because – just 
to make sure [he] did have everything that had happened to [him] during the past seven 
years.” (GE 3, Tr. 50-62, 68-72.) 
 
Applicant was terminated by his previous employer in October 2006 for dropping 
calls. He worked for his previous employer from March 2001 to October 2006 as a 
teleservice representative. (Tr. 62-63.) (SOR ¶ 4.b.) 
 
Applicant was cited for speeding in January 2007 and August 2007. He was 
required to attend driving school following the first offense and the citation was 
dismissed. Following the second offence, he paid a $210 fine. (Tr. 63-66.) (SOR ¶¶ 4.c. 
and 4.d.) 
 
 5
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted four work-related certificates or awards documenting his 
superb performance since January 2007. (AE A, AE B, AE E, AE F.) Applicant’s 
supervisor submitted a reference letter in which he described Applicant as an “excellent 
employee” and added that “[h]is willingness to learn [a] new task has put him above his 
peers.” (AE D.)  
 
 Applicant’s mother testified on his behalf. She is employed as a corporate 
executive assistant and Applicant’s father is employed as a truck driver. (Tr. 80.)  She 
described her son as a “good kind-hearted person,” who was brought up with “good 
principles.” She described their family as “very tight” and “close.” She acknowledged 
Applicant made some bad decisions along the way, but she always tried to give him her 
best advice, but unfortunately some of that advice “[g]oes in one ear and out the other.” 
(Tr. 75-75.) Applicant’s mother further stated that her son “paid the consequences for 
his actions, for his wrong decisions.” She described him as a “good person,” “[n]ot just 
because he’s my son, but [because] he is a good man.” She stated that Applicant has 
disassociated himself from the friends he got in trouble with and now associates with a 
better group of friends. (Tr. 77.) She concluded that his current job has done a lot for 
her son and she has noticed a positive and noticeable change in him. (Tr. 81.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole-person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
 6
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.” See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism.  
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
  
Conclusions 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are raised under Guidelines J (criminal conduct), G (alcohol consumption), H 
(drug involvement), and E (personal conduct) with respect to the allegations set forth in 
the SOR. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 articulates the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes six criminal conduct disqualifying conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Two of those conditions are applicable in 
this case: “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and “(c) allegation or 
 
 7
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
Over a nine-year period, Applicant was convicted five offenses to include alcohol, 
drugs, and driving-related offenses, discussed supra.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions under this concern are applicable. Applicant’s 
five skirmishes with the law began in 1997 with a DWI arrest. In 2004, he was charged 
with possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia. Later in the same year, he was 
charged with Extreme DWI. In 2006, he was cited for speeding and driving on a 
suspended driver’s license. In 2007, he was charged with possession of alcohol in a 
park and drinking in public. These arrests began when he was 17 years old and 
continued until he was 26 years old. 
 
This nine-year history of arrests precludes application of any potential mitigating 
conditions under this concern. Applicant’s past conduct clearly calls into question his 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations, and falls short of what 
is expected of those entrusted with a security clearance. 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 22 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying. One of those conditions is applicable in this case: “(a) alcohol-
related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, 
 
 8
                                                          
child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” 
 
Applicant’s involvement with alcohol began as a teenager, which lead to his first 
DWI arrest in 1997. His second alcohol-related arrest occurred in 2004 for extreme 
DWI. Sentences following both arrests required him to attend an alcohol awareness 
program. Applicant was arrested most recently in 2007 for consuming alcohol in a park 
and drinking in public.1 Applicant continues to drink; however, there have been no 
documented alcohol-related incidents since his 2007 arrest. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns:  
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not define the sufficiency of the passage of time, and there is no 
“bright-line” definition of what constitutes “recent” conduct. Based on my evaluation of 
the record evidence as a whole,2 to include Applicant’s history of three alcohol-related 
arrests with his 2004 arrest being resolved as recently as 2006-2007 when he finally 
had a monitoring device instated on his vehicle, I am unable to apply AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
1See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
2See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 4 (App. 
Bd. May 26, 2004)). 
   
 
 9
                                                          
AG ¶ 20(b) does not fully apply because Applicant does not fully acknowledge 
his issues of alcohol abuse. He did not offer any evidence from a qualified professional 
that he does not have a drinking problem. Even though he attended two alcohol 
awareness programs, he had a subsequent arrest for drinking alcohol in public in 2007. 
He continues to drink alcohol to this day.  
 
Furthermore, Applicant did not provide sufficient corroborating evidence 
suggesting he has overcome his problem. Evidence of a diagnosis or prognosis from 
qualified medical authority would have been helpful. The fallout from past misuse of 
alcohol should be evident to him. His history of alcohol-related incidents, current 
behavior of continuing to drink alcohol, and lack of evidence demonstrating that he has 
overcome his past misuse of alcohol, leaves me with doubts that his alcohol 
consumption problems are “unlikely to recur.” AG ¶¶ 23(c) and (d) are inapplicable. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug involvement-related conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Two of those conditions are applicable in this case: 
“(a) any drug abuse,”3 and “(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.”  
 
    Applicant’s testing positive for marijuana following his 1997 arrest and 2004 guilty 
plea to possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia4 warrant application of AG ¶¶ 
25(a) and 25(c). When arrested in 2004, he pled guilty to possession of 29.35 grams of 
marijuana and drug paraphernalia. He used marijuana from about 1994 to October 
2006, a 12-year period. 
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
  
3AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
4AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
 
 10
                                                          
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), again there are no “bright line” rules for determining 
when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of 
the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR 
Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana 
occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence 
shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
“changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.”5 
5 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 
20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the absence 
of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge excessively 
emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug use, and gave 
too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the Administrative Judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The Administrative Judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
 
 11
                                                                                                                                                                                          
AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. Applicant’s two drug-related arrests and 12-year 
marijuana use was continuing and ongoing. His last marijuana use occurred three 
months before completing his December 2006 e-QIP. Applicant receives partial credit 
for disassociating himself from drug-using associates and contacts and changing the 
environment where drugs were used under AG ¶ 26(b). He did not, however, submit a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. He 
did not provide a prognosis from a duly qualified medical professional. The remaining 
mitigating conditions are inapplicable. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Under Adjudicative Guideline ¶ 15, the Government’s concern is: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 sets out seven personal conduct-related conditions that could raise 
security concerns and may be disqualifying in this case. Four of those conditions are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
 12
                                                          
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information: 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's 
time or resources. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately provided false information or omitted 
information on his 2006 e-QIP.6 
 
AG ¶ 17(f) provides a condition that could mitigate security concerns in this case, 
stating, “the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.” AG ¶ 17(f) fully applies to SOR ¶ 4.a. Although he admitted preparing his e-
QIP, and answering incorrectly, I am convinced that when he completed his e-QIP, he 
did not intend to omit information about the recency of his marijuana use.7 
6Deliberate and materially false answers on a security clearance application may violate 18 U.S.C. § 
1001. The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 (1995) as a 
statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the decision making 
body to which it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 2004). If 
Applicant had provided accurate answers on his security clearance applications, his accurate answers 
are capable of influencing the government to deny his security clearance. His criminal offenses are 
sufficiently serious to potentially jeopardize approval of his security clearance. Making a false statement 
under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential sentence includes 
confinement for five years and a $10,000 fine). In light of my ultimate decision, and the absence of an 
alleged violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 in the SOR, it is unnecessary for me to decide whether or not 
Applicant actually violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001. 
 
7 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an 
applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
 
 13
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant freely admitted the extent of his marijuana use when later interviewed 
by an OPM investigator. His listed marijuana use certainly put the Government on 
notice of his past drug use. Having had the opportunity to listen to his testimony and 
observe his demeanor, his explanations as set forth in the findings of fact are accepted 
as credible. The evidence is not sufficient to show that he made deliberately false 
statements when he answered he question regarding past drug use. 
 
Additionally, the Government established through Applicant’s admissions and 
evidence presented that he was terminated after purposefully and repeatedly dropping 
customer calls and in 2007 was cited twice for speeding. The foregoing warrants 
application of AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d). 
 
Potential mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17 are: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Given the length of time since Applicant was terminated for dropping calls, the 
fact that his current employment record is superb, and the behavior is not repetitive, AG 
¶ 17(c) fully applies to SOR ¶ 4.b. The 2007 speeding tickets are minor offenses. 
Applicant attended driving school after the first ticket and the citation was dismissed. He 
paid a fine after the second ticket. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) fully apply to SOR ¶¶ 4.c. and 
4.d. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
 
 14
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
Whole-Person Concept. Applicant receives credit for the turnaround in his conduct and 
lifestyle since 2006, which is relatively brief when contrasted with his previous lifestyle. 
His work performance with his employer is good and weighs in his favor. Applicant has 
strong family support, especially from his mother. There is some compelling evidence of 
his responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. I am convinced that he is loyal to his 
company, his family and his country.  
 
  Applicant’s five arrests or incidents involving criminal or vehicular misconduct 
spanning a nine-year period, his 12 years of marijuana use, and alcohol-related 
concerns are serious, recent, and not fully mitigated. His conduct requiring law 
enforcement involvement and admitted drug use establish a 12 year history of failure to 
comply with the law. Although he has purportedly turned his life around since October 
2006, his past record causes lingering concern and doubt about his eligibility for a 
security clearance. The best indicator of future behavior is past behavior. Applicant has 
no one other than himself to blame for the record he has created. While I would like to 
give him the benefit of the doubt, further time is required to establish that he has made a 
turnaround warranting the granting of a security clearance.  
 
  Applicant is encouraged to continue on his current track. Time will tell whether 
his ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations will continue. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude that he has mitigated 
security concerns pertaining to personal conduct, but he has not mitigated security 
concerns pertaining to criminal conduct, drug involvement, and alcohol consumption.    
 
 I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors” and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has failed to mitigate or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a. through e.: Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
        Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 3, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
         Subparagraphs 3.a. through b.: Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 4, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
         Subparagraphs 4.a. through d.: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
