 
1 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
 
In the matter of:                                             ) 
 ) 
        ) 
            )  ISCR Case No. 07-18496 
                                                            )                                              
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: John F. Mardula, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol Involvement. 
However, she failed to rebut or mitigate security concerns under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct, Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. Her 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on April 27, 2006. On July 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, Guideline G, Alcohol Involvement, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 On August 12, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to   
have a hearing before an administrative judge.1 The case was assigned to me on 
December 16, 2009. On January 14, 2010, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling 
Applicant’s hearing for February 3, 2010. On January 29, 2010, Applicant’s counsel 
requested a continuance because he had a death in his family. Without objection, 
Applicant’s hearing was rescheduled for March 8, 2010. On that date, I convened a 
hearing to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. As a preliminary matter, the Government 
reported that it had not received the documents that Applicant intended to offer as 
evidence until 3:00 pm on the last business day before the hearing. By mutual 
agreement, the parties requested that the hearing be continued until 9:00 am on March 
29, 2010. I granted their request, and DOHA issued a revised notice of hearing to reflect 
the new hearing date. 
 
When the hearing reconvened, the Government called no witnesses and 
introduced 12 exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 12 and admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and called two witnesses. She 
introduced 36 exhibits, which were marked as follows: Ex. A through Ex. F; Exs. G-1 
through G-8; Exs. H through Z; and Ex. AA, Ex. BB, and Ex. CC. Applicant’s exhibits 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the March 8 hearing 
on March 16, 2010 (Tr. 1).  DOHA received the transcript of the March 29 hearing on 
April 8, 2010 (Tr. 2). 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 14 allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG E, Personal 
Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.n); 12 allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.l.); two allegations of disqualifying 
conduct under AG G, Alcohol Consumption (SOR ¶¶ 3.a. and 3.b.); and five allegations 
of disqualifying conduct under AG J, Criminal Conduct (¶¶ 4.a. through 4.e.). In her 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied 11 and admitted three of the Guideline E 
allegations; she denied all 12 of the Guideline F allegations; she denied the two 
Guideline G allegations; and she admitted three and denied two of the Guideline J 
allegations. In total, Applicant admitted the following SOR allegations: ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 
1.m., 4.a., 4.b., and 4.c. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (SOR; 
Answer to SOR.) 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and has never been married. She is the mother of two 
daughters, ages seven and twelve. The father of her older child has been incarcerated 
and has not paid child support. The father of her second child pays Applicant $425 a 
month in child support. Applicant is pursuing undergraduate studies and hopes to attain 
a degree in Information Assurance in the summer of 2011. (Ex. 1; Ex. 4 at 5; Tr. 140-
142.) 
 
1By letter dated January 27, 2010, Applicant requested a hearing under ¶ 4.4.3. of the Directive. Her 
written request that her hearing be allowed to proceed is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1.  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant has been unemployed since October 2009. During her unemployment, 
she received unemployment benefits. Her eligibility for unemployment benefits expired 
on April 30, 2010. During her periods of unemployment, Applicant depended upon her 
mother for support. (Tr. 2 at 168, 224-225.) 
 
 Applicant seeks restoration of her security clearance, which was suspended in 
2005 during a security clearance investigation. At the time of her hearing, she was 
neither sponsored by a government contractor for a security clearance, nor did she 
have a need for access to classified or confidential information. By letter dated January 
27, 2010, Applicant invoked ¶ 4.4.3. of the Directive to request that her security 
clearance hearing be permitted to proceed. (Ex. B; Tr. 1 at 7-8; Tr. 2 at 65-66; HE 1.) 
 
 Applicant’s employment history begins in about 1998, after she graduated from 
high school. From April 1998 until July 1998, she worked as a temporary receptionist for 
an employment agency. From July 1998 until September 1998, she was employed as 
an accounts payable clerk. After two months of unemployment, she took a job as a 
customer service representative with a federal contractor, where she worked from 
November 1998 until April 2000. She left that job voluntarily, without giving notice, 
because she felt overwhelmed by her responsibilities. In April 2000, Applicant took a 
position as an office assistant. She was dismissed from this job in May 2000 for a 
pattern of lateness. The termination is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. (Ex. 1; Ex. 4 at 4; Tr. 2 at 
161-162,165-166.)   
 
 Applicant obtained another job in May 2000. In October 2000, she left the job 
following allegations of unsatisfactory performance. From February 2001 until August 
2001, Applicant was employed as a receptionist by a federal contractor. From August 
2001 until October 2002, Applicant was employed by another federal contractor. In 
October 2002, Applicant changed jobs again, and worked for five months for another 
government contractor before she was dismissed for a pattern of lateness. Her 
termination is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. (Ex. 1; Ex. 4 at 3-4; Tr. 2 at 152.) 
 
 Applicant’s workplace issues were not her only concern: she also faced 
behavioral issues in her personal life. In March 1999, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with destruction of property. Her case was nolle prossed. This behavior is 
alleged at SOR ¶ 4.a. (Ex. 7.) 
 
 In November 2000, she was served with a protective order for stalking a man 
with whom she had been romantically involved. From December 2001 to February 
2002, she stalked another ex-boyfriend. The two stalking incidents are alleged at SOR 
¶¶ 1.m and 1.n. (Ex. B; Ex. 3 at 6-7; Ex. 4 at 6, 12; Ex. 5 at 2; Tr. 2 at 66-68.) 
 
 In 2001, when Applicant was employed by a government contractor, she was 
awarded a security clearance. After eight months with the employer, she left her job. 
She claimed she had a personality conflict with her supervisor; the employer reported 
that Applicant was frequently late for work, and she was not eligible for rehire. In 2004, 
Applicant accepted employment with another government contractor. In her new job, 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
she was required to have a security clearance and to be approved for an additional level 
of access. Applicant completed a security clearance application in August 2004. On that 
form, she denied illegal drug use. In June 2005, she underwent a security clearance 
investigation conducted by another federal agency. During the investigation, Applicant 
stated that she had used marijuana about three times a month between 2001 and 2004. 
She also told an authorized investigator that she used marijuana while holding a 
security clearance and after signing her employer’s no-drug use policy. The agency 
then revoked Applicant’s security clearance and denied her additional access. At her 
hearing, Applicant denied ever using marijuana, and she stated that the authorized 
investigator who interviewed her about her drug use in 2005 erred in reporting that she 
had used marijuana. She provided a signed and notarized statement of intent never to 
use illegal drugs. In her statement of intent, she consented to automatic revocation of 
her security clearance if she were to use illegal drugs in the future.2 Applicant’s drug 
involvement and the agency’s decision to revoke her clearance and deny her additional 
access are alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.d.  (Ex. A; Ex. B at 2; Ex. 3 at 4, 6-7; Ex. 4 at 
4; Tr. 2 at 62-63, 157-158, 174-175, 183-185, 224.)  
 
 Applicant provided a copy of the letter she received on November 25, 2005, from 
an adjudicator at the other government agency. The letter read, in pertinent part, as 
follows:   
 
During your security testing session . . . you stated that you smoked 
marijuana about three times a month between 2001 and August 2004.You 
advised that you held a [security] clearance during this timeframe. You 
acknowledged that you knew it was wrong to use marijuana while holding 
a security clearance, and added that you had also signed a no-drug policy 
statement for your employer. 
  
(Ex. B; Ex. 3 at 6-7.) 
 
 By letter dated March 1, 2006, Applicant requested that the agency review its 
determination to revoke her security clearance and deny her additional access. The 
agency acknowledged receipt of her request and advised her that she would be notified 
in writing of the outcome of her appeal. Applicant stated that she had not received a 
decision on her appeal from the agency. She concluded that the agency had reversed 
its initial decision and restored her security clearance. (Ex. C; Ex. D; Tr. 72-74.) 
 
 In March 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with assault and battery. The 
charge was nolle prossed. In May 2008, she was arrested and charged with driving 
while intoxicated. She was found guilty of reckless driving. Her driver’s license was 
suspended for six months. She was also sentenced to 30 days in jail, suspended; 
ordered to attend an alcohol safety awareness program; and fined. She completed the 
alcohol safety awareness program in December 2008. In September 2008, Applicant 
 
2 Applicant testified that she had not provided a copy of her signed statement of intent to her employer. 
(Tr. 2 at 216-217.) 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
was cited for drinking in public. She attended a Labor Day picnic in a park and was 
apprehended by a park ranger as she opened a can of beer. She paid a fine and court 
costs. In November 2008, a friend of Applicant’s borrowed her car and altered her 
license tags. Applicant was charged with possession of forged license tags. She was 
found not guilty of the offense. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the drinking 
in public and possession of forged license tags charges alleged at SOR ¶¶ 4.d. and 4.e. 
At her hearing, she admitted the underlying conduct, but denied the forged license tag 
charge because she was found not guilty. She denied the drinking in public charge 
because she did not believe she had been arrested. These arrests, charges, and 
citations are alleged at SOR ¶¶ 4.b., 4.c., 4.d., and 4.e. (Ex. W; Ex. X; Ex. Y; Ex. Z; Ex. 
AA; Ex. CC; Ex. 4 at 5-6; Ex. 5 at 1-2; Ex. 8; Tr. 2 at 123-124, 189-196.)     
 
 The SOR also alleged that Applicant is responsible for 12 delinquent debts 
totaling approximately $31,752. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all 12  
delinquencies. However, in her direct testimony and in cross examination, Applicant 
admitted all 12 delinquent debts. The evidence established that the following debts had 
not been satisfied: a judgment for $4,150, dating to 2003, for a repossessed vehicle 
(SOR ¶ 2.a.); a $1,544 debt to an educational institution, charged off in about 2004 
(SOR ¶ 2.b.); a judgment for $14,272, entered against Applicant in 2007, for a 
repossessed vehicle (SOR ¶ 2.c.); a $2,670 debt, in collection status, owed to a creditor 
that evicted Applicant for failure to pay her rent in 2003 (SOR ¶ 2.g.); and a $273 
medical debt, placed in collection status in about August 2006 (SOR ¶ 2.i.)3 (Ex. I; Ex. 
M; Tr. 2 at 93-96, 101-102, 200-203, 208, 210-211.)  
 
 Additionally, Applicant admitted that a $4,141 student loan debt, alleged at SOR 
¶ 2.d., had not been satisfied. Her Ex. J established that the student loan creditor had 
offered to settle the debt in November 2009 for $2,210. Her Ex. K established that the 
outstanding principal on her student loans was approximately $16,000, and because 
she had recently enrolled in higher education, the creditor had deferred payment of her 
student loans. (Ex. J; Ex. K; Tr. 2 at 89-92, 203-207.) 
 
 Applicant acknowledged the $1,348 delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶ 2.e. She 
claimed she had settled the debt for $700 in 2006. However, she reported that the 
creditor had no record of her payment. She stated she would pay the debt in the future. 
(Ex. I; Tr. 2 at 96-97, 208.) 
 
 Applicant asserted that the $391 delinquent medical account alleged at SOR ¶ 
2.f. was a duplicate of a $388 delinquent medical account alleged at SOR ¶ 2.h. 
However, Applicant failed to provide documentation to establish that the accounts were 
the same. (Ex. I; Ex. L; Tr. 2 at 97-100, 209-210.) 
 
 
3 Applicant stated she had a payment plan with the creditor identified in SOR ¶ 2.g. and would pay the 
debt at a future time. Applicant’s Ex. M indicated that the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 2. i. had not been paid. 
(Ex. M; Tr. 2 at 208-210.) 
 
6 
 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 2.k. that Applicant was indebted to a state unemployment 
commission for a $1,029 overpayment of unemployment compensation. Applicant 
provided documentation establishing that her subsequent unemployment compensation 
had been garnished to satisfy the overpayment. (Ex. T; Ex. U; Tr. 2 at 109-113, 169-
172.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 2.j. that Applicant owed a $623 delinquent debt to a 
creditor on an account placed for collection in January 2007. Applicant provided 
documentation establishing that she had made payments which reduced the current 
balance due to $123. (Ex. I; Ex. P; Ex. Q; Ex. R; Ex. S; Tr. 2 at 104, 108, 211-212.) 
 
 The SOR also alleged at ¶ 2.l. that Applicant owed a delinquent medical debt of 
$468 that had not been satisfied. Applicant provided documentation to establish that 
she had made payments on the debt which reduced the current balance to $218. (Ex. I; 
Ex. N; Ex. O; Ex. V; Tr. 2 at 105-107, 212-213.)    
  
 Applicant completed, signed, and certified an e-QIP on April 27, 2006. She 
signed the following certification after completion of her e-QIP: 
 
My statements on this form, and any attachments to it, are true, complete, 
and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and are made in good 
faith. I understand that a knowing and willful false statement on this form 
can be punished by fine or imprisonment or both. (See section 1001 of title 
18, United States Code). 
 
(Ex. 1 at 44.) 
 
 Section 24 on the e-QIP seeks information on an applicant’s use of illegal drugs 
and drug activity. It contains the following advisory: 
 
The following questions pertain to the illegal use of drugs or drug activity. 
You are required to answer the questions fully and truthfully, and your 
failure to do so could be grounds for an adverse employment decision or 
action against you, but neither your truthful responses nor information 
derived from your responses will be used as evidence against you in any 
subsequent criminal proceeding.  
 
(Ex. 1 at  38.) 
 
 Question 24a on the e-QIP reads: 
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquillizers, 
etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs? 
 
7 
 
 
(Ex. 1 at 38.) 
 
 Applicant answered “No” to Question 24a. She did not acknowledge using 
marijuana three times a month from about 2001 to 2004. Applicant’s failure to disclose 
the information about her marijuana use is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. (Ex. 1 at 38.) 
 
Question 24b on the e-QIP reads: 
 
Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance while employed as a 
law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while 
possessing a security clearance; or while in a position directly and 
immediately affecting the public safety? 
 
 (Ex. 1 at 38.) 
 
 Applicant answered “No” to Question 24b. She did not acknowledge using 
marijuana while holding a security clearance.  Her failure to disclose her marijuana use 
while holding a security clearance is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f. (Ex. 1 at 38.) 
 
 Question 26b on the e-QIP inquires about an individual’s investigative record and 
reads: “To your knowledge, have you ever had a clearance or access authorization 
denied, suspended, or revoked, or have you been disbarred from government 
employment? If “Yes,” give date of action and agency.” (Ex. 1 at 39.) 
 
 Applicant answered “No” to Question 26b. She did not acknowledge that she was 
denied additional access and her security clearance was revoked by another 
Government agency in November 2005. Applicant’s failure to disclose that she had 
been denied additional access and that her security clearance had been revoked by 
action of another Government agency in November 2005 is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g. (Ex. 1 
at 40.) 
 
 On April 23, 2007, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from 
the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM). During her interview, Applicant stated 
that she had failed a question in her interview with another federal agency regarding her 
use of marijuana. She stated to the investigator that she had not used marijuana and 
did not understand why she failed the question. She did not disclose her marijuana use 
between 2001 and 2004. Applicant’s failure to disclose her marijuana use to the 
authorized investigator on April 23, 2007 is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h.  (Ex. 4 at 3.) 
 
 In the same interview, Applicant stated that she had never been denied a 
security clearance. She failed to disclose to the investigator that she had been denied 
additional access by another federal agency and that her security clearance had been 
 
8 
 
 
                                           
revoked in about November 2005. Applicant’s failure to disclose this information is 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.i. (Ex. 4 at 3.)4 
 
 On August 27, 2008, Applicant was interviewed again by an OPM investigator. 
During this interview, she stated that she had never used any illegal drugs. She did not 
disclose her use of marijuana from 2001 to 2004. Her failure to disclose her marijuana 
use to the authorized investigator on August 27, 2008, is alleged in the SOR at ¶ 1.j. 
(Ex. 4 at 13.) 
 
 On September 26, 2008, Applicant provided a signed, sworn statement to an 
OPM investigator. In that statement, she stated that she never used marijuana or any 
other illegal drug. She failed to disclose her use of the illegal drug marijuana from 2001 
to 2004.  Applicant’s failure to disclose her marijuana use in her signed, sworn 
statement is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.k. Additionally, Applicant testified at her security 
clearance hearing on March 29, 2010, that she had never used marijuana. (Ex. 5 at 2-4; 
Tr. 2 at 224.) 
 
 In her September 26, 2008 signed, sworn statement to the authorized OPM 
investigator, Applicant disclosed she was arrested in June 2008 and charged with a 
criminal offense related to alcohol consumption. However, she failed to disclose that 
earlier that month, on September 1, 2008, she had been cited for drinking in public. 
Applicant’s failure to disclose her citation for drinking in public is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.l. At 
her hearing, Applicant testified that she told the investigator about her drinking in public 
citation, but he did not include it in the statement. (Ex. 2; Ex. 5 at 1-12; Tr. 2 at 126.) 
 
  When Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator in April 2007, she 
provided information about her alcohol use.  In January 2009, in response to DOHA 
interrogatories, she affirmed that the following information was accurate: 
 
Subject occasionally drinks alcohol to the point of intoxication an average 
of three or four times per year. Subject drinks long island iced teas [a 
mixed drink containing alcohol] when out with her friends at bars 
approximately once or twice a month. When drinking to the point of 
intoxication, this includes three drinks and subject becomes tipsy and 
dances for fun. She does not black [out] or become violent. Subject drinks 
alcohol for celebration. Subject does not consider her alcohol use a 
 
4 Applicant’s statements about the revocation of her security clearance and denial of higher-level access 
are ambiguous and contradictory. In a personal subject interview in August 2008, she stated that she 
appealed the denial of her security clearance and lost the appeal. She reported that she was told she 
could repeat the security investigation in one or two years. (Ex. 4 at 13.) In response to DOHA 
interrogatories in January 2009, she stated that she appealed the earlier revocation of her clearance, her 
appeal was granted, and her clearance was granted. However, she also attached the letter from the other 
Government agency informing her that she had been disapproved for additional access to classified 
information and her existing security clearance had been revoked for drug involvement and personal 
conduct issues. That letter is dated November 25, 2005. (Ex. 3 at 5; Ex. B.)  Applicant provided a signed, 
sworn statement in which she stated that she did not know when she completed and certified her e-QIP in 
April 2006 that her clearance had been suspended, denied, or revoked. (Ex. 5 at 5.) 
 
9 
 
 
problem and it has not had any impact on her professional life, home life, 
her physical or emotional health and she has not had any arrests or 
criminal activity related to her alcohol use. Her alcohol use is not 
something that could leave her susceptible to blackmail or coercion. 
 
(Ex. 4 at 5, 18.) 
 
 In August 2008, when she was again interviewed by an OPM investigator, 
Applicant discussed her arrest for driving under the influence of alcohol in June 2008, 
and her use of alcohol since about the year 2000. In January 2009, again in response to 
DOHA interrogatories, Applicant affirmed that the information which follows was 
accurate: 
 
Subject first consumed alcohol at age 21 at her 21st birthday party. From 
age 21 to 23 the subject would only drink about once every 6 months and 
was intoxicated twice. From 23 to 25 the subject would only drink about 
once every six months and was not intoxicated during this time. From 25 
to 27 the subject would have some alcohol about once every other week, 
mainly one or two drinks. Subject did not get intoxicated. From age 27 to 
present the subject will drink about 4 times a year and has not been 
intoxicated. The subject is not addicted to alcohol and has not sought 
counseling. Subject’s alcohol use has not caused issues with friends, 
family finances, school, or work. Subject has not experienced any 
negative personality changes because of the alcohol.  
 
(Ex. 4 at 15-16, 18.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 3.a. that Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess 
and to the point of intoxication, from approximately March 2000 to at least August 2008. 
The SOR also cross-alleges at ¶ 3.b. that Applicant’s arrest in May 2008 for driving 
while intoxicated and her citation for drinking in public in September 2008 raise security 
concerns under Guideline G, alcohol consumption. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant 
denied the two alcohol consumption allegations. (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 At her hearing, Applicant repeated her denials to SOR allegations at ¶¶ 3.a. and 
3.b. She stated that while she was initially charged with driving while intoxicated, she 
was convicted of reckless driving. She also stated her understanding that she was not 
arrested and charged with drinking in public, but, instead, was cited for the offense and 
paid a fine in lieu of a court appearance. She denied consuming alcohol to the point of 
intoxication. She further stated: “I did consume alcohol to relax me and that would 
probably be a bottle of cheap champagne, Merlot, one bottle every two months. “ In 
December 2008, Applicant completed an alcohol safety awareness program. She stated 
at her hearing that she no longer consumes alcohol. She stated that she last consumed 
alcohol in September or October 2008.  (Ex. 2 at 8; Tr. 2 at 117-127, 192.) 
 
 
10 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant’s former supervisor appeared as a character witness on her behalf.  He 
worked with Applicant for about seven or eight months before he left the company. He 
testified that, in his opinion, Applicant was motivated, conscientious, and exercised 
good judgment.  (Tr. 2 at 35-42.) 
 
 A former coworker also appeared as a character witness for Applicant. She 
testified that she had known Applicant for approximately nine months. She stated that, 
in her opinion, Applicant was diligent, thorough in her work, and followed established 
rules and regulations. (Tr. 2 at 47-52.) 
 
 In the first nine months of 2009, Applicant earned approximately $58,000. Since 
losing her job in October 2009, she receives approximately $414 in unemployment 
compensation for herself and her two children each week.5 Each month, she also 
receives $550 in child support and $243 in food stamps. (Tr. 2 at 230-235.) 
 
 Applicant’s monthly rent is $1,500 and her monthly car payment is $425. Her 
mother pays her utility bills and car insurance. Applicant’s mother, who is handicapped, 
plans to retire and move in with Applicant and her children. She will pay Applicant $700 
toward the monthly rent until Applicant finds a job. Applicant asks her sister to help her 
buy gasoline. (Tr. 2 at 231-234, 241.) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
5 At the suggestion of Applicant’s counsel, I multiplied her weekly unemployment compensation by 4.3 to 
arrive at a monthly amount of $1,780. (Tr. 2 at 233.)  
 
11 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
12 
 
 
In 2000, Applicant was fired from a job because she was frequently late for work. 
That same year, a former boyfriend obtained a protective order to prevent Applicant 
from stalking him. Applicant stalked another former boyfriend in 2001 and 2002. In 
2003, Applicant was fired from another job for attendance issues. This conduct 
suggests a pattern of unreliability and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. 
 
In about November 2001, Applicant was granted a security clearance. In 2004, 
her employer recommended her for additional access, and she completed a security 
clearance application in which she denied illegal drug use.  In 2005, during her security 
clearance investigation, Applicant admitted using marijuana about three times a month 
between 2001 and August 2004, while holding a security clearance. In about November 
2005, she was denied additional access and her security clearance was revoked. 
 
In April 2006, Applicant completed a security clearance application. In response 
to Questions 24a, 24b, and 26b on that SF-86, Applicant answered “No”, thereby 
denying any drug use since the age of 16 or in the last seven years, any drug use while 
holding a security clearance, and any previous revocation, suspension, or denial of her 
security clearance.   
 
In interviews with authorized investigators in April 2007 and August 2008, 
Applicant stated that she had never used marijuana, and she failed to disclose her 
marijuana use from 2001 to 2004. In her April 2007 interview with an authorized 
investigator, she also failed to disclose that she was denied additional access and her 
security clearance was revoked by another government agency in November 2005. 
 
On September 26, 2008, Applicant was again interviewed by an investigator who 
assisted her in the preparation of a signed, sworn statement. In her signed, sworn 
statement, Applicant stated that she never used marijuana or any other illegal drugs. 
She failed to disclose her marijuana use between 2001 and 2004. She also failed to 
disclose that she had been cited for drinking in public on September 1, 2008.   
 
Applicant’s personal conduct raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(b), 
16(c), and 16(e)(1). AG 16(a) reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification 
of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or 
award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(b) reads: “deliberately providing false or 
misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security 
official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative.”  
 
AG ¶ 16(c) reads: “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
adjudicative guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole- 
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of 
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
 
13 
 
 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.” AG ¶ 
16(e)(1), reads in pertinent part as follows: “personal conduct, or concealment of 
information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.”   
 
 The disqualifying personal conduct alleged in the SOR occurred between 2000 
and 2008. From 2000 to 2002, Applicant stalked two former boyfriends, and in 2000 and 
2003, she was terminated from two jobs for lateness and attendance issues. These 
events, which occurred over seven years ago, when viewed as a whole with other more 
recent personal conduct allegations, raise security concerns under AG ¶ 16(c). As a 
whole, the events indicate, under a whole-person assessment, questionable judgment, 
unreliability, lack of candor, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, 
suggesting that Applicant may not properly safeguard protected information. 
 
After being granted a security clearance in 2001, Applicant used marijuana about 
three times a month between 2001 and 2004. In November 2005, her security clearance 
was revoked and she was denied additional access as the result of her personal 
conduct and her drug involvement. These facts raise security concerns under AG ¶ 
16(e)(1).  
 
 When she completed and signed her e-QIP in April 2006, Applicant falsified her 
responses to the e-QIP by failing to disclose her marijuana use and her drug use while 
holding a security clearance. She also failed to disclose that another Government 
agency disapproved her request for additional access and revoked her clearance 
because of her drug involvement and personal conduct issues. On three separate 
occasions, in April 2007, August 2008, and September 2008, when she was interviewed 
by OPM investigators, Applicant failed to disclose her marijuana use from 2001 to 2004. 
Additionally, in 2007, she failed to disclose that she had been denied additional access 
and her security clearance had been revoked by another federal agency in November 
2005. In her signed, sworn statement of September 26, 2008,  Applicant again falsified 
her response by denying ever using illegal drugs. Additionally, she failed to disclose that 
she had been cited for drinking alcohol in public. After a thorough examination of the 
record, carefully observing Applicant, and listening to and reading her testimony, I 
conclude that her falsifications of her April 2006 e-QIP were deliberate. I also conclude 
that she deliberately provided false or misleading information concerning relevant facts 
about her marijuana use, her drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 
revocation of her security clearance and denial of additional access to the authorized 
investigators who interviewed her on April 23, 2007 and August 27, 2008. Further, I 
conclude that Applicant falsified her signed, sworn statement of September 26, 2008, by 
stating that she never used marijuana or any illegal drugs and by failing to disclose a 
citation for drinking in public.   
 
I have carefully reviewed the several mitigating conditions under Guideline E. I 
conclude that none of the mitigating conditions applies in this case. 
 
 
14 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18: 
       
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns.   
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debt that remained unsatisfied for several 
years. She was unable or unwilling to pay her creditors. This evidence is sufficient to 
raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several mitigating conditions could apply to 
the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. If the financially 
delinquent behavior “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 20(a) might apply. If 
“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances,” then AG ¶ 20(b) might apply. If “the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control,” then AG ¶ 20(c) might apply. If “the individual 
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” then 
AG ¶ 20(d) might apply. Finally, if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply. 
 
The record shows that Applicant’s financial delinquencies date to at least 2003, 
and they have continued to the present. Moreover, Applicant now lacks sufficient 
financial resources to meet her family’s basic needs and must rely upon her mother for 
additional support. Applicant owes over $31,000 in delinquent debts, which she cannot 
satisfy. To her credit, she provided documentation to establish that she was paying 
down the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 2.j. and 2.l. However, the record suggests that her 
 
15 
 
 
financial difficulties occurred under circumstances that are likely to recur, and they cast 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
The record does not include facts that suggest protracted conditions beyond 
Applicant’s control that would explain her failure over a period of years to meet her 
financial obligations. While she experienced periodic unemployment and the challenges 
of raising two children as a single parent, she is also pursuing a college degree.  
 
Applicant stated that she intends to satisfy several of her creditors in the future. 
While Applicant’s intention to satisfy her creditors is laudable, she has failed to 
demonstrate a track record of financial responsibility. She has not yet demonstrated 
priorities that emphasize paying her existing debts and avoiding additional financial 
delinquencies in the future. While I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) and 20(d) apply in part to 
the facts of Applicant’s case, I also conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(e) do not 
apply to her case.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, applies in this case to a determination of 
eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability.” 
 
 I have considered all of the Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions.  I 
have especially considered AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c). AG ¶  22(a) reads: “alcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or 
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”  AG ¶ 
22(c) reads: “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent.”   
 
Applicant began to consume alcohol in about 2000, when she was 21 years old. 
In April 2007, she reported that she occasionally drank alcohol to intoxication three or 
four times a year. She drank when she went out with her friends once or twice a month. 
She did not consider her alcohol use a problem. In August 2008, she reported to an 
authorized investigator that, since the age of 27, she had consumed alcohol about four 
times a year and had not been intoxicated. 
 
In June 2008, Applicant was arrested for the first and only time for driving under 
the influence of alcohol. She was found guilty of reckless driving and ordered to take 
part in an alcohol safety awareness education program. In September 2008, she was 
cited for drinking in public at a Labor Day picnic in a park. These facts raise security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c). 
 
 
16 
 
 
The Guideline G disqualifying conduct could be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(a) if 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The disqualifying 
conduct could also be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(b) if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).”  If “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress,” then AG ¶ 23(c) 
might apply.  Finally, mitigation might be possible under AG ¶ 23 (d) if “the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.”   
 
 Applicant is now 31 years old. In June 2008, she was arrested and charged with 
driving under the influence of alcohol. Three months later, in September 2008, she was 
cited for drinking in public. These alcohol-related incidents are relatively recent. 
 
 In December 2008, Applicant successfully completed an alcohol safety 
awareness program. Nothing in the record suggests that Applicant has been diagnosed 
as an abuser of alcohol or as alcohol dependent. She last consumed alcohol in 
September or October 2008. At her hearing, she reported that she no longer drinks 
alcohol. I conclude that AG ¶ 23 (a) applies in mitigation in this case: Applicant’s alcohol 
involvement behavior, while recent, reflected infrequent use, happened under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur, and does not cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
  Under the Criminal Conduct guideline “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
AG ¶ 30. 
 
 Applicant admits a history of criminal conduct that spans nine years. In 1999, she 
was arrested and charged with destruction of property. The charge was nolle prossed. 
In 2006, she was arrested and charged with assault and battery. That charge was also 
nolle prossed.  In May 2008, she was arrested for driving while intoxicated. She was 
found guilty of reckless driving, was sentenced to 30 days in jail, suspended, and 
ordered to attend an alcohol education program. Her driver’s license was suspended for 
six months, and she was fined.  Despite Applicant’s initial denials, the record evidence 
 
17 
 
 
established Applicant’s drinking in public charge and the charge that she was in 
possession of forged license plates. This behavior raises concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) 
and AG ¶ 31(c). AG ¶ 31(a) reads: “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.” 
AG ¶ 31(c) reads: “allegation or admission or criminal conduct, regardless of whether 
the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
 Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions might apply to Applicant’s case.  If 
“so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 32(a) might apply.  If 
“there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of 
time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive involvement,” then AG ¶ 32(d) 
might apply. 
 
  The record establishes that Applicant’s criminal behavior began in 1999 and  
continued to at least 2008. Her criminal conduct is, therefore, recent. Two witnesses 
offered character testimony on behalf of Applicant and stated that they thought she was 
trustworthy and reliable. However, in her answers to the SOR, Applicant denied two 
criminal conduct allegations for narrow reasons, even though, at her hearing, she 
acknowledged the truth of the underlying conduct alleged. Applicant’s denials suggest 
that she has not fully acknowledged responsibility for her conduct, which, in turn, raises 
continuing security concerns about her lack of remorse and rehabilitation. Applicant’s 
long-standing pattern of criminal behavior continues to cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  I conclude that neither AG ¶ 32(a) nor AG ¶ 32 (d) 
applies. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
18 
 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I observed Applicant’s 
demeanor closely at her hearing, and I listened carefully to her testimony. My review of 
the record reveals that Applicant has worked hard to acquire an education and to care 
for her two daughters. She has had difficulties in maintaining steady employment and in 
paying her creditors. 
 
 When she answered the 12 financial allegations in the SOR, Applicant denied all 
of them. However, in direct testimony and in cross-examination, she admitted the 
allegations and acknowledged that the debts were her responsibility. She also denied 
the criminal conduct allegations alleged at ¶¶ 4. d. and 4.e., and yet she admitted the 
underlying allegations. Applicant’s conduct suggested that she is not committed to 
answering truthfully and uses denial as a tactic. 
 
Applicant completed her e-QIP in April 2006, just five months after receiving a 
letter from another Government agency revoking her security clearance and denying 
her additional access because of drug use and personal conduct issues. However, 
Applicant failed to report her marijuana use between 2001 and 2004, which occurred 
while she held a security clearance. She also failed to report that her security clearance 
had been revoked in November 2005. I conclude that her failure to report this 
information on her e-QIP was a deliberate attempt to mislead the Government.  
 
Additionally, Applicant provided false and misleading information about her drug 
use and the revocation of her security clearance to OPM investigators during security 
clearance investigations in April 2007 and in August and September 2008. I conclude 
that Applicant deliberately failed to give truthful answers to the investigators and was 
not a credible witness. Moreover, her failure to tell the truth about her drug use and the 
revocation of her security clearance continued during her security clearance hearing on 
March 29, 2010.    
 
Applicant’s failure to give truthful answers on her e-QIP, during three interviews 
with authorized investigators, and at her hearing raises serious concerns about her 
credibility and her vulnerability to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. It also 
suggests that she may not know how to respond truthfully in other situations, raising the 
likelihood that she may continue to be untruthful in the future. Because the Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information, it must be able to rely, with confidence, on their capacity to act 
honorably and report truthfully. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I conclude, 
after a careful review of the facts of her case, the adjudicative guidelines, and the 
whole-person concept, that Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
from her personal conduct, financial delinquencies, and criminal conduct. 
 
 
 
19 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
            Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
        Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.n.:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline F:             AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
        Subparagraphs  2.a. - 2.i.:  Against Applicant 
 
        Subparagraphs 2.j. -  2.l.:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline G:              FOR APPLICANT 
 
         Subparagraphs 3.a. - 3.b.:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 4: Guideline J:                        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
         Subparagraphs 4. a. - 4.e.:   Against Applicant   
   
                                                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                         ______________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
