 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07508 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP), on 
January 8, 2008. On October 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) which 
were effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 On November 10, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 
7, 2010. The case was assigned to me on January 15, 2010. On March 1, 2010, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for March 23, 2010. The hearing 
was held, as scheduled. The Government offered four exhibits which were admitted as 
Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 4 without objection. The Applicant testified and offered 
eight exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - H. The transcript (Tr.)  
 
2 
 
 
was received on April 1, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR pursuant to 
paragraph E3.1.17 of the Directive. Applicant did not object to the motion to amend. (Tr. 
60-63) 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.a(1) was amended to read as follows: “(1) marijuana – about 1000 
times, at times including daily use, from 1998 to July 2008;” 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a(6) was added which reads: “(6) hallucinogenic mushrooms 
(psilocybin) on multiple occasions between 1999 and 2008.” 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.d was added which reads: “d. You operated a motor vehicle while 
impaired or intoxicated by alcohol on two occasions in 2009.”  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations including the 
amendments to the SOR.  
 
Applicant is a 26 year old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  She is a licensing analyst and has worked for her current 
employer since December 2007. Applicant has a bachelor of science degree in 
packaging science. This is her first time applying for a security clearance. She is 
engaged to be married and has no children.  (Tr. 4-5, 26-27, 55; Gov 1)   
 
Applicant has a history of illegal drug abuse beginning when she was in high 
school. She began to use marijuana at age 15. She estimates that between 1998 and 
July 2008, she used marijuana 1,000 times. She smoked marijuana on a daily basis 
during the first four years of college. In 2006, she moved back home and would only 
smoke about three to four days a week. She stopped smoking marijuana in October 
2007 when she began interviewing for jobs. She last used marijuana in July 2008, 
seven months after completing her application for a security clearance. Applicant was at 
a concert with some friends and they smoked marijuana and took hallucinogenic 
mushrooms (psilocybin). Her July 2008 marijuana use was the only time she used 
marijuana after being hired by her current employer. (Tr. 25, 33; Gov 1; Gov 2)  
 
Between 1998 and 2008, Applicant used hallucinogenic mushrooms about ten 
times. Applicant first tried ecstasy in 2000 while still a high school student. She used 
ecstasy approximately 60 times between January 2003 and January 2005. Applicant 
used to attend rave parties and ecstasy was the substance of choice. (Tr. 35, 39; Gov 1; 
Gov 2) Between January 2001 and January 2002, she used LSD on at least three 
occasions. (Tr. 39-40; Gov 1, section 24) 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant used cocaine approximately 60 times between November 2006 and 
November 2007. She befriended a cocaine dealer. She purchased cocaine a couple 
times. In 2007, Applicant tested positive for cocaine use during a pre-employment drug 
test. The company withdrew their employment offer. The last time Applicant used 
cocaine was around Thanksgiving 2007 when her friends threw her a farewell party 
before she moved to begin her current job.  (Tr. 36-38, 46-47, 54; Gov 2) 
 
Applicant admits to being aware that her drug use was illegal. She was also 
aware of her current employer’s policy prohibiting illegal drug use. She claims that she 
used illegal drugs after applying for a security clearance because she was stupid and 
immature. (Tr. 41-42, 47) 
 
Applicant considers herself to be an alcoholic. During her background 
investigation interview on May 6, 2008, Applicant indicated that she started to drink 
alcohol while in high school. She would drink several times a week to the point of 
intoxication. She becomes violent when she becomes intoxicated. She told the 
investigator that she wanted to stop drinking, but took no steps to do anything about it 
as of the date of the interview. (Tr.  45; Gov 2) 
 
On two occasions, Applicant was arrested and charged with Domestic Assault 
after getting into a physical argument with her then boyfriend. She was intoxicated on 
both occasions when she was arrested. In December 2007, after a night of drinking at a 
bar, Applicant and her boyfriend got into an argument at another couple’s apartment. 
They left the apartment and continued fighting in the parking lot of the apartment 
complex. They realized the police would be called so they got into a car and began to 
leave. The police detained them before they could leave. Applicant was charged with 
Domestic Assault. Her boyfriend was charged with possession of drug paraphernalia. 
The charges against Applicant were dismissed because her boyfriend refused to testify 
against her. She admits to the conduct even though the charges were dropped. (Tr. 28; 
Gov 1, section 23; Gov 2; Gov 3) 
 
On April 14, 2008, Applicant got into a fight with her boyfriend at their apartment. 
She was intoxicated. The neighbors called the police. Applicant’s boyfriend told the 
police that she had physically assaulted him. The police noticed red marks on her 
boyfriend’s face. Applicant was arrested and charged with Assault by Contact - Family 
Violence. On June 11, 2008, Applicant received a deferred sentence. She was given the 
choice to pay a $515 fine or complete an anger management course. She chose to 
complete the anger management course and completed the course on October 2, 2008. 
(Tr. 28; Gov 2)     
   
In her answers to interrogatories dated January 12, 2009, Applicant indicated the 
anger management classes allowed her to explore her codependency issues with 
alcohol. She admitted that she was still drinking. She has only gone to bars about twice 
a month since July 2008. She only had one to two drinks each time. She indicated that 
 
4 
 
 
she did not buy alcohol to drink at home, and that she does not drink in her house. (Gov 
2) 
 
During the hearing, Applicant testified that she did not realize the severity of her 
alcohol problem. Three events made her realize the seriousness of her problem. On the 
first occasion, she blacked out after driving home from a bar in the winter of 2009.  The 
second event was when she made a fool of herself when she was out drinking with 
friends and coworkers. Her breaking point was on May 2, 2009. She was drinking at a 
coworker’s concert. She became upset and anxious and drove herself to a hospital and 
checked herself into the hospital.  She was treated for depression, anxiety, and alcohol 
and drug addiction for three days. During her stay in the hospital she received 
counseling from a psychiatrist and attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings. She 
did not attend AA meetings after she left the hospital. (Tr. 22, 47) 
 
When Applicant was hospitalized, she claims that she was treated for 
depression. She is not aware of being diagnosed with substance abuse or alcohol 
abuse. Her drug and alcohol issues never interfered with her work. She provided a copy 
of her college transcripts which reveal that she had a good grade point average. (Tr. 20, 
29; AE A) 
 
After she was released from the hospital, she found a Christian counselor and 
attended several therapy sessions. She also became active in the singles group of her 
church home. Her church helped her commit to a more sober life style. She has not 
drank alcohol since May 2, 2009. She takes no prescription medication and is doing 
well. She no longer associates with her drug using friends. She took a voluntary drug 
test on November 6, 2009, which tested negative for illegal drugs. (Tr. 23-25; AE D; AE 
E; AE G; AE H)  
 
During the hearing, Applicant provided a written statement indicating that she has 
been sober since May 3, 2009, and she does not intend to consume alcoholic 
beverages in the future. (AE D) She also provided a written statement that she has not 
used illegal drugs since July 21, 2008, and she does not intend to use illegal drugs in 
the future. She has disassociated herself from her friends who use illegal drugs and 
alcohol. (AE H) 
 
The leader of the singles group at Applicant’s church wrote a letter on her behalf. 
He and his wife met Applicant in 2008 when they started the group. Applicant attended 
their meetings regularly. Applicant was one of their most faithful attendees and was an 
integral part of the church group. Applicant confided that she wanted to separate herself 
from the mistakes of her past. He and his wife can attest to her change of heart and life. 
(AE F at 1) 
 
Applicant’s co-worker wrote a letter on her behalf indicating that she met 
Applicant in February 2009 when she began her employment at the same company. 
Applicant showed her around and introduced her to the other coworkers. They joined an 
intramural softball league. They went to happy hour on a few occasions. She observed 
 
5 
 
 
that alcohol did not always have the best effects on Applicant. Applicant’s mood would 
change in a negative way and she did not seem to know when to stop drinking. They 
eventually became good friends and Applicant confided to her that she did not like how 
she acted after drinking alcohol. Applicant told her that she was going to quit drinking 
alcohol in May 2009.  The co-worker has not seen her drink alcohol since that time. To 
avoid drinking, Applicant would go home after softball games. Her co-worker says that 
Applicant has changed and her overall happiness and quality of life is greatly improved. 
(AE F at 2) 
 
Applicant’s sister wrote a letter indicating Applicant first revealed her struggles 
with substance abuse in early 2008. Once Applicant admitted that she had a problem, 
her life began to improve incrementally. She was willing to take steps necessary to 
overcome her problems. She sought help from her family, home church, and from a 
professional therapist. She avoided friendships and situations that previously 
compromised her decision to live productively. Her sister says with great confidence 
that Applicant has achieved a level of stability and integrity. (AE F at 3) 
 
Applicant’s performance reports from 2008 and 2009 are favorable. (AE B)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
6 
 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern raised under the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG &24:       
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following drug involvement disqualifying conditions apply: 
 
AG & 25(a) (any drug abuse);  
 
AG ¶ 25(b) (testing positive for illegal drug use); and  
 
AG ¶25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia). 
 
Applicant abused illegal drugs over a ten year period, often using illegal drugs on 
a daily basis. The level of her drug use was not experimental. In 2007, she tested 
positive for cocaine in a pre-employment drug screening.   
 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from drug involvement. One mitigating condition potentially applies to  
Applicant’s case.  
 
 AG & 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the 
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.)  
potentially applies. Applicant no longer associates with her drug-using friends. She 
broke up with her boyfriend. She avoids situations where drugs are likely to be used. 
She has not used illegal drugs since July 2008. She expressed an intent to no longer 
use illegal drugs.  
 
 While Applicant appears to meet the application of AG ¶ 26(b), it does not fully 
mitigate the drug involvement concern based on Applicant’s long history of substance 
abuse. Her statement that she intends to abstain from illegal drug use in the future, 
while sincere, is given less weight because she previously stated that she quit using 
illegal drugs in November 2007 only to use again in July 2008. Her illegal drug use in 
July 2008 occurred after she submitted her security clearance questionnaire in January 
2008, and after she was interviewed by an investigator in conjunction with her 
background investigation in May 2008. Applicant was also aware of her company’s 
policy prohibiting illegal drug use.   
 
 Additional concerns remain because although Applicant attended some AA 
meetings when she was hospitalized in May 2009 and subsequent counseling through 
her church, she no longer attends counseling after relocating to another state. She 
testified that she has family members in the area for support and believes she can 
handle the situation on her own. Given her history of drug and alcohol abuse, I am not 
confident that she will be successful in her efforts to remain sober without some 
professional help. While I find it encouraging that Applicant has been drug free since 
July 2008, I believe more time is needed to prove that Applicant will remain drug free 
based on the extent of Applicant’s illegal drug use, the fact that she abused illegal drugs 
for over 10 years, and her relapse in July 2008 after applying for a security clearance.   
 
 The drug involvement concerns are not mitigated. 
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern raised under the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set 
out in AG & 21:       
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
 
8 
 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. The following alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent) applies with respect to Applicant’s two arrests for 
Domestic Violence in December 2007 and April 2008. On both occasions Applicant got 
into a physical argument with her boyfriend after a night of drinking. She admits to 
getting violent when she is intoxicated. Applicant also admits to blacking out while 
driving home after a night of drinking in the winter of 2009. She admits to driving her car 
while on intoxicated on two occasions in 2009 even though she was never arrested for 
these incidents.  
 
AG ¶ 22(c) (habitual or binge consumption to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent) also applies. Applicant admits that she is an alcoholic. When she drinks 
alcohol, she drinks to the point of intoxication. Her co-worker and friend noticed the 
negative adverse effect alcohol had on Applicant’s personality. Applicant experienced 
several incidents where her judgment has been impaired as a result of her drinking 
alcohol. She was arrested on two occasions after arguing with her boyfriend after a 
night of drinking. In the winter of 2009, she suffered an alcoholic black out while driving 
home after a night out drinking. She admits to making a fool of herself after a night of 
drinking with friends and co-workers.   
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from alcohol consumption. The following mitigating conditions are relevant to 
Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a) (so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment); and  
 
AG ¶ 23(b) (the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
Applicant admits to having issues with alcohol and believes that she is an 
alcoholic. She has remained alcohol-free since May 2009. However, she currently does 
not attend alcohol counseling. She initially told the government on her security 
clearance questionnaire that she had not consumed alcohol since December 16, 2007. 
She eventually resumed drinking alcohol which resulted in her second arrest for 
Domestic Violence in April 2008. Her alcohol use escalated to the point that she blacked 
 
9 
 
 
out while driving home after a night of drinking in winter 2009 and she felt that she made 
a fool of herself in front of her co-workers. Not enough time has passed to verify that 
Applicant will maintain her sobriety.  
 
Guideline G is found against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
performance evaluations with her current employer. I considered her favorable 
reference letters. While I believe Applicant is sincere when she states that she intends 
to remain alcohol and drug free, at this time I believe the potential for relapse remains 
because Applicant is currently not in a counseling program. She has a ten year history 
of alcohol abuse and illegal drug abuse. Her last use of illegal drugs occurred in July 
2008, seven months after applying for a security clearance and while aware of her 
employer’s policies against illegal drug use. While the evidence reveals that she has 
remained sober for over a year, it is too soon to conclude Applicant will remain alcohol 
and drug free in the future based on her ten-year history of substance abuse. I find 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised under the drug involvement and  
alcohol consumption guidelines.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
