                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-04328
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: William Savarino, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of the Case
On June 2, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as amended
(Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), effective within the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 30, 2009, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on September 9, 2009, and was scheduled for hearing on
October 7, 2009. At the scheduled hearing, Applicant asked for a continuance to obtain
counsel. Applicant’s hearing request was granted. The case was rescheduled for hearing
on December 8, 2009. 
2
The hearing was held as rescheduled. At the hearing, the Government's case
consisted of four exhibits.  Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and nine exhibits.
The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 17, 2009.  Based upon a review of the
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information
is denied.
Besides its four exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of six
documents pertaining to the country of Jordan: Background Note: Jordan, U.S.
Department of State (February 2009); Country Specific Information: Jordan, U.S.
Department of State (May 2009); 2008 Human Rights Report: Jordan, U.S. Department
of State (February 2009); Country Reports on Terrorism 2008, Chapter 2-Country
Reports, Middle East and North African Overview (April 2009); Statement for the Record
from the Counterintelligence Executive, Before the House Judiciary Subcommittee on
Immigration, Border Security and Claims (September 2005; Annual Threat Assessment
of Intelligence Community, Director of National Intelligence (February 2008).
The Government also sought administrative notice of ten documents relative to
the country of Israel: Background Note: Israel, U.S. Department of State (October 2007);
CRS Report for Congress: Israel: Background and Relations with the United States,
Congressional Research Service, Report RL 33476 (April 2009); Annual Report to
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage-2000, National
Counterintelligence Center; Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection
and Industrial Espionage-2005, National Counterintelligence Center (August 2006);
Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage-
2007 (September 2008); National Counterintelligence Center; Intelligence Threat
Handbook, June 2004, Interagency OPSEC Support Staff (IOSS); California Exporter
Settles Criminal and Civil Charges for Illegal Exports of High Performance Oscilloscopes
to Israel; U.S. Department of Commerce (April 2005); Minnesota Company Settles
Charges Relating to Illegal Exports to Israel; U.S. Department of Commerce (April 2005);
Israeli Man Settles Charges of Concealing Material Facts, U.S. Department of
Commerce (April 2002); Arizona Company Settles Charges of Illegal Exports of Lasers,
U.S. Department of Commerce (May 2001).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007);
Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are well
known. See Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good cause
shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the above-named background
reports addressing the geopolitical situations in Jordan and Israel, respectively. 
Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves, consistent  with
the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.  This notice did not foreclose Applicant from
challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the reports
addressing the current status of Jordan and Israel.  
3
Procedural Issues
Prior to the close of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw the
allegations set forth in subparagraph 2.d for reasons that the alleged friend is his wife.
There being no objections, and good cause demonstrated, Department Counsel’s
withdrawal motion was granted.  
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to supplement the record with his canceled U.S. 2003
passport.  For good cause shown, Applicant was granted ten days to supplement the
record. Within the time permitted, Applicant provided a copy of his cancelled U.S.
passport. Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s post-hearing submission, and
for good cause shown, the submission is admitted as exhibit J.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged in the SOR to have: (a) falsified his
resume in 2001 to get a job with a state transportation department; (b) been re-assigned
by his employer as a linguist in May 2005, while working in Qatar, because of allegations
made by his former fiancee, a foreign national, that he had revealed sensitive work
information to her; (c) obtained a new U.S. passport, in approximately February 2006, by
falsifying material facts by stating his U.S. passport was stolen, and failing to truthfully
disclose his passport had been confiscated; and (d) been denied a contract linguist
position by the U.S. Army in January 2007 based on a finding that he presented a
security risk. 
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged in the SOR to have: (a) a spouse who is a
citizen of Jordan residing in Israel; (b) a sister who is a citizen of Jordan, residing in
Qatar; (c) a friend, who is a citizen of Jordan, residing in Qatar; (d) a friend, who is a
citizen of Palestine, residing in Jordan; (e) a mother-in-law who is a citizen of Jordan,
residing in Israel; (f) three brother-in-laws and five sisters-in-law who are citizens of
Jordan, residing in Israel; (g) four aunts and an uncle of his wife, who are citizens of
Jordan, residing in Israel; (h) renewed his residency status or visa in Bahrain for
continued employment in Qatar; (I) traveled to Jordan and Israel from December 2005 to
February 2006 to visit his sister and his wife; and (j) traveled to Israel in January 2007 to
get married. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations. He denied
falsifying his resume revealing sensitive information to his former fiancee, and falsely
claiming his U.S. passport was stolen. He added no explanations.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year old linguist for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted
as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
4
Background
Applicant was born and raised in Kuwait.  He immigrated to the United States
(U.S.) from Jordan in 1979 on a student visa.  See Ex. 4. Applicant became a naturalized
U.S. citizen in February 1993.  See Exs. 1 and 4.  He maintains no dual citizenship and
has a degree in architectural design drafting.  Ex. 1.
Applicant has been married four times. See Exs. 1 and 2.  He married W1, a U.S.
citizen, in 1985. According to the information provided an investigator from the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) in June 2007, they divorced in 1991 over marital
differences.  Ex. 2.  He has no children from this marriage. Applicant married again in
1993 to W2.  He divorced her in Egypt in 1994 and has no children from this marriage.
In 1996, Applicant married W3. Ex. 2. They encountered irreconcilable differences
and attempted a divorce in 2003.  When they learned that their attempts at divorce were
invalid, they arranged for formal divorce in September 2006.  Exs. 1 and 2.  Applicant
attributes his divorce from W3 to family stress and logistical problems.  He blamed W3
for taking away his citizenship papers and his U.S. passport.  Ex. 2. They have no
children from their marriage.
Applicant married his current spouse (W4) in February 2007 after a two-year
engagement. He met W4 in an internet exchange in July 2005 and twice visited her (in
the U.S. and Israel) before she came to live with him in March 2007 (following their
marriage).  See Exs. 1 and 2; Tr. 91, 119.  They have two children. Ex. 1; Tr. 92.  W4 is
a citizen of Jordan who works for the U.S. AID mission in Jerusalem, where she has
resided since she and Applicant first met in 2005.  Exs. C, E, and F. She holds a
permanent resident card that was issued to her by the Israeli government in October
2009.  See Exs. 1, 2, 4, and D.
Applicant’s parents were born and raised in Palestine and are deceased. Ex. 1.
He has two sisters.  See Exs. 1 and 2; Tr. 123-24. Both are Jordanian citizens. One
resides in Great Britain and has dual citizenship status with Great Britain and Jordan.
See Exs. 1 and 2. The other resides in Jordan. Neither of his sisters have any
associations with any government or military organization. Tr. 97, 106-07. Applicant also
has a close friend who is a citizen of Jordan residing in Qatar.  See Ex. 4. 
W4's mother is a citizen of Jordan who resides in Israel with W4.  Tr. 96-97.  W4
has three brothers and five sisters who are citizens of Jordan and reside in Israel.  See
Exs. 1 through 3; Tr. 99-100.  None of W4's brothers and sisters, or their spouses, have
any associations with any government or military organization.  Tr. 101-02 .  W4 also has
four aunts and an uncle who are citizens of Jordan residing in Israel.  See Exs. 1 and 2;
Tr. 103-04.  
5
Applicant communicates with W4 regularly and maintains monthly contact with his
sisters.  Occasionally, he communicates with his wife’s siblings.  See Exs. 2 and 4; Tr.
112-13.  He has infrequent contact with the rest of his wife’s family members and his
friend. Ex. 2; Tr. 113-15.  Between December 2005 and February 2006, he traveled to
Jordan and Israel to see his sister and W4.  He returned to Israel in January 2007 to
marry W4.  None of W4's family members have ever visited Applicant in the U.S.  Tr.
123.
Since January 2007, Applicant has not traveled to Jordan,  Israel, or any country
in the Middle East, for any reason.  Applicant has no reason to believe that any of his
family members residing in Jordan or Israel are at any risk to pressure, compromise, or
coercion.   See Exs 2 and 4.
Applicant’s work experience
Before Applicant accepted his present linguist assignment, he held linguist
positions with several contractors. Between May 2001 and January 2002, he was
employed by a large state transportation agency as an engineer. In his employment
application with the agency, he claimed to have a basic knowledge of and familiarity with
Microsoft hardware (including excel programs) and excellent work experience. See Ex.
2; Tr. 49-52, 133-35. Based on his assurances, he was hired as a transportation
engineer with the state agency.  Exs. 1 and 2.  Shortly after his hire, and during his
probation period, he encountered difficulties in excel work on his assigned computer.
Asked by his supervisors why he claimed excel training and experience, Applicant
responded that he did not know he put in for a higher grade position and believed he
would get some excel training. Ex. 2. Applicant acknowledged that his supervisor did not
accept his explanation, and accused him of lying. Tr. 56-57. As a result of this encounter,
Applicant’s state employer issued a notice of rejection to him. See Exs.  4 and B; Tr. 58-
59.   Rather than challenge his rejection, he resigned his position.  Tr. 59-60, 202.
Applicant was unemployed for most of the two years spanning January 2002 and
February 2004.  Ex. 1.  Between February 2004 and May 2005, he worked as a linguist
for a language consultant with the U.S. Embassy in Qatar See Exs. 1 and 2; Tr. 148.  In
May 2005, he was re-assigned by his employer due to an argument with his supervisor
and allegations made by his former fiancee (previously disclosed to employer), a foreign
national, that he had divulged sensitive information to her.  See Exs. 2 and I; Tr. 150-51.
While Applicant retreated some from his earlier explanations of his reassignment when
pressed for reasons at hearing, his initial explanations offer the most plausible reasons
for his re-assignment and ultimate departure from the language consulting firm he
worked for and are accepted.  What disclosures his fiancee might have made to U.S.
Embassy officials to prompt his re-assignment is not known, but were apparently serious
enough to warrant corrective action by his employer, Applicant’s denials notwithstanding.
Tr. 65-66.
Following his re-assignment and departure from his linguist position in Qatar,
Applicant could not find suitable employment. Over the course of the year (between May
6
2005 and April 2006), he was unemployed for the most part.  During his extended period
of unemployment, he received $1,000 a month in unemployment benefits.  See Ex. 4.
In April 2006, Applicant returned to the same state transportation agency he
worked for in 2001.  In his telephone interview with an agency head, he failed to disclose
his prior employment with the agency and the circumstances in which he reassigned. Tr.
69-70.  Applicant’s supervisor claimed he lied to him and issued a notice of rejection in
July 2006.  See Exs. 2 and B; Tr. 68-69. The agency proceeded to separate him from
service.  Tr. 70-72. 
Claiming he listed his prior employment with the agency in his employment
application, Applicant challenged his latest rejection and reached a settlement with the
state agency in October 2007.  See Ex. B; Tr. 66-67, 71-72.  By the terms of his
settlement, Applicant was placed on unpaid leave of absence from July 2006 through
June 2007.  The agency, in turn, agreed to assign 11 days of paid administrative time for
each monthly pay period between July 2007 and June 2010.  See Ex. B.  For his part,
Applicant agreed in advance to resign from the state agency, effective June 2010,
withdraw all appeals, and to avoid any future application or acceptance of employment
from the state agency in the future.  Ex. B.
Applicant interviewed for a contract linguist position with the U.S. Army in January
2007.  See Ex. 4.  During his interview, he changed his answers numerous times and,
according to the Army’s investigation record, lied several times during the interview.
Following the interview, the Army noted the absence of any national agency check and
an incomplete national criminal information center check and found Applicant to present
counterintelligence and foreign preference risks.  Ex. 4.  Based on its findings, the Army
concluded that Applicant should not be considered for a position of trust with the U.S.
Government.  See Ex. 4.  
Passport issues
Applicant was issued a U.S. passport when he became a naturalized citizen in
1993.  This passport expired in February 2003 and bears two cancellation stamps: one in
January 2003 and another on March 12, 2003.  See Ex. G.  Circumstances surrounding
these dual cancellation dates are not clear.  The first one cites a new application, which
would appear to corroborate Applicant’s claims that he obtained a new passport to
replace his initial one that was scheduled to expire in February 2003. See Exs. 4 and G.
In late March 2003, Applicant became embroiled in a heated argument with W3
over his planned deployment to the Middle East.  See Ex. A.  He reported in a March 5,
2003 police report that W3 took his items of identification (i.e., his passport, his driver’s
license, and his social security card).  Ex. A.  Whether she took his old canceled passport
or his newly issued one is not clear. Applicant did not provide any documented
explanations in his Army interview and hearing of whether the taken passport was his
cancelled one or a freshly issued passport.  Nor did he provide any details of when he
obtained a new one.  Piecing together the March 12, 2003 date stamp on his old passport
7
and his very limited accounts in his Army and OPM interviews, inferences may be
reasonably drawn that he applied for and obtained a third passport in March 2003.
Compare Exs. 2 and 4 with G.  
Shortly after obtaining his third U.S. passport in March 2003, Applicant claimed he
recovered the passport his fiancee had previously taken from him.  Tr. 75-77, 82.  He
recollected that he returned to the Post Office to obtain a cancellation of his recovered
passport.  By all reasonable accounts, Applicant kept both his old Jordanian passport and
his canceled U.S. passport. He provided no meaningful explanations as to why he
determined to retain possession of them.
On June 9, 2005,  Applicant reported to the local police in another state that his old
Jordanian passport and his U.S. passport had been stolen from his briefcase (along with
his deployment papers) during his short stay at a local motel in the evening of June 3,
2005.  See Ex. 3.  In a follow-up June 14, 2005 police report, he told police that he still
retained his current U.S. passport.  Ex. 3.  Police returned the following day to take a third
account from Applicant about his stolen passports.  In this revised account, he confirmed
that his two old passports were never found.  Ex. 3. Then, in a fourth and final revised
account of his passport theft on June 27, 2005, he advised investigating police that he
found both expired passports. However, he did not provide any details of how he found
his two old passports.  
When asked what he did with his recovered Jordanian and U.S. passports,
Applicant responded that he shredded his Jordanian passport and returned it to the
Jordanian Embassy, without providing any documentation of his actions.  By contrast, he
assured that he retained his canceled U.S. passport.  Tr. 161.  Applicant provided no
further details of why he retained his canceled U.S. passport. Tr. 159-61. 
Between December 2005 and February 2006, Applicant traveled to Jordan and
Israel to visit his sister and W4 (his girlfriend at the time).  He used his recovered current
passport from March 2003 to enter and exit the countries. Tr. 80-81. When departing
Israel in February 2006, he was detained by Israel airport personnel and questioned
about the expired U.S. passport he possessed.  Ex. 4; Tr. 120, 190.  By the time of his
departure from Israel, his U.S. passport had expired.  When he arrived back in the U.S.,
he was detained again by airport personnel.  He told the Army interviewer that his expired
U.S. passport was confiscated by airport personnel. See Ex. 4. His story changed some,
however, when he was asked about the passport at hearing.  At hearing, he assured his
passport was marked canceled and returned to hm.  Tr. 81. He documented his claims
after the hearing with a copy of his canceled U.S. passport that bears a February 24,
2006 cancellation date.  See Ex. J.  
Shortly after he returned from Israel in February 2006, Applicant applied for a new
U.S. passport from a local post office. Tr. 83-84. To obtain a new passport, he falsely told
post office personnel that his U.S. passport had been stolen.  See Ex. 4; Tr. 84. What he
did not tell responsible post office personnel was that his U.S. passport had earlier been
confiscated by airport personnel and canceled at the airport. See Exs. 4 and J. Applicant
8
provided no convincing explanations to avoid drawn inferences that he misstated the
circumstances about his loss of his U.S. passport when he applied for a new passport. Tr.
84-86. He essentially misled post office personnel to ensure his application for a new
passport would be expeditiously approved. This drawn inference is fully supported by the
accounts contained in the Army’s investigation file and Applicant’s own testimony.
Jordan’s country status
Jordan occupies a small land area in the Middle East that once was part of the
historical Fertile crescent region. See Background Note: Jordan, supra, at 2. Jordan has a
constitutional monarchy based on its constitution promulgated in January 1952.  Id., at 3.
It is a quite small country with limited natural resources, especially its water supplies. Its
economy is a developing one that relies heavily on imported oil supplies. See
Administrative Notice: Jordan, at 1-2. Jordan is ruled by King Abdullah II, and has a
council of ministers who are selected by the King.  See Background Note: Jordan, supra,
at 1-4. Jordan also has a partially elected bicameral National Assembly. Id., at 3-4.  
From 1949 to 1967, Jordan administered a territory known as the West Bank.  See
Background Note: Jordan, supra, at 2.  Since the 1967 war, when Israel assumed control
of the territory, the U.S. has considered the West Bank to be territory occupied by Israel.
Id., at 2.  The U.S. continues to believe that the final status of the West Bank can be
determined only through negotiations among the concerned parties based on United
Nations (UN) Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338.  Id.
For over sixty years, Jordan has maintained a close alliance relationship with the
U.S. However, it has had something of a turbulent history since it signed a mutual
defense pact in May 1967 with Egypt.  Background Note: Jordan, supra, at 1-4.  
Despite some noticeable improvements in certain areas, Jordan’s human rights
record continues to be problematic. See 2008 Human Rights Report: Jordan, supra, at 1-
2. Problems include torture, arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention, overcrowded prisons
with poor sanitary conditions, denial of due process, infringement on citizen’s privacy
rights, political detainees, and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly,
association, and movement. Id.  The UN reports widespread use of torture by police and
security forces in the country, and there has been some substantiation of torture reports.
See 2008 Human Rights Report: Jordan, supra, at 2. 
Jordanian law allows any male relative to prevent a woman or child from leaving
Jordan, even if they are U.S. citizens.  See Country Specific Information: Jordan, supra,
at 3.  Jordanian law applies to dual Jordanian-U.S. citizens, and subjects dual citizens to
mandatory military service obligations for males under the age of 37.  Id. Jordan treats
dual citizens as Jordanian citizens and is known not to inform U.S. embassy personnel
when a dual Jordanian-U.S. citizen encounters a problem.  Id. 
Notwithstanding Jordan’s aggressive pursuit of terrorists, drafting of counter-
terrorism legislation, prosecution of terrorism cases, including both al-Qaida and non-al-
9
Qaida defendants, and investigation and disruption of terrorist plots, the threat of
terrorism remains high in Jordan.  Terrorists in Jordan often do not distinguish between
U.S. government personnel and private citizens and specifically target areas known to be
frequented by Westerners.  See Country Specific Information: Jordan, supra, at 2.
To be sure, Jordanian security forces are of record in disrupting numerous terrorist
plots against U.S. interests in recent years, and have continued to prosecute terrorism
cases, both al-Qaida related and non-al-Qaida related. See Country Reports on Terrorism
2008, supra, at 12. Jordan’s state security court convicted and sentenced three
individuals, first to death, but then commuted the sentences to 15 years each, for plotting
to assassinate President Bush during his November 2006 trip to Jordan. Id.  For the
future, terrorist groups can be expected to continue to conduct intelligence activities as
effectively as the Jordanian state’s intelligence services. See Statement for the Record
from the Counterintelligence Executive, supra, at 2.  
Israel’s country status
Israel is a parliamentary democracy whose prime minister heads the government
and exercises executive power.  See Administrative Notice: Israel, supra, at 1-2.  Israel
has a diversified, technologically advanced economy that is growing at about 5 per cent
per year.  See Background Note: Israel, supra, at 6-9.  The U.S. is Israel’s largest trading
partner. Israel’s major industrial sectors include high-technology electronic and
biomedical equipment, chemicals, and transport equipment.  Id. at 8.  
Israeli-U.S. country relations remain strong and close: They share common
democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests. See CRS Report for
Congress: Israel: Background and Relations with the United States, Congressional
Research Service, supra.  The U.S. is committed to Israel’s security and well being since
1948 and provides important economic and security assistance to the country. Arab-
Israeli peace initiatives have been a major focus of the U.S.-Israeli geopolitical
relationship for over five decades.  See Background Note: Israel, supra, at 11.  U.S.
efforts to achieve a Middle East peace settlement are based on UN Security Council
Resolutions 242 and 338, which “have been based on the premise that as Israel takes
calculated risks for peace the United States will help minimize those risks.” Id.
True, issues remain between the two countries. For instance, the U.S. is
concerned with Israeli military sales, inadequate Israeli protection of U.S. intellectual
property, and espionage-related cases. See id., Summary section and 31 through 34.
The U.S. and Israel have regularly discussed Israel’s sale of sensitive equipment and
technology to various countries, especially China (the PRC). Israel reportedly is the
PRC’s second major arms supplier, after Russia.  Id. at 33.
U.S. concerns also extend to Israel’s very active data collection activities.  The
National Counterintelligence Center’s 2000 Report to Congress on Foreign Economic
Collection and Industrial Espionage lists Israel as one of the most active collectors of
10
proprietary information.  See Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection
and Industrial Espionage-2005, supra. The most recent report identifies the major
collectors as repeat offenders who have targeted multiple U.S. government organizations
since at least 1997.  See id. at 2.
Cases have been reported involving Israeli individuals exporting, or attempting to
export, U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Israel, including: (1) oscilloscopes that are
export-controlled “for nuclear non-proliferation and anti-terrorism reasons,” (see California
Exporter Settles Criminal and Civil Charges for Illegal Exports of High Performance
Oscilloscopes to Israel, supra); (2) epitaxial wafers and oscillator chips that could be used
in communications and radar systems (see  Minnesota Company Settles Charges
Relating to Illegal Exports to Israel, supra); (3) an infrared camera, the export of which is
controlled “for national security reasons because of its potential application in military
surveillance” (see Israeli Man Settles Charges of Concealing Material Facts, supra); and
(4) diode lasers that have “potential military applications, and are controlled for national
security and nuclear non-proliferation reasons” (see Arizona Company Settles Charges of
Illegal Exports of Lasers, supra). Foreign government entities, including intelligence
organizations and security services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of
U.S. technology.  See Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and
Industrial Espionage-2005, supra, at 5-6.  
Work-related omissions
In his first application for an engineering position with a state transportation agency
in 2001, Applicant inflated his training and experience in computer technology to obtain
his engineering position.  When asked about his work-related inflation of his work training
and experience by the Army interviewer in January 2007, Applicant informed the
interviewer that he was familiar with Microsoft excel, when in fact he was not.  See Ex. 4.
His claimed confusion about the words he used to describe his computer training and
experience were not convincing to his supervisor who threatened to terminate him and
permitted him to resign his position under unfavorable circumstances.  Applicant declined
to acknowledge the circumstances of his resignation from the state transportation agency
when asked about his employment record in the July 2006 e-QIP he completed in July
2006. See Ex. 1; Tr. 203-04.  And he provided false and inconsistent answers about his
forced resignation when initially interviewed by the Army investigator in January 2007.
See Ex. 4; Tr. 195-97.  
Only when pressed by the Army investigator did he admit to “lying” twice on his job
applications for employment with the state agency . Ex. 4.  When interviewed by an OPM
investigator several months later, he returned to his initial practice of defending the
general accuracy of the training and experience he claimed in his job application with the
state agency. 
When Applicant reapplied for an engineering position with the same state
transportation agency in April 2006, he failed to inform the agency who hired him that he
11
had resigned his position with the agency four years earlier to avoid facing possible
termination. See Exs. 2 and 4.  Applicant’s notifying his supervisor of his omission several
weeks later did not excuse the omission and ultimately resulted in his supervisor’s
relieving him of his probation duties. His ensuing settlement only partially restored his
expected benefits with the state agency.  See Ex. B; Tr. 205-17.  
Endorsements
Applicant did not provide any endorsements from friends and associates, or fitness
evaluations to counter the trust lapses exhibited in his various employment accounts.  Nor
did he provide any proof of community and civic contributions.  
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision-making process
covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could create a
potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations that
could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and all of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns,” if any. These guidelines must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied.
Although, the guidelines do not require judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in 2(a) of the AGs, which
are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense decision
based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the context of the
whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
12
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security
concern if the individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests,
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.  Adjudication
under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the
foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located,
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism   See AG ¶ 6.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the revised AGs, a decision to
grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
13
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis
Applicant is a linguist for a defense contractor with work-related personal
conduct issues, as well as foreign influence issues associated with his having family
members who reside in Israel and Jordan.  Although his contacts with most of his
family members residing in both countries are not frequent, they do involve his spouse
and his siblings, as well as immediate members of his wife’s family. Both countries
have strong democratic foundations and enjoy good political and economic relations
with the U.S. 
Personal conduct concerns
Judgment and trustworthiness concerns exist over Applicant’s demonstrated
pattern of judgment, trust and candor lapses associated with his misrepresentations
about his training and experience in employment applications he completed for a state
transportation agency. Concerns are also raised about the circumstances of
Applicant’s being re-assigned by his employer in Qatar, the misstatements and
inconsistencies imputed to him in his various accounts covering his experiences with
his passports, and the lack of candor he exhibited in his 2007 Army interview and
ensuing  denial of consideration for a position of trust as an Army translator. These
actions reflect serious trust breaches, candor lapses, and disregard of the DoD’s rules
and policies for clearance holders.
Applicant’s actions are expressly covered by Guideline E, and are entitled to
cognizance under this Guideline according to the Appeal Board.  See ISCR Case No.
06-20964, at 6 (App. Bd. April 10, 2008).  Where (as here) there is  probative adverse
information covered by Guideline E which reflects a recurring pattern of questionable
judgment use, trust breaches, or candor lapses, grounds exist for considering the
allegations covered by Guideline E.
Under Guideline E, two disqualifying conditions are specifically applicable to
Applicant’s situation, given the number of judgment and trust lapses he displayed in
14
his job applications with the state agency and in his reported divulgence of sensitive
information to his US Embassy employer while operating in Qatar.  Both D.C. ¶ 16(d),
“credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline
and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when
combined with all available information supports a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard protected information,” and DC ¶ 16(f), “violation of a
written or recorded commitment made by the individual to the employer as a condition
of employment,” have some application to the facts of the case. 
Some of Applicant’s explanations for his passport losses and cancellations
reconcilable with one another, but not all of them.  Both from a piecemeal and overall
perspective, this is a very difficult case to unravel. Questions persist about his
handling of his passport issues that arose over a five-year period between 2003 and
2007.  In the same vein, questions continue to plague Applicant over the
circumstances of his re-assignment from his Qatar translator position in 2005, and his
inflating of his work-skills and experience in his applications for an engineering
position with a state transportation agency in 2001, and again in 2005.  While
Applicant’s settlement of his claims against the state transportation agency that issued
him a rejection notice for his second tour of duty in 2006 partially absolves him of the
adverse implications of his rejection, his settlement by itself does not absolve him of
the adverse trust implications from his employment omissions of his prior employment
with the agency.  And his 2006 settlement does not  address his 2002 separation for
inflating his resume with training and experience he did not possess at the time of his
hire.  
Based on the passport explanations that Applicant was able to establish with
his evidence  (i.e., his passport cancellations and new issuances and his settlement of
his 2005-2006 employment tour), Applicant is entitled to take some advantage of MC
¶ 17(d), “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors,
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur,” and MC ¶ 17(e), “the individual has
taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation,
or duress,” of the mitigating conditions in the personal conduct guideline.  
For the most part,  Applicant’s actions leave too many unresolved questions
about his ability to provide consistent, truthful explanations when asked by public
officials in prospective trust relationships or retain sensitive information when
employed as a linguist for a government contractor (the Qatar situation).  To be sure,
Applicant was open about his various employment relationships when interviewed by
Army and OPM investigators.   But the employment relationships he either assumed
or applied for (as with the Army) are replete with inconsistent and false information.
Both his OPM and Army interview summaries reflect numerous inconsistences and
15
mis-characterizations of the status of his U.S. passport, as well as misstatements
about his work training and experience in the two job applications he filed with the
state transportation agency he briefly worked for on two occasions. The circumstances
of his forced resignation from his linguist assignment in Qatar leave many questions
unresolved as well.  Besides an argument he had with supervisor, he suggested his
forced resignation might have been due to his fiancee’s telling his employer that he
divulged sensitive information to her. Divulgence of sensitive information, if true, could
certainly have raised major questions about his fitness to hold a security clearance
and a sensitive translator position. Applicant denied any divulgence of sensitive
information when confronted at the hearing., but he acknowledged the possibility of his
fiancee’s reporting him, when he spoke to Army investigators.  Documentation of the
reasons for his re-assignment would be helpful to resolving the issue, but is lacking.
So, questions persist about whether divulged sensitive information to his fiancee, and
what that information might be. 
When evaluated collectively, and not in a piecemeal fashion, Applicant’s
multiple inconsistencies and misstatements leave too many open questions about his
integrity and honesty to meet the high standards of trust and reliability imposed on
persons who are granted access  to see classified information. 
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980).
Failure of the applicant to make concerted efforts to provide consistently complete and
accurate answers to investigators seeking background information on his job and
clearance suitability do raise security-significant concerns about the sufficiency of the
applicant’s demonstrated trust and judgment necessary to safeguard classified
information.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the judgment
questions raised by his repeated failure to provide full and truthful answers about his
passport status and employment relationships. Cultural and language differences,
while perhaps contributory to his judgment and trust lapses, do not account for the
manifest gaps and inconsistences in his documented accounts to investigators seeking
background information from him. Too many of his accounts reflect either false
accounts or irreconcilable ones furnished to various agencies over an extended period
(viz. between 2001 and 2007).  Either way, Applicant’s accounts do not contain full and
accurate summaries of information provided investigators, employers, and postal
personnel asked to replace a “stolen” passport. While unemployment might have
played a considerable role in Applicant’s disposition for avoiding information that would
jeopardize his employment prospects, it is not enough to mitigate security concerns.
16
 Endorsements and performance evaluations might have been helpful, too, in
making a whole-person assessment of his overall clearance eligibility, but were not
provided. Overall, clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited
amount of information available for consideration in this record does not enable him to
establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising out
of his trust and candor lapses associated with his past employment affiliations and
passport experiences.  
Taking into account Applicant’s interview history of providing inconsistent and
inaccurate background information to both government investigators and federal/state
employers, his checkered employment history to date that entails either rejections or
re-assignments, and his passport accounts that are not fully reconcilable, it is still too
soon to make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s overall trustworthiness and
reliability.  More time is needed to make judgment and trust assessments of Applicant
that are commensurate with the minimum requirements for holding a security
clearance.
Foreign influence concerns
The Government raises security concerns over risks associated with Applicant’s
wife,  siblings, his wife’s family, and a listed friend  who are citizens of Jordan residing
in Jordan, Israel, and Qatar, respectively. Key to the Government’s foreign influence
concerns are Applicant’s immediate family and wife’s family members who currently
reside in Jordan and Israel.  
Despite strong country relations and reciprocal efforts in prosecuting the war on
terror, the threat of terrorism remains high in Jordan.  Terrorists are known to target
both U.S. government personnel and private citizens in areas known to be frequented
by Westerners.  Jordan, a country that is controlled by a constitutional monarchy, still
has a poor human rights record.  It remains a country in transition and in the process of
establishing stable political and economic institutions. The historically close relationship
between Applicant and his immediate and extended family members (who reside in
Israel and Jordan) makes them potentially vulnerable to coercion and non-coercive
measures.  Similar concerns about terrorists involve Applicant and his family members
who reside in Israel.  
Because insurgents operating in Jordan and Israel are known to violate
domestic laws and regulations, as well as international laws, they are more likely to use
improper and illegal means  to obtain classified information in Applicant’s possession or
control through his family members still residing in these two countries. DC ¶ 7(a),
“contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion,” applies.  
17
To date, none of Applicant’s siblings, wife, or in-laws or parents or siblings
residing in Jordan and Israel, respectively, have any history of being subjected to any
coercion or influence. These historical antecedents do limit the severity of any potential
conflict situation. However, the absence of any past coercive measures taken by
Jordan and Israel authorities does not completely absolve Applicant from coercive risks
in the future given Jordan’s geographical location and presence of terrorists operating
within its borders, and Israel’s active data collection program and numerous case
prosecutions of individuals involved in export violations.  For these reasons, ¶ DC 7(b),
“connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by
providing that information,” has some application to Applicant’s situation.
Still, none of Applicant’s immediate and extended family members have any
identified prior affiliations or connections with any foreign governments (Jordan and
Israel included).  None have any known affiliations with either the Jordanian or Israeli
governments, or any other foreign government (to include Qatar).  Any potential conflict
that might be associated with his sisters, his wife, and his wife’s family is small and not
likely to pose any conflicts of interest for Applicant in the foreseeable future. 
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or
mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of
foreign countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign
country may not be in another. While foreign influence cases must by practical
necessity be weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing
in the supplied materials and country information about Jordan and Israel.  Unlike the
old AGs, the new ones do take into account of the country’s demonstrated relations
with the U.S. as an important consideration in gauging whether the particular relatives
with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened security risk. The
geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime involved do matter. 
Applicant’s situation is a special one for reasons that pertain wholly to his unique
status and circumstances. Not only has he been careful to avoid any frequent contact
with his sisters and his wife’s family members in Jordan and Israel, but none of his
family members have any known history of being pressured or coerced to elicit
classified information in Applicant’s possession. In special circumstances involving
linguists who put themselves in harm’s way by working in unstable countries where
they have family members residing, the Appeal Board has been quick to note that such
individuals are more likely to recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign
power, terrorist group, or insurgent group at coercion or exploitation. By their training
and work descriptions, they are expected to have experience working in dangerous
places. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). Applicant’s lengthy
historical  connections to the U.S. since his naturalization as a U.S. citizen in 1993 and
his wife’s established work relationship with the U.S. Government in Israel make it
unlikely he would ever resolve any potential conflict against his U.S. interests.  
18
Based on his case-specific circumstances, MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.,”  is available to Applicant. Neither Applicant nor his immediate or extended family
residing in Israel and Jordan pose any specific heightened security risks that could
subject them to potential pressures and influence from either Israeli or Jordanian
government and military officials.  Of benefit to Applicant, too, is MC ¶ 8(c), “contact or
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little
likelihood that it could create risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” has some
applicability, too, based on Applicant’s infrequent contacts with his siblings and his
wife’s family members  residing in Israel and Jordan.   
 
One other mitigating condition has application to Applicant’s situation.  MC ¶
8(f), “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interests
is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to
influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.” is fully applicable. His financial
interests in Israel and Jordan are minimal (and for the most part through his wife who
resides in Israel), and are not likely to create any problem conflicts in the foreseeable
future.    
To complete a  whole-person assessment of Applicant’s foreign influence risks
to ascertain whether they are fully compatible with minimum security clearance
eligibility requirements, Applicant’s civilian contributions to U.S. security interests as an
Arab linguist require careful balancing with the raised security concerns. On the one
hand, he has exhibited trust and candor lapses in his work-relationships, and has no
compiled record of endorsements and positive performance evaluations to assess his
overall trust and reliability. There is some evidence, too, of his possibly divulging
sensitive information to his third spouse that affected his employment status in Qatar in
2005. What kind of information Applicant might have divulged is undeveloped in the
record and is not enough to create any reasonable doubts about his ability to resist any
mounted pressure or compromise attempts against any of his relatives residing in
Jordan or Israel.  
Overall, though, there is nothing probative in any of the backgrounds of
Applicant and his family members residing in Israel and Jordan to suggest that any of
them are at serious risk to compromise classified information when confronted with a
pressure situation.  Most of them reside with W4 in Israel, where W4 is employed by
the U.S. AID, and Applicant has very little contact with any relatives outside of his wife
and his sisters.
Whole-person assessment is available herein to minimize Applicant’s exposure
to conflicts of interests with his Israeli and Jordanian family members.  Most
19
importantly, Applicant is not aware of any risks of coercion, pressure, or influence that
any of his family members might be exposed to.  So, in Applicant’s case, the potential
risk of coercion, pressure, or influence being brought to bear on him, or any of his
respective family members (whether or not they reside in the U.S., Israel, or Jordan) is
minimal and mitigated. 
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in AG ¶ 2(a).
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas 1.a through 1.d : Against Applicant 
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Subparas 2.a through 2c:            For Applicant
           Subpara. 2.d withdrawn:           For Applicant
Subparas 2.e through 2.j:                       For Applicant
 Conclusions  
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
20
