                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-06632 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline E (personal 
conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 23, 2008, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 11, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 17, 2009. He 
answered the SOR on October 1, 2009, and DOHA received his answer on October 5, 
2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 23, 2009. The case 
was assigned to me on October 30, 2009. On October 30, 2009, DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing scheduling the case for November 18, 2009. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received without objection. Applicant did not offer any exhibits, but did testify on his 
behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 30, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old material expeditor, who has worked for his defense 
contractor employer since January 2008. (GE 1, Tr. 14, 22-23.) He seeks a security 
clearance, which is a requirement for his continued employment. (Tr. 14-16.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1988. He has no formal education 
beyond high school, but did attend several service schools while in the U.S. Marine 
Corps. (GE 1, Tr. 16.) He married in September 1991 and has four children from his 
marriage – a 17-year-old son, a 16-year-old daughter, a 13-year-old daughter, and a 7-
year-old son. Applicant also has a 19-year-old son from a previous relationship. (GE 1, 
Tr. 16-20.) Applicant’s wife is employed full-time as a cage shift supervisor at a local 
casino. (Tr. 79-80.) 
 
Applicant served in the Marine Corps from October 1988 to October 1992, and 
was honorably discharged as a lance corporal (pay grade E-3). His military occupational 
specialty was 0151 (administrative clerk). He testified that he held a security clearance 
while in the Marine Corps. (GE 1, Tr. 14-15, 20-22, 66.) 
 
The SOR alleges four arrests or citations and four periods of employment that 
ended under less than favorable conditions. Summarized, they are: 
 
In December 1998, while employed as a dispatcher for the local sheriff’s 
department, Applicant was arrested for felony computer tampering and felony criminal 
history records, unauthorized disclosure. This arrest involved work-related misconduct. 
He testified, “Actually, I believe the second charge ended up being a misdemeanor and 
I plead guilty to a Class 6 undesignated felony and a Class 1 misdemeanor is what I 
was convicted of.” He was sentenced to three months in jail and placed on three months 
probation. He served 45 days in jail under a work release program. Applicant testified 
that he was helping out an acquaintance and added that he knew it was a violation of 
policy, but thought it was a “minor violation.” (SOR ¶ 1.b.) Following this arrest, he was 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
placed on administrative leave and subsequently resigned from his position. (SOR ¶ 
1.a.) (GE 2, Tr. 23-32.) 
 
In June 2001, while employed as a circulation assistant for local newspaper, 
Applicant was terminated after he was involved in an accident while driving a company 
vehicle. He described the accident, “And as I backed around to make my turn, I 
smashed into the back end of the vehicle. You know, the company was responsible to 
pay for it. So, in turn, they terminated me. I had been there, you know, less than a year, 
so I think that’s probably why. I hadn’t been there, you know, that long.” When queried 
by Department Counsel, Applicant conceded that he had been reported for speeding 
while driving a company vehicle. (GE 2, Tr. 32-34, 74-75.) (SOR ¶ 1.c.) 
 
In February 2001, Applicant was involved in a domestic dispute with his wife 
which led to his being arrested and charged with disorderly conduct-fighting. He testified 
that he broke a chair and “didn’t really know it was against the law to break my own 
property, but apparently it is when you’re involved in a domestic.” Pursuant to his guilty 
pleas, he was convicted and sentenced to ten days in jail (suspended), ordered to 
complete anger management classes, and placed on three months probation. (GE 2, Tr. 
34-37.) (SOR ¶ 1.d.) 
 
In May 2002, Applicant was involved in a domestic dispute with his wife and 
mother-in-law, which led to his being arrested and charged with assault. He testified, 
“[m]y mother-in-law came out and struck me and – and in self – I was defending – trying 
to defend myself from my mother-in-law and the wife scratched my face and so I 
grabbed her by the neck to hold her back. I was arrested. We were all three convicted of 
misdemeanor assault.” Pursuant to his guilty plea, he was convicted and sentenced to 
one day in jail, ordered to complete anger management classes, and placed on one 
year of probation. (GE 2, Tr. 38-45.) (SOR ¶ 1.f.) 
 
In May 2002, while employed as a route relief driver for a local linen company, 
Applicant was fired for not showing up for work. He testified that he was unable to report 
for work because he was incarcerated following his assault arrest, discussed supra. (GE 
2, Tr. 37-38, 75.) (SOR ¶ 1.e.) 
 
In April 2006, while employed as communications manager for the local fire 
department, Applicant was terminated for harassment. Applicant testified that he was 
unfairly terminated for purportedly sending inappropriate text messages and e-mails to a 
female co-worker. Referring to how he was treated by his employer during his 
termination, Applicant testified, “I wasn’t really given a fair chance to say anything. I said 
– and I even told him, well, you’ve already made your decision apparently because 
you’re not giving me a chance to speak, so I have nothing to say. And I was 
disrespected by the Human Resources Officer. I was called some disrespectful names 
and so it led to the entire thing just being, you know, you need to leave.” (GE 2, Tr. 46-
54, 82-83.) (SOR ¶ 1.g.) 
 
In November 2007, Applicant was cited for endanger life/health of minor. He had 
left his four and a-half-year-old son alone while he drove his youngest daughter to 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
school. A neighbor called the police after observing Applicant’s 4½ year old son 
wandering away from home. Applicant was fined “around $200” and the charge was 
dismissed. He acknowledged using poor judgment. (GE 2, Tr. 54-58.) 
 
When asked by Department Counsel what changes he made to prevent future 
arrests or terminations, Applicant answered: 
 
Some of the things happened when I was a little younger. The Sheriff’s 
Department, I was a lot younger, you know, 11 years ago I was arrested 
for that, in ’98, you know. I’m a lot older now. I’m more mature. Try to 
make better decisions. You know, sometimes you’re gonna make a bad 
decision. I try not to. You know, I try to make better judgment calls. I try 
not to – you know, I try to follow the rules at work, you know. Like I said, 
I’ve been there two years. I’ve had no problems, you know. I’m obviously 
still there. 
 
You know, and regardless of the results, I’m still gonna be there. They – 
you know, they advised they will keep me, you know, so I – I’ve grown up. 
I’m trying to, you know, get where I see that – I’m 38. In about ten or 15 
years, I gotta start thinking about retirement. So, you know, I don’t – I can’t 
– I don’t have time to be bouncing around and going from job to job or 
doing this and that. I just – I gotta focus on getting to where I need to be 
when I’m, you know, a little older and time to settle down, you know. (Tr. 
58-59.) 
 
Applicant and his wife were recently given power-of-attorney to care for their 17-
year-old son’s 16-year-old girlfriend. She lives with Applicant’s family and is pregnant. 
Applicant anticipates he will help support his son’s girlfriend and child. (Tr. 64-66.) 
Applicant did not submit any references or performance evaluations. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
Under Adjudicative Guideline ¶ 15, the Government’s concern is: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 sets out two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information: 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's 
time or resources. 
 
The Government established through Applicant’s admissions and evidence 
presented that he had four arrests or citations from 1998 to 2007, spanning a nine-year 
period. His most recent citation occurred one year before submitting his e-QIP. His 
arrests or citations include felony computer tampering, felony historical records – 
unauthorized disclosure, disorderly conduct-fighting, assault, and endanger life/health of 
minor.  
 
Additionally, the Government established through Applicant’s admissions and 
evidence presented that he left four separate jobs under adverse conditions during the 
same nine-year period. The foregoing warrants application of AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d). 
 
Potential mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17 are: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 None of the potential mitigating conditions under this concern are applicable. 
Under the totality of the circumstances, I find Applicant’s behavior is recent and not 
isolated. Considering his behavior, the nature and seriousness of his misconduct, his 
exercise of repeated poor judgment culminating in his recent citation for endangering 
the life/health of a minor as recent as one year before submitting his e-QIP, and other 
factors identified supra, I find his favorable information is not sufficient to mitigate 
Guideline E security concerns. His conduct raises questions about his ability and 
willingness to follow the law, and ultimately, to protect classified information. His 
conduct also raises serious doubts and questions about his judgment. Further time and 
additional evidence is needed before I can overcome my concerns/doubts regarding 
Applicant’s questionable judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
 To conclude, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
refute personal conduct security concerns. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the 
whole-person concept was given due consideration and that analysis does not support 
a favorable decision. 
 
  I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”1 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
   
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
1 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
