1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 08-09232
SSN: --------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Fulton S. Hamilton, Esq.   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The record evidence
shows Applicant has a history of drug abuse (cocaine) from about 2001 through about
January 2008. He then completed outpatient and inpatient treatment where he received
a primary diagnosis of cocaine dependence and a secondary diagnosis of alcohol
dependence, although it appears alcohol was never a serious problem for Applicant. He
has abstained from cocaine since approximately February 2008, obtained full-time
employment, and has a support system in place. He did not give full, frank, and candid
answers to questions about his cocaine use in May 2008, when he completed a security
clearance application. Likewise, his hearing testimony made in an effort to justify his
answers was not credible. His lack of credibility undermines his evidence of reform and
rehabilitation. Accordingly, as explained in further detail below, this case is decided
against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Exhibit G.  2
 Exhibit E. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on September 17,1
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guidelines
known as Guideline H for drug involvement and Guideline G for alcohol consumption.
The SOR also recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge to
decide whether to deny or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me November 17, 2009. The hearing took place February 2,
2010. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received February 12, 2010. 
The record was kept open until February 17, 2010, to allow Applicant to submit
additional documentary evidence. He did so in a timely manner, and the petition and
series of court orders are admitted without objections.   2
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He married in 2007,
and he and his spouse have two children, a son born in 2006 and a daughter born in
2007. He has been employed as an integration technician since May 2008. His job
involves refurbishing shelters used by our Armed Forces when they are deployed. He
received a “meets expectations” performance review for his initial annual performance
review.  Before this job, Applicant was self-employed during 1996 to 2008, when he3
owned and operated a tree trimming business. He is seeking to obtain a security
clearance for the first time.  
 Exhibits 1–4. 4
 Exhibit G. 5
 Exhibit G. 6
 Exhibit A. 7
 Exhibit 3. 8
 Exhibit 3 at 5. 9
 Exhibit 4. 10
 Exhibit 3. 11
3
Applicant has a history of drug abuse (cocaine) from about 2001 through about
January 2008.  His drug abuse came to the attention of local authorities after the birth of4
his son in December 2006, when drug testing indicated prenatal cocaine use by the
mother, and both the child and mother tested positive for cocaine at the child’s birth.5
Their daughter was born in December 2007 with the same problem. As a result,
Applicant and his wife lost legal custody of both children. They regained legal custody in
October 2008, after going through a phased or transition process determined by the
juvenile court in a series of court orders. 
To cite one example, in its December 2007 order,  the court stated that Applicant6
and his spouse tested positive for cocaine and both acknowledged recent use of
cocaine. The court found Applicant in contempt of court for using cocaine. Also, the
court ordered Applicant (and his wife) to enroll in and begin participation in a drug-
treatment program. That was not the only instance of Applicant testing positive. He
tested positive for cocaine in January 2007, twice in November 2007, three times in
December 2007, and three times in January 2008.  7
Applicant began the court-ordered drug-treatment program as an outpatient in
early December 2007.  By mid-January 2008, Applicant admitted he was not processing8
his relapses, he acknowledged everyday use of cocaine, and he expressed a strong
desire for inpatient treatment.  9
Applicant began an inpatient program for the treatment of chemical dependency
on January 28, 2008, which he completed on February 25, 2008.  After completing the10
program, he returned to the outpatient program the same evening. He then attended
sessions on a regular basis, and he completed the outpatient program in early May
2008,  approximately when he began his current employment. 11
 Exhibit A. 12
 Exhibit B. 13
 Exhibit 1. 14
 Exhibit 1 at 24 of 27. 15
 Although these matters were not alleged in the SOR, I considered them for the limited purpose of assessing16
Applicant’s credibility and for assessing his evidence of reform and rehabilitation. See ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (describing five examples when it is proper to consider conduct not
alleged in an SOR) (citations omitted). 
 Tr. 101–111. 17
 Tr. 56–57. 18
 Tr. 37, 40. 19
4
It was during February 2008 that he began testing negative for cocaine, and he
thereafter tested negative until testing ended in September 2008.  In addition, he tested12
negative during pre-employment drug testing in April 2008.  13
At the end of May 2008, Applicant completed a security clearance application for
his employment.  In response to Question 24a, which asked about illegal drug use in14
the last seven years, Applicant answered in the affirmative by indicating he had used
cocaine about 50 times during the period April 2002 (estimated) to June 2007. He also
explained that in January 2008 he had admitted himself to the inpatient rehabilitation
program, and he stated that “I was not taking when I entered and had been clean for
about 3 months.”   15
Applicant deliberately understated both the duration and frequency of his cocaine
use on his security clearance application.  In addition, his efforts in his hearing16
testimony to reconcile his answers on his security clearance application with the
evidence of his drug use were not credible.  His testimony, that he provided an17
estimate for both the duration and frequency of his cocaine use, was not persuasive or
credible. I make these findings in light of (1) the December 2007 contempt finding due
to Applicant’s testing positive for cocaine, and (2) that Applicant tested positive for
cocaine multiple times in November 2007, December 2007, and January 2008. These
circumstances took place several months before Applicant completed the security
clearance application, in which he stated a June 2007 end date for his cocaine use.
Applicant’s substance abuse counselor, father, and brother all testified on
Applicant’s behalf. Their testimony was credible and worthy of belief. 
The substance abuse counselor considers Applicant a success story due to his
attitude in addressing his drug abuse.  In the counselor’s opinion, Applicant turned18
around completely and has an excellent prognosis.  To that end, Applicant submitted a19
 Exhibit F. 20
 Tr. 35, 53–54. 21
 Tr. 60. 22
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to23
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.24
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 25
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 26
5
statement of intent agreeing to remain drug-free and agreeing to automatic revocation
of a security clearance if he violated his pledge to remain drug-free.  Of note, the20
counselor viewed the drug abuse as the major issue for Applicant, as alcohol was not a
major concern.  21
Both the father and brother have observed the turnaround made by Applicant,
with one describing the changes as like “night and day.”  Both gentlemen, who have22
regular contact with Applicant and are wholly supportive of Applicant and his wife, have
seen no indications or signs that Applicant has relapsed since completing the inpatient
program in early 2008. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. Moreover, the Department
of Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As23
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,24
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An25
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  26
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).27
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.28
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.29
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.30
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 31
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).32
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.33
 AG ¶¶ 21, 22, and 23 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 34
6
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting27
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An28
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate29
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme30
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.31
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.32
The Adjudicative Guidelines set forth the relevant standards to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a
commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant and material
information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person
concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the Government. The Government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the33
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
The allegations under Guideline G  for alcohol consumption are addressed34
summarily. Although the SOR alleges security concerns due to Applicant’s past use of
cocaine and alcohol, the evidence established that the overriding problem or issue for
Applicant was his cocaine use. He did receive a secondary diagnosis of alcohol
dependence, and the evidence shows he has abstained from alcohol since at least
February 2008, a period of two years when the record closed. Applicant has mitigated
 AG ¶¶ 24, 25, and 26 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 35
 AG ¶ 24. 36
 AG ¶ 25(a). 37
 AG ¶ 25(b). 38
 AG ¶¶ 25(d) and 25(e).39
 AG ¶¶ 26(b) and 26(d). 40
7
the security concerns under Guideline G through a combination of inpatient and
outpatient treatment, family involvement, and a good employment record. Accordingly,
Guideline G is decided for Applicant.
The gravamen of the SOR is the allegations under Guideline H  for drug35
involvement. Under the guideline, the overall security concern is that:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.36
The guideline contains a number of conditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying. Several apply in this case as follows: (1) Applicant’s use of
cocaine, which constitutes drug abuse, for a multiple-year period ending in about
January 2008;  (2) Applicant tested positive multiple times for illegal drug use;  and (3)37 38
Applicant received a diagnosis or evaluation or both of cocaine dependence.  Of note,39
Applicant tested positive for cocaine while under the supervision of a juvenile court
handling the custody case, and he was found in contempt of court for doing so. Taken
together, these circumstances raise serious concerns about Applicant’s fitness or
suitability for access to classified information.
The guideline contains a number of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns. Applicant receives credit in mitigation based on (1) his demonstrated intent
not to abuse drugs in the future, and (2) his successful completion of the inpatient and
outpatient programs in 2008.  To his credit, and his family’s credit for their sustained40
support and involvement, Applicant has abstained from cocaine use since
approximately February 2008. After completing the inpatient and outpatient programs,
Applicant found gainful employment, which appears to be his first full-time job in many
years. He and his wife were successful in persuading the juvenile court to return
custody of their children to them, and he appears to be actively engaged with both his
job and his family. 
At this point, the signs or indicators are positive, but for one notable exception—
Applicant’s deliberate understatement of both the duration and frequency of his cocaine
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).41
8
use on his security clearance application as well as his hearing testimony in which he
attempted to justify or rationalize his answers. His failure to give full, frank, and candid
answers about his cocaine use and his lack of credibility in his hearing testimony
undermine his evidence of reform and rehabilitation. It does so because honesty and
willingness to self-report are key factors or considerations in this regard. An individual,
like Applicant, who is dishonest with himself or others about the full extent of his drug
abuse is not a rehabilitation success. Given these circumstances, a longer period of
abstinence from cocaine use is prudent and sensible before a safe predictive judgment
can be made about Applicant’s suitability or fitness to hold a security clearance.
Accordingly, Guideline H is decided against Applicant.   
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s history of
cocaine use justify current doubts about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.
Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, these doubts are resolved in favor
of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to
the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence. Nevertheless, Applicant41
did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.
This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
