                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10439 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On December 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 15, 2010, and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 4, 2010. The FORM was 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
mailed to Applicant, who received it on March 10, 2010. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant provided additional information. The case was assigned to me on April 30, 
2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.j, and 
denied the remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He served in the Air Force Reserves from 1985 to 
1989, and was honorably discharged. He is married and his children are grown. He 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 1977 and obtained a computer programming certificate. 
 
 Applicant experienced periods of unemployment from: October 2007 to 
November 2007 and May 2008 to June 2008. He has been employed with his current 
employer since June 2008.  
 
 Applicant provided proof of satisfaction of the judgments listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.u. These judgments were owed to a former landlord. Applicant withheld rent when he 
had a dispute with the landlord. Applicant stated that he satisfied all of the judgments to 
this landlord that are listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.y, and 1.z. He did not provide documentary 
proof that these remaining judgments were satisfied.  
 
 The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b ($2,874) was based on an unpaid credit card debt. 
The judgment was obtained in 2005. Applicant closed the account and believed the 
interest being charged was “obscene” so he did not pay it. Applicant provided a 
document to show he was offered a settlement amount of $1,116. He did not provide 
proof that he accepted the offer and is making the required payments.1 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the tax lien debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,008) entered against 
him in 2008. He acknowledged he would pay it, but needed to investigate it and make 
arrangements. He did not provide any other information about what actions he has 
taken to pay or resolve the debt.2 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($438) is a television account. Applicant acknowledged 
the account in his response to interrogatories dated June 8, 2009, and stated he would 
attempt to settle the account. He indicated he was required to return the cable boxes 
and had not. No other information was provided regarding this debt.3 
1 Response to FORM.  
 
2 Item 5. 
 
3 Id. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant did not recognize the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($123), but stated he would 
pay it if it was legitimate. He did not provide any further information on action he took to 
dispute or resolve the debt.4 
 
 Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($372). He stated he never had an 
account with the creditor. He indicated that he would investigate the debt, but needed 
time to determine its validity. He believed the debt might be related to identity theft. He 
did not provide further information regarding his actions to dispute, resolve, or 
determine if the debt was due to identity theft.5 
 
 Applicant indicated in his response to interrogatories, that he was attempting to 
contact the creditor for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($1,338) and would attempt to negotiate a 
settlement. He did not provide other information regarding what actions he took to 
resolve or pay the debt.6 
 
 Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($460). The debt is listed on two credit 
reports.7 Applicant did not provide documentary proof to show what actions he has 
taken to dispute the debt. 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($17,659) is for a car loan Applicant cosigned for his son. 
His son acknowledged he defaulted on the loan because he lost his job and intends to 
pay the debt when he resumes employment. Because both Applicant and his son are 
cosignatories on the loan, both are responsible for it. Neither has paid the debt and it 
remains unresolved.8 
 
 In Applicant’s interview with an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management on August 12, 2008, he indicated that he had contacted the creditor for 
the car loan debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($16,312) and he was making payments. He had fallen 
behind in his payments. He was then in an accident with the car and it was totaled. His 
insurance did not cover the loss. He indicated he agreed to pay $215 a month until the 
debt was paid. He did not provide any documentary proof that he is paying the debt.9 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.l ($254) was a telephone account. Applicant indicated in his 
response to interrogatories that he was attempting to negotiate a settlement with the 
creditor. He also indicated he was contacting the credit bureau. He believed the balance 
4 Id. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Item 6, 7. 
 
8 Item 5; Response to FORM. 
 
9 Id. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
should be around $100. He did not provide documentary proof of his actions or 
payments.10 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($1,560) is for a school Applicant attended for three 
months before terminating the course because he got a job. He indicated that in April 
2008, he made an agreement with the creditor to pay 15% of his pay to satisfy the debt. 
He indicated that he made three payments. He did not provide proof he made any 
payments or that the debt is resolved.11 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.n ($1,366) is owed for parking tickets. Applicant indicated 
he paid $300 for parking fines. He believes the remaining fines are owed by his brother 
and his son. His brother purchased the vehicle for which the tickets were issued and his 
son used the vehicle. Applicant indicated he would resolve the issue. He indicated he 
was entering into a payment arrangement with the creditor and was to begin receiving 
monthly bills in July 2009. Applicant did not provide proof of the agreements or of any 
payments made. There was no documentary evidence provided to substantiate 
Applicant’s position that he was not responsible for the remaining debt.12 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.q ($715 and $338) were for car insurance. 
Applicant had two-year contracts with the companies and cancelled them early. He 
indicated he was negotiating settlements. He did not provide documents to show he has 
resolved the debts.13 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.r ($420 and $145) are payday loans. Applicant 
indicated that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.p was dismissed due to a class action lawsuit against 
the creditor. Applicant did not provide documentary proof of his position. He did not 
provide proof he has disputed the debt with the credit bureau. Regarding the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.r, he indicated the creditor is no longer in business. He stated he was disputing 
this debt with the credit bureau, but did not provide documentary proof.14 
 
 Applicant disputed the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.s ($527). He acknowledged he had 
a dispute with the creditor and they went to small claims court. He indicated he paid the 
creditor and she agreed to remove the judgment from the record. He sent the creditor a 
letter requesting that she remove the judgment. No additional documents were provided 
to show the judgment was satisfied.15 
 
10 Id. 
 
11 Id. 
 
12 Id. 
 
13 Id. 
 
14 Id. 
 
15 Id. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 The creditor for the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.t ($2,461) offered to settle the account 
for 50% of the balance. Applicant is waiting for paperwork. The debt remains 
unresolved.16 
 
 Applicant is unaware of the basis for the judgment that was entered against him 
in 1989 and listed in SOR ¶ 1.v ($20,000). On March 22, 2010, he wrote a letter on to 
the creditor, but the letter was returned, undelivered. He indicated he is attempting to 
contact the attorney who handled the case. He believes the debt could be due to 
identity theft. Applicant did not provide any other information showing his actions to 
dispute or resolve the debt. 17  
 
 The debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.w ($145) is owed to a probation department. Applicant 
indicated he has never been in jail, but his oldest son is incarcerated. He has not 
provided information to show he has disputed the debt or contacted the creditor to 
resolve it.18 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.x ($1,684) is owed to a city housing authority. Applicant 
believes this debt is an error. He indicated that he contacted the creditor and is waiting 
for someone to contact him. No other information was provided as to what action 
Applicant has taken to resolve or dispute the debt.19 
 
 Applicant indicated in his response to interrogatories that he needed time to 
resolve his debts. He stated he had no idea about many of his debts until his clearance 
investigation. He believes many of the debts are in error or inaccurate. He has been 
poor all of his life and has never been arrested. He has been working since he was 15 
years old. He believes he is a man of character and integrity. He has never succumbed 
to making money illegally.20 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
16 Id. 
 
17 Items 5, 9, 10. 
 
18 Items 5, 11. 
 
19 Items 5, 12. 
 
20 Response to FORM.  
 
6 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
7 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following two under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has 24 delinquent debts and judgments totaling approximately 
$72,732. Except for SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.u, the debts are unpaid and unresolved. 
Applicant has been aware of the security concerns regarding his delinquent debts since 
August 2008, when he was interviewed by the OPM investigator. I find both 
disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant proved that he satisfied the judgments in SOR ¶1.a and 1.u. He did not 
prove that he paid or resolved any of the remaining delinquent debts or judgments. He 
was offered a settlement agreement for the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b, but did not provide 
proof that he accepted the agreement and is making payments. He disputes many of 
 
8 
 
 
the debts, but failed to substantiate his disputes and provide proof of any actions he 
may have taken. He indicated that he needed time to investigate certain debts. He was 
interviewed about his delinquent debts in August 2008. He was on notice in June 2009, 
through his interrogatories, of the specific debts he needed to address. He was again 
made aware in December 2009 of the financial considerations security concerns 
through the SOR. Applicant’s behavior is recent and the delinquent debts and 
judgments remain an ongoing and unresolved concern. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply. There is some evidence that Applicant experienced short periods 
of unemployment. However, he failed to provide enough information to determine the 
level of impact his short unemployment periods had on his ability to pay his bills. Those 
periods of unemployment were beyond his control, but insufficient evidence was 
provided to conclude he acted responsibly under the circumstances. I find AG ¶ 20(b) 
only partially applies. There is no evidence Applicant sought advice from a financial 
advisor. There is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being 
resolved or under control. He did not provide evidence that he has made a good-faith 
effort to pay the majority of his delinquent debts and judgments, or attempt to resolve 
them. Applicant satisfied two judgments. He indicated other judgments were paid, but 
did not provide proof. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Throughout, he 
claimed, without corroboration that he disputed many of the delinquent debts and 
judgments, but failed to provide documentation verifying the disputes or actions he was 
taking to resolve them. I find AG ¶ 20 (e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served in the military 
reserves. I have considered he experienced periods of unemployment. In August 2008, 
the Government made him aware of the security concerns related to his delinquent 
 
9 
 
 
debts. In December 2009, DOHA issued a SOR listing the specific debts of concern. He 
subsequently provided documentation that he satisfied two judgments and has a 
settlement offer from one creditor. However, he did not provide documentation to show 
he paid any of the remaining delinquent debts. He did not provide information that he 
sought credit counseling or established a repayment plan or settlement agreement with 
any of the other creditors. He disputed some debts, but did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show any actions he may have taken to address the disputed debts. 
Despite having notice of the concerns for more than a year, he failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns, indicating a lack of reliability and 
good judgment. Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.t:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.u:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs  1.v-1.z:   Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
