KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: The fact that the Judge did not explicitly discuss Applicant’s having paid off certain
non-SOR debts does not undermine the Judge’s whole-person analysis.  Applicant has provided
no reason to believe that the Judge mis-weighed the record evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed. 
CASENO: 08-11645.a1
DATE: 06/08/2010
DATE: June 8, 2010
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-11645
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On May 29, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline
F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 22, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative
Judge Edward W. Loughran denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his application
The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline E are not at issue in this appeal.  1
See Directive ¶ E2.20(a): “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such2
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment[.]”
of the pertinent mitigating conditions and whether the Judge failed properly to apply the whole-
person factors.   Finding no error, we affirm.  1
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is an engineer working
for a Defense contractor.  He has worked for his current employer or a predecessor company since
1978.  
Applicant has filed for bankruptcy four times since 1984.  He was discharged twice in
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, in 1985 and again in 1998.  His other two filings, both under Chapter 13, were
dismissed, one in 1989 and the other in 2004.  The 1989 dismissal was due to non-payment, and the
2004 was voluntary.  
In addition to the bankruptcy filings, the Judge also found that Applicant had, at the close of
the record, two delinquent debts.  The first was for $14,114 owed due to the repossession of a car.
Applicant arranged a settlement of this debt with the creditor, agreeing to pay monthly installments
of $150 toward a final settled amount of $7,276.  At the close of the record Applicant had made four
payments.
The second delinquent debt was in the amount of $1,180, owed to a check-cashing company.
Although Applicant initially denied this debt, based on his testimony at the hearing, the Judge
concluded that the debt was legitimately his and that it was still owed.
Applicant was disciplined by his employer in 2008 for misusing a company credit card by
making personal charges upon it in addition to charges related to company business.  Applicant
enjoys a good reputation for job performance, honesty, and trustworthiness.  
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in his application of the Guideline F mitigating
conditions.  For example, he argues that his latest bankruptcy filing occurred in 2003, which was
several years prior to the close of the record.  Therefore, he believes that his financial problems
occurred long ago and should be mitigated by the passage of time.   The record demonstrates,2
however, that while the Judge acknowledged record evidence concerning the timing of the latest
bankruptcy filing, he also noted that, since that filing, Applicant acquired more delinquent debts, two
significant ones remaining unpaid.  Accordingly, he reasonably concluded that Applicant had failed
to demonstrate that the financial problems were behind him or were unlikely to recur.  
The Judge also acknowledged that Applicant’s financial troubles were affected by
circumstances outside his control, for example a period of unemployment, medical expenses, and
Directive ¶ E2. 20(b): “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s3
control . . . and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances[.]”  
The misuse of the credit card formed the basis of the two Guideline E allegations, which the Judge resolved4
in Applicant’s favor.  However, the Judge also stated that, despite his conclusion under Guideline E, he would consider
this misconduct in the context of Applicant’s financial situation, his case for mitigation, and the whole-person analysis.
Decision at 8, n. 19.  
A Judge is not required to discuss each and every piece of record evidence in making a decision.  See, e.g.,5
ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009).
a diminution in employer-provided reimbursement for travel expenses.   However, the Judge noted3
other record evidence which was not so favorable to Applicant, for example testimony that Applicant
mismanaged money, that he did not balance his checking account, that he did not live within a
budget, and that he misused the company credit card.   He concluded that Applicant had failed to4
demonstrate responsible behavior in regard to his debts.  After examining the Judge’s decision in
light of the record as a whole, we conclude that he did not err in denying favorable application to the
Guideline F mitigating conditions.
Applicant contends that the Judge did not properly apply the whole-person factors.  He
contends, for example, that the Judge did not consider that he had paid off debts not listed in the
SOR.  He also argues that the Judge failed to extend proper consideration to record evidence of his
good work habits, his character, and his having held a clearance for over 30 years without incident
or concern.  However, a Judge is presumed to have considered all of the record evidence.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009); ISCR Case No. 07-00553 at 2 (App. Bd.
May 23, 2008).  The Judge acknowledged that Applicant had paid off many of the debts alleged in
the SOR.  However, the fact that he did not explicitly discuss non-SOR debts does not undermine
his unfavorable conclusion as to mitigation.  Even if he had explicitly discussed these other debts,5
there is little likelihood that he would have found their resolution sufficient to outweigh evidence
that Applicant continued to acquire delinquent debt despite having twice been discharged in
bankruptcy, and other evidence of financial irresponsibility.    
Furthermore, while the Judge found that Applicant enjoyed a good reputation for character
and performance of duty, Applicant has provided no reason to believe that he weighed this positive
evidence in a manner that is arbitrary capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
21819 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 13, 2009).  We conclude that the Judge’s whole person analysis complies
with the requirements of Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2, in that the Judge considered the totality of
Applicant’s conduct in reaching his decision.  See ISCR Case No. 08-02464 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 16,
2009); ISCR Case No. 05-03948 at 3-4 (App. Bd. May 21, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-09959 at 6
(App. Bd. May 19, 2006).  
After reviewing the record, we conclude that the Judge examined the relevant data and
articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the
facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
   
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed; James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
