1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 08-10285
SSN: ------------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The record evidence shows
Applicant has a history of drug abuse during the period of 1985–2006, when he used
crack cocaine and marijuana, although his drug of choice was crack cocaine. Some of
his drug abuse took place while he held a security clearance. Due to his cocaine use,
he went through drug treatment programs twice, the first time in 1985 and the second in
2006. He has not used cocaine since completing the program in 2006. Applicant did not
provide full, frank, and candid answers to questions about his drug abuse during the
security clearance process. There is insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns. Accordingly, as explained in further detail below, this
case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 Exhibit C. 2
 Exhibits A and B. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on October 9,1
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guidelines
known as Guideline H for drug involvement and Guideline E for personal conduct. The
SOR also recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge to decide
whether to deny or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. 
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me February 22, 2019. The hearing took place April 5, 2010. The
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received April 13, 2010.  
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 72-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has been married
to the same woman for more than 50 years, and he has five children (all adults) and
eight grandchildren. There are no minor children living in his household.
Applicant’s employment history includes a 23-year period when he worked for a
tire manufacturing company, for which he is entitled to a pension.  More recently, he2
has worked as a security guard or access control specialist from 1998 to present. His
recent job performance has been good.  He is seeking to retain a security clearance3
previously granted to him in 2004 or sooner. 
Applicant has a history of drug abuse. He used both crack cocaine and
marijuana, although his drug of choice was crack cocaine. Some of his drug abuse took
place while he held a security clearance. Due to his cocaine use, he went through drug
treatment programs twice, the first time in 1985 and the second in 2006. He has not
used any illegal drugs since he completed the program in 2006. After completing
 Exhibit 3. 4
 Exhibits 1 and 2. 5
 Exhibit 2. 6
 Exhibit 1. 7
 Exhibit 3. 8
3
treatment, he attended Narcotics Anonymous (NA) on a regular basis for about two
years. Since about mid-2008, he has not attended NA, but is actively involved with his
church where his spouse is quite active as well.  
The best evidence of Applicant’s drug abuse is likely the records from the drug
treatment program he attended in 2006.  Those records, which are based on4
information he provided at that time, show he was admitted and discharged with a
diagnosis of cocaine dependence. The records show Applicant was seeking help for his
crack cocaine use problem. And the records show he reported the following about his
past drug use: (1) he first used crack cocaine about 20 years ago; (2) he abstained for
about three years after going through a 21-day inpatient program in 1985; (3) he
typically binged in a pattern of $200 to $300 worth of crack cocaine over two to three
days, and then he might go for two to three months without using; (4) his last use of
crack cocaine was about one week before admission; and (5) he smoked marijuana for
a period of four years about ten years ago, but had not used any in six years. 
Applicant completed security clearance applications on at least two occasions.5
He first completed an application in November 1997.  In response to Question 24a,6
Applicant answered in the negative thereby denying the use of any illegal drug (to
include marijuana and cocaine) within the last seven years.
He completed the second application in June 2008.  In response to 24a,7
Applicant answered in the affirmative and reported the occasional use of crack cocaine
during the estimated period of June 2000 to June 2006. He also reported the successful
completion of the drug treatment program in 2006. He did not, however, answer in the
affirmative in response to Question 24b, which asks about illegal drug use while
possessing a security clearance. 
Applicant was interviewed by a governmental investigator in July 2008. The
results of that interview were summarized by the investigator and included in a report of
investigation.  The summary of the interview indicates Applicant began using crack8
cocaine in June 2000, when he started experimenting with the drug at the suggestion of
a friend. There is no indication in the summary that he mentioned any cocaine use
taking place before 2000.  
 Exhibit 4. 9
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to10
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.11
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 12
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 13
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.15
4
The Agency required Applicant to respond to interrogatories about his past drug
use.  In response to Question 1, which asked Applicant to disclose if he had used any9
narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogen, and cannabis (to include marijuana and
hashish) except as prescribed by a medical doctor, Applicant responded in the
affirmative and reported the occasional use of crack cocaine, the last of which took
place in June 2006. He did not report any marijuana use. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. Moreover, the Department
of Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As10
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,11
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An12
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  13
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  Department Counsel has the burden of presenting14
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An15
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.17
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 18
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).19
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.20
 AG ¶¶ 24, 25, and 26 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 21
 AG ¶ 24. 22
 AG ¶ 24(b). 23
5
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate16
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme17
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.18
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.19
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it20
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline H,  the security concern for drug involvement is as follows:21
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.   22
Drug abuse means “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that
deviates from approved medical direction.”23
Applicant’s lengthy history of drug abuse raises serious security concerns. He
engaged in drug abuse when he used marijuana and crack cocaine over a 20-year
 AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), (d), and (g).24
 AG ¶ 26(a) – (d).25
 AG ¶¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the security concerns and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).26
6
period (1985–2006), although his drug of choice was crack cocaine. He twice sought
treatment for his dependency, the first in 1985, which was successful for about three
years, and the second in 2006, which has been successful to date. Some of his drug
abuse took place while he held a security clearance granted to him by the Defense
Department. Taken together, these circumstances raise security concerns under
several disqualifying conditions.  24
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns.  I considered all the mitigating conditions and the most pertinent here are:25
• A demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were
used;
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any  violation. 
• Satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including but not
limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse,
and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional. 
Applicant receives credit under both of these conditions. It appears that the drug
treatment program in 2006 was successful and it is unlikely that Applicant will relapse at
this point in time. On balance, however, Applicant’s evidence in mitigation is insufficient
to prevail. In reaching this conclusion, I gave substantial weight to the nature, extent,
and seriousness of his drug abuse over a 20-year period and the concomitant security
concerns. Using crack cocaine while in possession of a security clearance raises
serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good
judgment, and it reflects poorly on his fitness and suitability for access to classified
information. In addition, his falsifications, as discussed below, undermine his evidence
of reform and rehabilitation. Accordingly, Guideline H is decided against Applicant. 
Turning to personal conduct under Guideline E,  it includes issues of false26
statements and credible adverse information that may not be enough to support action
under any other guideline. The overall concern is:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
 AG ¶ 15. 27
 AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (b).28
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).29
7
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  27
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
The issue here is the truthfulness of Applicant’s answers to questions about his
drug abuse. I am not persuaded that Applicant gave a deliberately false answer to
Question 24b on his June 2008 security clearance application (after all, he gave an
affirmative response to Question 24a, the immediate preceding question). But the
record does support a conclusion that Applicant did not give full, frank, and candid
answers about his drug abuse when he completed his November 1997 security
clearance application, during an interview in July 2008, and when answering
interrogatories in December 2008. Applicant’s explanations to the contrary are not
credible.  
The established falsifications support application of two disqualifying conditions
that address the deliberate falsification of relevant facts during the security clearance
process.  I reviewed all the potential mitigating conditions under the guideline and28
conclude none apply. Making false or misleading statements to the federal government
during the security clearance process is serious misconduct. It is not easily explained
away, excused, or mitigated. Accordingly, Guideline E is decided against Applicant. 
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s drug abuse
and his falsifications justify current doubts about his judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. He did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate
the security concerns. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to the
whole-person concept  and I considered all of Applicant’s favorable evidence, which29
was not insubstantial. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain
a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
8
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.f: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.b–2.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.          
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
