1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-12029
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 17, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On June 16, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On July 10, 2009, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on August 5, 2009. DOHA initially issued a notice of hearing on
September 1, 2009, and the hearing was scheduled for September 25, 2009. Because
Applicant was not available, the hearing had to be continued. DOHA issued a second
notice of hearing on October 21, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on
December 30, 2009, in Las Vegas, Nevada. 
2
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits
A through K, which were also admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript
of the hearing (Tr) on January 7, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 43 years old. He is currently married, and he was married three
previous times. Applicant served in the United States Air Force from February 1986 to
April 2006, and he held a security clearance for the entire span of his military career.
Applicant is seeking employment with a defense contractor, and he has applied for a
DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 5 allegations (1.a. through 1.e.) regarding financial difficulties
under Adjudicative Guideline F.  The allegations will be discussed below in the same
order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $206. Applicant
testified that this debt was from a collection agency for a credit union in which he
maintained a checking account.  Since he was not using the account, he was not aware
that this debt had been accumulating fees. He claimed that he called the creditor and
told them he was not aware he was receiving charges for this account. They told him
they would send him some paperwork to resolve this debt, which he never received. He
testified that he was later informed that this creditor no longer has a record of this debt,
and it has dropped off his credit report. (Tr at 49-50.)
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $12,459. Applicant
testified that this debt was incurred on a second mortgage, when his ex-wife and her
husband at the time purchased a home. According to Applicant this home purchase
occurred  before he was married to this woman, and he does not know why his name is
on this debt. (Tr at 39-45.)  Applicant was married to this woman form March 1999
through September 3, 2009. (Exhibit H.) He disputed this debt in a letter that he sent to
this creditor on December 11, 2009, in which he explained that this debt is not his, and
the account should be removed from his credit report. (Exhibit B.) Applicant also sent
letters to all three credit reporting service, disputing this debt (Exhibits C, D, E), and he
received a letter from Equifax, telling him that this debt was no longer on the Equifax
credit file. (Exhibit E.) Exhibit A , a credit report dated December 29, 2009, seems to list
this debt several times, but in each listing it shows the amount owed as $0.  Applicant
3
also testified that he has called this creditor and he was informed that they do not have
information about him in regards to this debt. (Tr at 69-73.)
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $45,600. Applicant
testified that this debt was also incurred by his former wife before he was married to her.
He claimed that it was listed on Exhibit A and showed that this debt has a $0 balance.
(Tr at 45-47.) This debt is listed in Exhibit 3, the full data credit report, dated October 9,
2008, although it shows that it is being disputed. However, it is not listed on the more
recent credit report, Exhibit 4, the Government’s credit report dated May 27, 2009, nor is
it listed on Exhibit A, the credit report dated December 29, 2009. Exhibit C includes a
letter from one of the credit reporting agencies showing that, after investigating
Applicant’s dispute of this debt, it is to be deleted from their future credit reports.
Therefore, Applicant has successfully disputed this debt.
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $26,489. Applicant
testified that this debt was also incurred by his former wife for a vehicle that she
purchased for herself. After disputing this bill, Applicant received a letter from the
creditor (Exhibit J), stating that they planned to report to the credit bureaus that this
account was charged off, with a balance owing. Applicant testified that after he received
this letter he called the creditor, and they conceded to him that, since they had no way
to verify that he had signed for this vehicle, they would drop this account from the credit
reporting agencies. (Tr at 75-76.) 
Applicant testified that he is not sure of the status of this debt, but he noted that it
was not listed on Exhibit A. It is also not listed on Exhibit 4. Applicant further stated that
on previous credit reports this debt had been listed under involuntary repossession, and
ultimately his wife filed for bankruptcy without his knowledge or participation. (Tr at 48-
52.) 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $4,005. Applicant
testified that he is unaware of the origin of this debt, and although it was listed on
Exhibit 3,  it had been dropped off the later credit reports. (Tr at 52.) Exhibit K is a letter
dated November 13, 2008, from a financial institution, which appears to be related to
this debt. It informed Applicant that they have notified the appropriate credit reporting
agencies to remove Applicant’s name from reporting on this account. I note that Exhibit
3 shows this debt was disputed, and Exhibits 4 and A do not list this debt. 
Applicant conceded that his finances continue to be of concern, since he has
received an offer of employment, but he has not been able to become employed
because he does not hold a security clearance. However, he testified that he is not
overdue on any current debts. (Tr at 54.) Exhibit A, Applicant’s most recent credit report
of December 12, 2009, shows that Applicant had no accounts that were listed as past
due. 
Applicant submitted his Certificate of Release or Discharge From Active Duty (DD
Form 214), which confirmed that Applicant served in the United States Air Force from
February 1986 until March 2006, when he was Honorably Discharged. (Exhibit G.)
4
Among the honors received by Applicant were the Air Force Achievement Medal, the Air
Force Commendation Medal with 3 Oak Leaf Clusters, the Air Forces Expeditionary
Medal, the NCO Professional Military Education Ribbon,  and many others. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
5
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debts, primarily by the actions of his
ex-wife, although it is not clear if they were incurred when they were married. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties: I find that AG ¶  20(d) is applicable since Applicant has “initiated a good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” The evidence indicates that
Applicant acted responsibly to resolve these debts, after he became aware that the debts
were incurred by his ex-wife. Since Applicant had a good-faith reason to challenge the
debts, he formally sent letters to the creditors and the credit reporting agencies disputing
the debts. He also followed up with telephone calls to any of the creditors, whose phone
numbers were listed on the credit reports, trying to explain his basis for disputing the
bills. 
Since Applicant challenged these bills for specific good-faith reasons, and the
later credit reports do not list any of the debts from the SOR as overdue, it appears that
Applicant has successfully disputed each of them. Therefore, I find that this mitigating
condition is a factor for consideration in this case. Applicant is current on all of his recent
debts. Therefore, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the financial concerns of the
Government.
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited above
as to why the Mitigating Condition applies, together with the consideration that Applicant
served this country honorably and with distinction for 20 years in the United States Air
Force, I find that the record evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.e.: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
