                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-11735
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of the Case
On September 14, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005.
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 27, 2009, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 18, 2010, and responded with additional
information within the 30 days permitted.  The case was assigned to me on April 27,
2010.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
2
 Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have (a) been charged and convicted
of forgery in March 2002 and (b) accumulated 32 delinquent debts exceeding $33,000. 
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have demonstrated questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations by virtue of his (a) actions covered by his 2002 forgery conviction, (b) his
January 2004 charge and conviction for driving while ability impaired, and (c) his being
stopped and cited on at least three different occasions for driving without a valid driver’s
license. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied his forgery charge and conviction.
He claimed he was charged and convicted of writing bad checks in August 2002 and
received a deferred sentence (since completed). He admitted many of the alleged
delinquent debts. He claimed most of these debts were paid in full, or covered by
payment plans.  He also denied the legitimacy of many of the alleged debts, claiming
there is no record of any these debts in his updated October 2009 credit report.
Applicant admitted his driving while impaired arrest. He admitted having a
suspended license on the occasions he was stopped and cited, but offered
explanations.  He claimed his license violations were correctable ones and do not cast
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 30-year-old systems administrator for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army after graduating from high school in 1997.
He served on active duty with the Army between April 1998 and April 2001, and was
honorably discharged in April 2001. Item 1.  Applicant married in April 2001 and has
one child from this marriage.  He and his wife separated in January 2002.  See Item 6.  
Finances
Following his Army discharge, Applicant encountered difficulties finding work.  He
was unemployed between June 2001 and August 2001.  While he was unemployed, he
lived with his parents (Item 7), and essentially lived paycheck-to-paycheck during this
period. To defray his living expenses, he opened multiple checking accounts, using
fictitious names and social security numbers.  See Item 7.  
During late 2001 and early 2002, he opened three different checking accounts
using fake identification (IDs) for each of the accounts.  See Item 11. Typically, he
wrote checks on these accounts that ranged in amounts from $250 to $350 a check.
Item 7. He made each of the checks out to “cash,” forged his signature on these fake
3
accounts and cashed the checks. With the proceeds, he took care of his living
expenses.  Item 7.  
Applicant used each fake bank account he created for approximately five days in
a row. Item 7.  When he made the mistake of using the same account for seven days
(in March 2002), he was caught, arrested, and charged with forgery (a felony).  
For the first six months following his April 2001 separation, Applicant relied
mostly on his parents for income.  Over the course of the ensuing five years, he worked
sporadically on term job assignments that would last anywhere from one week to three
months in duration.  
Between March 2002 and May 2003, Applicant was unemployed. Without
income, he fell further behind with his bills.  Records document that between June 2001
and May 2003, Applicant accumulated about 32 delinquent debts exceeding $33,000.
In December 2002, Applicant was informed by an anonymous postal letter that
his separated spouse had given birth to a baby.  After several unsuccessful attempts to
get back together, he and his wife reunited in January 2004.
Applicant has since become gainfully employed. Since his deployment to Iraq
with his present employer in 2007, Applicant has paid off most of his listed debts.  He
documents fully paid receipts for seventeen of his listed debts totaling $16,950 in
eliminated delinquent accounts. Specifically, he documents payment in full of the
creditor 1.b debt (AE 4), creditor 1.c (AE 5), creditors 1.d through 1.g (AE 6), creditor 1.j
(AE 7), creditors 1.l through 1.o (AE 10), creditor 1.q (AE11), creditors 1.u through 1.x
(AE 12), and creditor 1.ff (AE 13). These payments are not yet reflected in Applicant’s
most recent credit report. See AE 1.
However, Applicant does not provide any documentation of payment of his
remaining debts listed in the SOR.  While most of his still delinquent accounts report
small balances (i.e., creditors 1.h and 1.i, creditor 1.p, creditors 1.r through 1.t, and
creditors 1.y through 1.ee), several are large: notably creditor 1.k ($1,361), creditors 1.r
through 1.t, creditor 1.y ($7,326), and creditor 1.gg ($3,135). Applicant claimed no
knowledge of any of these debts listed on his credit reports and denies any debts due
to these creditors.  See Item 4. These debts are not reported in his most recent credit
report, but are not otherwise explained.  He provides no letters or other evidence,
though, of inquiring about these reported debts from the listed creditors or challenging
the debts with the credit reporting agencies.
Applicant currently reports a net monthly income of $9,166 and monthly
expenses of $3,592.  See AE 14.  He reports a net monthly remainder of $4,407.  
Applicant’s forgery conviction, while somewhat dated, still reflects concerted
attempts by Applicant to misappropriate funds (by writing on forged or fictitious
accounts) he was not entitled to.  He completed his probation conditions in 2007.
4
Alcohol-related offense and traffic citations
In January 2004, Applicant was charged with driving under the influence (DUI)
while driving home from work.  He had consumed approximately six drinks after his shift
and made a regrettable decision to drive home. See Item 7. While driving home, he was
confronted by a male driver in another car at a stop light. Applicant and this driver
engaged in a race with their vehicles.  At one point, they were traveling at high rates of
speed and became involved in an accident that culminated in Applicant’s rolling his
vehicle.  See Item 7.  
The police officer who investigated the accident asked Applicant for his drivers
license and vehicle registration. When Applicant could not produce his license and
registration (claiming he lost his wallet), the investigating officer charged Applicant with
a fictitious license plate and escorted him to a local hospital for treatment.  Once inside
the hospital, Applicant submitted to a blood alcohol test. After registering a blood
alcohol level that suggested he was impaired, the police officer  transported Applicant
to a local jail where he was charged with DUI and released.  
Following his release from jail, Applicant returned to the scene of the accident to
search for his wallet.  Item 7.  He found his wallet in the grass about 20 feet from the
site where his car came to a rest.  
At his hearing in 2003, Applicant pled guilty to a reduced charge of driving while
ability impaired (DWAI) and was sentenced to two years in jail (deferred) and ordered to
perform 24 days of community service.  Applicant, in turn was assigned a court date to
assess his compliance with the court’s conditions. His deferred sentence was
conditioned on the following: 40 hours of community service and completion of a Level
II alcohol education class.  
Following several appearances in court without his attorney present, the court
ordered Applicant to serve 45 days in jail.  Applicant was credited with serving 45 days
of jail time between September 2007 and October 2007. The court also credited him
with completing his other pre-trial conditions and dismissed the DWAI charges.  Item 7. 
Between July 2005 and April 2007, Applicant was cited on three occasions for
driving without a license, or on a suspended license.  In July 2005, he was cited for
driving without a license and driving under denied conditions.  Item 7.   By all accounts,
he paid the imposed fines.  
In his answer and post-hearing response, Applicant claimed that he had a valid
license from another  state when stopped by in-state police  on each of the three
occasions in which he was stopped by police. See Items 4 and 7. He provided no
documentation, however, to corroborate his claims. He assured, though, that he has
since surrendered his out-of-state driver’s license to his state’s driving authority, and
anticipates no future citations for not having a valid state license.
Applicant provides several endorsement letters and a certificate of appreciation.
See Items 19 through 24.  
5
                      Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole-person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
6
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a systems administrator who accumulated a number of delinquent
debts during periods of unemployment and underemployment. His accumulation of
delinquent debts, and his use of fictitious checking accounts to cover his expenses
7
during periods of financial difficulty and his unwillingness to address his delinquent
debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s acknowledged debts are attributable to his experiencing financial
problems during periods of unemployment between June 2001 and May 2002.  Based
on the documented materials in the FORM, some extenuating circumstances are
associated with Applicant’s inability to pay off or otherwise resolve his debts.  As a
result, MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted
responsibly,” is partly available to Applicant.
,.
Applicant’s use of fictitious checking accounts to sustain him during periods of
unemployment are not easily reconcilable with eligibility requirements for holding a
security clearance.  Moreover, some judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s
unexplained  delinquencies and his failure to demonstrate he acted responsibly in
addressing his listed debts before he received the SOR. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at
3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). Not only are several of his listed debt delinquencies still
unresolved, but he has failed to document any disputes with the underlying creditors
and credit reporting agencies. Probative evidence of mitigation is not demonstrated by
Applicant based on available documentation.      
                                          
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980).
Failure of the applicant to make concerted efforts to pay or resolve his debts raises
security-significant concerns about whether the applicant has demonstrated the trust
and judgment necessary to safeguard classified information.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts, and his use of
fictitious checking accounts to pay his bills during periods of unemployment and
financial difficulties. While he has since completed his probation conditions and repaid
most of his listed delinquent debts, he has not established any seasoned track record
for paying his debts and overcoming trust doubts attributable to his forgery conviction.
Bringing closure to those listed debts he disputes is a critical prerequisite to his
regaining control of his  finances and mitigating financial concerns.
While Applicant’s endorsement letters and certificate of appreciation are helpful
in evaluating his overall judgment and trustworthiness, they are not enough to
overcome the trust deficiencies manifest from his delinquent account history and
forgery conviction.  Overall, a clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on
8
the limited amount of information available for consideration in this record does not
enable him to establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security
concerns arising out of his accumulation of delinquent debts and forgery conviction.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, his lack of explanations for his challenged debts, and
his forgery conviction, it is too soon to make safe predictive judgments about
Applicant’s ability to repay his debts and restore his finances to acceptable levels
commensurate with the minimum requirements for holding a security clearance. 
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a, 1.h through 1.i, 1.k, 1.p, 1.r through 1.t, 1.y through 1.ee, and
1.gg.  Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the remaining allegations
covered by subparagraphs 1.b through 1.g, 1.j, 1.l through 1.o, 1.q, 1.u through 1.x,
and 1.ff. 
Personal Conduct concerns
Judgment and trustworthiness concerns exist over Applicant’s demonstrated
pattern of judgment and trust lapses associated with his writing checks on fictitious
checks over a two-year period between 2001 and 2002.  Concerns are also raised
about the circumstances associated with his 2004 alcohol-related conviction and his
traffic convictions involving his driving on an invalid out-of-state license. Together,
these three incidents reflect pattern deficiencies in the exercise of good judgment and
maintenance of trustworthiness.  
Applicant’s actions are expressly covered by Guideline E, and are entitled to
cognizance under this Guideline according to the Appeal Board.  See ISCR Case No.
06-20964, at 6 (App. Bd. April 10, 2008).  Where (as here) there is  probative adverse
information covered by Guideline E which reflects a recurring pattern of questionable
judgment use, trust breaches, or candor lapses, grounds exist for considering the
allegations covered by Guideline E.
Under Guideline E, two disqualifying conditions are specifically applicable to
Applicant’s situation. Both DC ¶ 16(d), “credible adverse information that is not
explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or
other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected
information,” and DC ¶ 16(f), “violation of a written or recorded commitment made by
the individual to the employer as a condition of employment,” have some application
to the facts of the case. 
Based on his explanations for his traffic citations and the age of his alcohol-
related conviction, Applicant is entitled to take some advantage of MC ¶ 17(d), “the
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or
9
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and
such behavior is unlikely to recur,” and MC ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress,” of
the personal conduct guideline. His forgery conviction, however, reflects a pattern of
deceit and fraud that cannot be easily reconciled with the trustworthiness
requirements for clearance holders.  
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment and trust questions raised by his forgery conviction. His endorsement letters
and training certification are favorable to him and warrant consideration when
evaluating his overall reliability and trustworthiness.  It is too soon, though, to absolve
Applicant from questions about his trustworthiness that have resulted from his forgery
conviction.  
Applicant does not mitigate security concerns raised under the personal
conduct guideline. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraph 2.a.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect
to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 2.b and 2.c.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors enumerated in AG 2(a).
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR, I make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subpara.  1.a:                      Against Applicant
Subparas. 1.b through 1.g:                           For Applicant
Subparas. 1.h and 1.i:      Against Applicant
Subpara.  1.j:      For Applicant
Subpara.  1.k:      Against Applicant
Subparas. 1.l through 1.o:      For Applicant
Subpara.  1.p:      Against Applicant
Subpara.  1.q:      For Applicant
Subparas. 1.r through 1.t:     Against Applicant
Subparas. 1.u through 1.x:      For Applicant
Subparas. 1.y through 1.ee:     Against Applicant
Subpara.  1.ff:     For Applicant
Subpara.  1.gg:     Against Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):     AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 2.a:     Against Applicant
Subpara. 2.b:     For Applicant
Subpara. 2.c:     For Applicant
10
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
11
  
