                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-01515
SSN: ------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 21, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on November 19, 2008.  (Government 1.)  On November 23, 2009, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing
the security concerns under Guidelines E, H and J for Applicant. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry”
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 The Applicant responded to the SOR on December 9, 2009, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on January 22, 2010.  A notice of hearing was issued on March 2, 2010,
scheduling the hearing for April 15, 2010.  At the hearing the Government presented
four exhibits, referred to Government Exhibits 1 to 4, which were admitted without
objection.  The Applicant presented one exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibit A, that
was admitted without objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The official
2
transcript (Tr.) was received on April 27, 2010.  Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 20 years old and has a high school diploma.  He is employed by
a defense contractor as an Engineer Technician, and is applying for a security
clearance in connection with his employment.
  
Paragraph 1 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because engaged in conduct involving questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations.    
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  (Tr. p. 9.)  The Applicant began working for his current employer in June
2008.  Since then he has received two pay increases for his work performance.  He got
the job through a family friend, in lieu of joining the military.
The Applicant has been cited for three driving infractions.  In December 2007, six
months before he was hired by his current employer, he was cited for Driving Past
Curfew.  The Applicant stated that he was seventeen years old at the time.  He was
spending the night at a friend’s house and got up in the middle of the night to drive
home to pick up his work clothes.  A police officer pulled him over.  
A few months later, in February 2008, he was cited for (1) Unsafe Left Hand Turn
(2) Obstructed View, (3) Not in Possession of Driver’s License, and (4) Failure to Signal.
The Applicant explained that it was raining, he was turning right, and his blinker was not
working.  The police pulled him over and asked why his blinker was not on.  The
Applicant told the officer that his blinker was out, but the officer told him that he should
have used his hand signals to make the turn.  The officer also noticed air freshener
hanging on the Applicant’s rear view mirror that was obstructing the Applicant’s view.  In
addition, the Applicant did not have his driver’s license in his possession at the time,
because he was wearing basketball shorts.  (Tr. p. 42.)
Three months later, in May 2008, the Applicant was cited for speeding and was
fined.  The Applicant explained that he was going to the store to get some medicine for
his little brother.  He was doing 60 miles per hour in a 55 mile speed limit.     
Subparagraphs 1(a) and 1(b) will be discussed under Paragraph 3, below.
3
Paragraph 2 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant admitted the allegation set forth in the SOR under this guideline.
(Tr. pp 8 - 9). The Applicant used marijuana two or three times between December
2007 and January 2008.  He testified that he has no intention of ever using marijuana
again.  He also used cocaine and ecstasy on one occasion on the same day in January
2008.  He tested positive for illegal drugs during a drug screening test by his probation
officer in January 2008.  He attributes his illegal drug use to peer pressure.  He no
longer associates with any drug users. 
Paragraph 3 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in criminal activities. 
The Applicant admitted the allegation set forth in the SOR under this guideline.
(Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  In August 2005, the Applicant was arrested for Grand
Theft from Person.  He explained the circumstances of this arrest.  He was fifteen years
old at the time.  He and his friends were waiting in line for ice cream.  The person in
front of them had a $5.00 bill showing.  Applicant claims that his friend took the $5.00
bill and ran.  The police arrived, and the Applicant told the officer that he did not know
who took the money.  The Applicant was instructed to empty his pockets and he had a
$5.00 bill.  Applicant believes that he upset the officer because he was not listening to
him.  Applicant was accused of stealing the money, and was arrested and taken to jail.
Applicant was issued a citation and required to appear in court.  Unintentionally, he
missed his court date and a warrant was issued for his arrest.  The court ultimately
dismissed the case.  (Tr. pp. 34 - 37.)   
In September 2007, the Applicant was arrested and charged with Burglary, a
felony.  He explained the circumstances of this arrest.  Applicant and a friend went into
a department store to steal.  The Applicant took a bottle of alcohol, his friend took some
clothes, alcohol and candy.  They were stopped by a security guard as they were
walking out of the door.  They tried to run, but were caught.  The police were called and
the Applicant was arrested and taken to jail.  The Applicant was placed on supervised
probation for one year, complete 80 hours of community service, and attend 20 hours of
either Narcotics Anonymous or Alcoholics Anonymous meetings.  Applicant attributes
his bad conduct to hanging around the wrong crowd.  (Government Exhibits 2 and 4.)  
Letters of recommendation from the Applicant’s General Manager; mother; a
mentor and good friend, who is retired military; another friend; and his grandmother,
indicate that he is considered responsible, trustworthy, professional, and a  man of
integrity.  He is said to be a hard worker with  strong leadership qualities.  He is
recommended for a position of trust.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)
The Applicant testified that he currently has a girlfriend, who has kept him for the
past two years on the straight and narrow path.  Although she did not testify, she was
present at the hearing for moral support.  The Applicant states that she has brought out
the best in him and he has become a completely changed person.  He recently
4
purchased a house.  Although alcohol consumption is not alleged, the Applicant
currently consumes alcohol, and is currently breaking the law.  He knows that it is illegal
for him to consume alcohol in the state, as he is under the legal age limit to consume
alcoholic beverages.  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16.(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which,
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
5
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
6
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in personal conduct, drug involvement, and criminal conduct
that demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in poor judgment and questionable conduct, (Guideline E), has a
history of drug involvement (Guideline H), and criminal conduct (Guideline J).  The
totality of this evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on
the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I
conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in
rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case
under Guidelines E, H and J of the SOR.  
7
The evidence shows that the Applicant, as young as he is, has a recent history of
questionable judgment, illegal drug use, and criminal conduct.  Just several months
before being hired by his current employer, he used illegal drugs, including marijuana,
cocaine and ecstasy.  He also tested positive for illegal drugs during a drug screening
test by his probation officer.  He was arrested and convicted of Burglary just a year
before starting his employment with a defense contractor.  He has also had three traffic
violations within the last two years.  Furthermore, although it is not alleged, he is
consuming alcohol when he is under the legal age to do so in this state.  Given this
history, he has not demonstrated the level of maturity required to have access to
classified information.  
  
Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Disqualifying Condition 16.(c) credible
adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an
adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as
a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information applies.  None of the mitigating conditions are
applicable.  Consequently, I find against the Applicant under Guideline E, Personal
Conduct.  
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug
abuse, and 25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia apply.
None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the
Applicant under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. 
Under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Disqualifying Conditions 31.(a) a single
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, and 31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find
against the Applicant under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct.   
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole-person assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of
candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.  
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and does not meet
the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find
against the Applicant under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Guideline H (Drug
Involvement), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).     
8
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.i.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
   
Paragraph 3: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.a.: Against the Applicant.
   
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
