                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03772 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On December 7, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 25, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 29, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 5, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on May 25, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. Applicant did not 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 2, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c, and denied ¶ 1.b. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He received his General Equivalency Diploma and 
completed one year of community college. He served in the Army National Guard. He 
also served in the Army Reserves and received a General Discharge Under Honorable 
Conditions for not drilling. He later reenlisted in the Army Reserves and received an 
Honorable Discharge. He is married and has two children. He has worked for a federal 
contractor since November 2008.1 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($1,020) is a medical debt. Applicant’s daughter needed 
surgery and he believed the insurance company was responsible for paying this debt. 
He disputed the debt with the insurance company. They did not pay the debt. He stated 
he got tired of disputing it with them, and to resolve it he paid the total amount in 
January 2010. The debt was about two-and-half years old.2 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($13,723) is a judgment for a car accident lawsuit. 
Applicant credibly testified that he was never in a car accident. He does not know if his 
driver’s license was lost or stolen, but it was missing. He believes someone had his 
license and was in the accident. He was never properly served with notice for the 
lawsuit. He hired an attorney and had the judgment vacated. The lawsuit continued and 
was scheduled for trial. He stated the reason the case was not dismissed was because 
he could not prove he was not involved in the accident. Applicant was offered a 
settlement on the case. He realized it would cost him more money to pay a lawyer to 
fight the lawsuit than if he paid the $2,000 settlement offer. He accepted the settlement. 
He is to make four payments of $500. He made one payment on April 30, 2010, and is 
required to make three more monthly payments and the case will be resolved. He 
provided a copy of a credit report that shows the judgment is deleted from it.3 Applicant 
credibly testified that he was unaware of the judgment until he was told of it during his 
background interview with an Office of Personnel Management investigator.4  
 
1 Tr. 35-39. 
 
2 Tr. 19-22; AE E. 
 
3 Tr. 28-35, 43-54, 63-64; AE A and B. 
 
4 Tr. 30, 32. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($699) was for a utility bill. Applicant stated the bill was in 
his wife’s name and he was unaware that it had not been paid. It was a final bill before 
they moved. He paid the bill.5  
 
 Applicant and his wife experienced periods of unemployment and had difficulty 
paying some of their bills. Both are now employed. All of their past bills are paid and 
they are paying their monthly bills on time. Applicant’s payment plan on SOR ¶ 1.b is 
current. They have only one credit card and it is paid on time.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
5 Tr. 22-28; AE C and D. 
 
6 Tr. 66-70. 
 
4 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had two delinquent debts that were unpaid until recently and a disputed 
judgment. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant had two debts that were delinquent. He has paid the debts. He 
disputed one debt with the insurance company, and although he believed he was not 
responsible for it, he paid it to resolve it. He was unaware of a utility debt that was in his 
wife’s name and was unpaid. It was for services on a residence where they no longer 
lived. He paid the debt. Applicant disputes the judgment. He hired a lawyer and had it 
vacated. Although he continues to dispute that he was involved in an accident, which is 
the claim, he realizes it will cost him more money to litigate the lawsuit than to settle it. 
He has chosen to pay the settlement and has a payment plan to resolve it. He has 
made one payment in the four-payment plan. 
 
 I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) applies. The circumstances of Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are unlikely to recur. Two of the debts, the medical account and the 
judgment, were disputed. The other debt was due to a move and is resolved. 
Applicant’s actions do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
 I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) applies. The circumstances of the judgment 
were beyond Applicant’s control. He disputes he was involved in a car accident, which 
is the cause of action for the lawsuit. Being fraudulently sued is an unusual 
circumstance. He had the judgment vacated and was going to litigate the action until it 
became cost-prohibitive. I find Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 I find mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) apply. There are clear 
indications Applicant’s financial issues are resolved. His delinquent debts are paid and 
he has a payment plan to resolve the judgment. Although he believed he was not 
responsible for a medical debt and disputed it with the insurance company, he paid it to 
resolve it. Applicant had a reasonable basis to dispute the medical debt and the 
judgment. He provided documentary evidence to substantiate his disputes and 
resolution of the issues.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant had two delinquent debts 
and a judgment. He disputed the medical debt with his insurance company, but paid it to 
resolve it. He vacated the judgment and instead of litigating the issue, he has accepted 
a settlement offer and is paying it through a payment plan. The final debt was an 
oversight and when he learned it was delinquent, he paid it. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
