                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04021 
 ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 16, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), as a requirement for her employment with a defense 
contractor (Item 1). On October 8, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F (Item 1). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense 
on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 31, 2009. (Item 4) Applicant admitted 
15 of the allegations. She denied one because it is a duplicate of another listed SOR 
allegation. She denied another allegation since the debt belonged to a former husband. 
She also denied that her finances raised a security concern for financial considerations. 
She provided an explanation for and information on some of her accounts.  She initially 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On March 5, 2010, she elected to 
have the matter decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 9). Department 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on March 30, 2010. On April 7, 2010, 
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM), and was provided the 
opportunity to file objections, and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
disqualifying conditions. Applicant responded in an undated response received at 
DOHA on May 5, 2010. The case was assigned to me on May 21, 2010. Based on a 
review of the case file and pleadings, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file, and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 31 years old and has been employed as a planner and scheduler for 
a defense contractor for approximately one year. She recently received her bachelor's 
degree in business administration. She is married for the third time. Her first two 
marriages ended in divorce in 2005 and 2008. She has two children who live with their 
father. She has never held a security clearance. (Item 1, e-QIP, dated January 16, 
2009).  
 
Credit reports (Item 6, credit report, dated August 27, 2009; and Item 7, credit 
report, dated February 24, 2009); show a collection account for a bank for $880 (SOR 
1.a, and SOR 1.p); another collection account for a different bank for $610 (SOR 1.b); 
two medical debts for $1,108 (SOR 1.c), and $55 (SOR 1.d); a collection account for 
cable service for $99 (SOR 1.e); a charged-off account for $691 (SOR 1.f); a credit card 
account charged off for $394 (SOR 1.g); a telephone service debt in collection for $665 
(SOR 1.h); a credit card account placed for collection for $728 (SOR 1.i); a credit card 
account charged off for $8,958 (SOR 1.j); a collection account for $793 (SOR 1.j); a 
collection account for $793 (SOR 1.k); a medical account in collection for $903 (SOR 
1.l); a collection account for $752 (SOR 1.m); a collection account for $640 (SOR 1.n); a 
cable debt in collection for $560 (SOR 1.o); and a credit card debt for $10,775 (SOR 
1.q). Applicant denies that her finances create a security concern. 
 
Applicant admits all of the above debts except for the credit card debt listed at 
SOR 1.q for $10,775. She states that this debt is her former husband's credit card debt 
and she was only an authorized user of the card. Applicant and her first husband 
separated in early 2000 and their divorce was final in February 2005. During the 
separation, she had difficulty paying her debts. She married again in January 2006, but 
her new husband was unemployed for a year, she was pregnant, and she was unable to 
work. There were no extra funds so only the fundamental debts were paid. In August 
2006, she separated from her second husband, and lived on her savings until January 
2007 when her second divorce was final. She held temporary jobs until hired by a 
defense contractor in January 2009. She has not consulted a debt management 
company or received financial counseling. (Item 5, Answers to Interrogatories, at 4)  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
In response to the SOR, Applicant presented information to show that the cable 
debt in SOR 1.e was paid in full. In response to the FORM, Applicant presented 
information to show the $55 debt at SOR 1.d was paid in full. She established that the 
debt at SOR 1.p is a duplicate of the debt at SOR 1.a. She also stated that the debt at 
SOR 1.q is from her last husband's credit card on which she was an authorized user. 
She states she is not responsible for the debt, and under state law, she is only at most 
responsible for half of the debt. 
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant stated she had no issue with paying her 
debts once she had a job and salary that allowed her to make payments on her debts. 
Her debts were the result of two failed marriages, medical problems, and unemployment 
or underemployment. She was required to pay her college the remaining tuition of 
$9,000 by July 2009 to receive her degree. She made the payments by July 2009. She 
was working to pay her debts when she was placed on leave without pay in October 
2009 because of the status of her security clearance. If not for being required to pay her 
tuition and now being unemployed, she would have been able to pay her other 
delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant notes in response to the FORM that she was never requested to 
provide proof of financial counseling, a monthly budget, or a debt repayment plan, but 
that the analysis in the FORM held this lack of information against her. She has not 
used a credit card since 2006, and her debts in the credit reports and on the SOR are 
from medical and utility bills, bank fees, and two credit cards that she no longer uses. 
She states that she now has the funds to pay her debts, but since her security 
clearance and job are in doubt, she cannot in good conscience pay these debts. She 
feels it is in her best interest to save money rather than pay old debts. She has held 
various financial positions and sensitive-information jobs in the past with no questions 
concerning her trustworthiness. She believes her employer has no questions 
concerning her trustworthiness.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations: 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations. Applicant’s delinquent debts listed in credit reports and admitted by 
Applicant raise Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). Applicant encountered delinquent debts after two 
 
5 
 
 
divorces and some periods of unemployment. The credit reports and admissions 
establish that Applicant had delinquent debt since 2002 that has still not been 
addressed or resolved. This information establishes that Applicant has a history of not 
meeting financial obligations caused by either unwillingness or inability to meet her 
financial obligations. 
 
 The government produced substantial evidence by way of credit reports, answers 
to interrogatories, and Applicant's admissions and statements to establish the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). The burden shifts to Applicant to 
produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under 
financial considerations. An applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation 
or prove a mitigating condition, and the burden to prove or disprove it never shifts to the 
Government. 
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) 
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), and conclude it does not apply. 
While the debts may have been incurred in the past, most are still unpaid and thus 
current. There are a number of different accounts and debts, so the debts were not 
incurred infrequently. Applicant has not presented any information to establish that the 
delinquent debts will not recur. Her continued debts and financial situation cast doubt on 
her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems 
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separations) and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). Applicant was divorced twice 
and had periods of unemployment. But she did have periods of employment and has 
been employed for approximately a year. She has funds by her own admission to pay 
her past due obligations. She chose not to use her funds to pay debts but save them to 
use later. Applicant has not established that her divorces and periods of unemployment 
caused her financial problems. Applicant has not acted reasonably and responsibly to 
use her funds to pay her debts, except for two small debts, casting doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant has not provided sufficient 
information to establish that her financial issues are under control.   
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(a) (the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control). Applicant presented no information to indicate she received financial 
counseling. Even if she had received counseling, there is no indication her financial 
problems are being resolved or under control. She is not making payments on her 
delinquent debts, and does not have a plan to resolve her delinquent debts.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). Applicant presented 
 
6 
 
 
documentation that two of her small delinquent debts have been paid. For FC MC ¶ 
20(d) to apply, there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and 
“evidence” of a good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling 
debts is needed. Good-faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. Appellant has to show a 
"meaningful track record" of debt payment, including evidence of actual debt reduction 
through payment of debts. All that is required is that she has a plan to resolve her 
financial problems and takes significant action to implement that plan. The entirety of 
her financial situation and her actions can reasonably be considered in evaluating the 
extent to which her plan to reduce her outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of a debt only 
under pressure of qualifying for a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant presented information to show that she only paid two of her smallest 
debts, both debts being less than $100. Paying only these debts is not a good-faith 
effort. She has not established that she acted with reasonableness, prudence, honesty, 
and an adherence to duty or obligation. Paying two debts of less than $100 each is not 
a meaningful track record of debt payment. She has not established a plan to pay her 
financial obligations. In fact, she states she will not pay the debts because of her job 
uncertainty. She denied responsibility for paying one debt because she was only an 
authorized user on her husband's credit card. She has not established that she is not 
responsible for this debt. She was an authorized user and has some responsibility for 
the debt. She has not presented any information from the creditor that establishes she 
is not obligated for the credit card debt. She does not have a plan to resolve her 
financial issues. Her finances are not under control and she has not acted reasonably 
and responsibly in regard to her finances. Her only plan seems to be that she may pay 
her past due obligations if she is employed and receiving sufficient income. She has not 
presented information to mitigate security concerns for financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not presented 
information to show she has taken sufficient action to resolve her financial issues. 
Applicant has not established a "meaningful track record" of debt payment by 
presenting information to show she is taking sufficient, consistent, reasonable, and 
responsible action to resolve her financial issues. She did resolve two small delinquent 
debts. But this is only a small part of her delinquent debts. She does have an obligation 
to pay the debt on a credit card she was authorized to use. She did not present a plan 
to show she intends to resolve and pay her remaining delinquent debts. Applicant has 
not demonstrated she is responsibly managing her finances under the circumstances. 
She does not have a consistent record of actions to resolve financial issues. She has 
not established that she has or will take reasonable steps to address her remaining 
delinquent debts and resolve her financial problems. The record shows she has been 
irresponsible towards her financial obligations. The lack of responsible management of 
financial obligations indicates she will not be concerned or responsible, but will be 
careless, in regard to classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. She 
has not established her suitability for access to classified information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her 
financial situation. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:   For Applicant (duplicate of SOR 1.a) 
  Subparagraph 1.q:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
