1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 09-05165
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Since 2003, Applicant has accumulated 19 delinquent debts totaling
approximately $22,000. Applicant’s job losses and her enrollment in a credit restoration
company in December 2009, without more, are insufficient to overcome the adverse
evidence under the financial considerations guideline. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SCA, GE 1) on April 14,
2009. She was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) on May 4, 2009. In her interrogatory answers submitted to the Government on
October 3, 2009 (Item 2), Applicant agreed with the investigator’s summary of her May
2009 interview, and that it could be used in a security clearance hearing to determine
her security suitability. (Interrogatory answers, GE 2) On December 14, 2009, DOHA
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial
considerations (Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865,
2
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
Applicant submitted her answer to the SOR on December 18, 2009. DOHA
issued a Notice of Hearing on January 18, 2010, for a hearing on February 24, 2010.
The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, six exhibits (GE 1 through 6) were
admitted in evidence in support of the Government’s case. Applicant objected to certain
debts she admitted to in the May 2009 interview (GE 2) because they were not her
responsibility. (Tr. 13-15) Her objection to GE 2 was overruled. I advised her that her
agreement with the contents of the interview (GE 2) was verified by her check mark on
the last page of GE 2 acknowledging she agreed with the interview, and that it could be
presented in a security clearance hearing to determine her suitability for a security
clearance. (Tr. 16) Applicant testified and submitted one exhibit (AE A1). 
The record remained open until March 4, 2010 (Tr. 78), to allow Applicant an
opportunity to submit additional evidence. She submitted six exhibits (AE A through AE
F) in a timely fashion. Those exhibits have been entered into the record. AE A contains
a discharge summary and a short term disability application. AE B contains a letter from
Applicant to her former employer dated March 2, 2010, requesting a copy of a
termination letter and notation of rehire. AE B also contains a statement indicating she
had paid a bill on March 31, 2005, and an undated letter from her claiming the
medication she was taking prevented her from thinking clearly enough to file a medical
claim within two days. Her reference in the letter to “you guys” suggests the undated
letter was submitted to her former employer who terminated her in November 2008 for
having three successive absences without notification. (Id.) See also, AE C.
AE C contains emails between Applicant and the father of one of her children, a
termination letter from Applicant’s former employer advising her on October 29, 2008,
that she was being voluntarily terminated for having absences of three successive days
without appropriate notification. (Because some sentences in the letter cite dates in
November 2008, the letter should have been dated November 29, 2008 instead of
October 29, 2008.)
AE D contains a tax form indicating that for tax year 2005, Applicant had $225
federal tax income withheld from $2,209 in unemployment compensation that she
received. The exhibit also contains an incomplete tax form for tax year 2006, showing
she received $2,274 in unemployment compensation, with an adjusted gross income of
$7,985. 
AE E contains copies of most of the medical records in AE A. AE F chronicles
emergency room/medical clinic visits during September and October 2008. The exhibit
concludes with a medical report dated October 22, 2008.
3
DOHA received the transcript on March 12, 2010. The record closed on March
12, 2010. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleges Applicant owes approximately
$22,590 for 21 delinquent debts. Applicant admitted SOR 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, 1.l, and 1.m.
She denied the remaining allegations, and, regarding several delinquent debts, provided
a short explanation for her denial. Based on Applicant’s response to the SOR, the
transcript and exhibits, I make the following additional factual findings. 
Applicant is 27 years old and divorced. She has two children, ages nine and six.
She is expecting her third child. Applicant receives no child support for her two children.
(Tr. 50) She has taken courses at the community college in 2002, 2006, and 2009. 
Applicant has been employed as a customer service representative by a defense
contractor since April 2009. She seeks a security clearance. 
From February 2004 to August 2005, Applicant was employed as a senior teller
for a bank. (GE 1) From August 2005 to January 2006, Applicant worked for a
temporary secretarial agency. From January to June 2006, Applicant was unemployed.
From June 2006 to March 2008, Applicant worked for a temporary secretarial agency.
From March to November 2008, Applicant was employed as a service advocate for a
health insurance company, but was terminated while on medical leave. From November
2008 to April 2009, Applicant was unemployed. (Id.)
The listed debts will be discussed in the order they appear in the SOR. The
delinquent debt information presented in the SOR is located in Applicant’s May 2009
interview (GE 2), and three credit bureau reports, dated April 22, 2009 (GE 4), August 4,
2009 (GE 5), and October 15, 2009 (GE 6). Four fraud alerts were applied to Applicant’s
credit report in April and May 2009. See GE 6.
SOR 1.a, $5,250, collection account, karate membership, individual installment
account. Applicant denied the account as she claims she cancelled the contract. The
credit records show the account became delinquent in January 2007. (GE 4) Applicant
remembered opening the account in 2005 when she filled out a form offering her a
chance to win a week of free karate instruction. (GE 2) She was subsequently notified
that she had won. When she went to the martial arts location, she was told she could
sign up for a full membership with a post-dated check that would become effective at
the end of the free week of instruction. Applicant was told that the contract could be
cancelled within a week. (Id.) She signed something because she received a karate
outfit. (Tr. 59-61) She testified that two days later she cancelled the contract because
her grandmother became sick. (Tr. 45-47) Even though she was instructed to send a
letter by facsimile to the corporate headquarters requesting the contract be cancelled,
Applicant decided to call the sales representative to cancel the service. She presented
no documentation to support her assertions. She is responsible for the account. 
4
SOR 1.b, $448, personal check, collection. Applicant admitted she owes for the
check. The account was considered delinquent in August 2006. Applicant told her
personal bank not to pay the amount. The account remains unpaid. 
SOR 1.c, $632, wireless services, collection, individual account. (GE 4) There is
no information indicating when the account was opened, but it became delinquent in
August 2003. When Applicant was interviewed in May 2009, she told the OPM
investigator that she and a friend opened an account for a beeper. She paid her portion
of the bill, but her friend did not pay his portion. She claimed she disputed the account
in 2007. She reported she tried to dispute the account in 2008, but was told she could
not dispute the account until 2010. The account has not been paid. 
At the hearing, Applicant asserted on many occasions, she contacted the
collection agency identified in SOR 1.c. However, she testified she had no
documentation at the hearing to show all the accounts she disputed because of the
contract she is under with the credit restoration organization. (Tr. 23) She stated, “But I
mean I do have which I can’t really do too much because I’m under this contract with
the creditor. I mean not the creditor but the creditor repair.” (Id.) The account remains
unpaid. No additional information was provided as to why she could not produce
information about disputing the listed accounts. 
SOR 1.d, $673, cell phone, collection account, individual installment. (GE 4) The
account was opened in 2006 and became delinquent in September 2008. Applicant
admitted the account was valid, but denied she owed the current delinquent amount.
The account remains unpaid.
SOR 1.e, $600, pay day loan check cashing company, collection account. In her
May 2009 interview, Applicant indicated she took out a loan of $500 and planned to
have $85 deducted from her checking account. According to Applicant, the creditor
made two unauthorized withdrawals from her account. The funds were returned to her
account. For unknown reasons, the automatic withdrawals of $85 every two weeks were
stopped. She has not resolved the debt.
SOR 1.f, $7,186, installment auto loan, repossessed in approximately October
2008 after unsuccessful negotiations by telephone. (Tr. 40-41) Applicant lost her job
due to medical problems as set forth in AE A and AE F. This account remains
Applicant’s responsibility. 
SOR 1.g, $54, insurance, collection account. Applicant believes she disputed this
account with the credit bureau. (Tr. 62) No documentation was presented to support her
dispute. The account has not been satisfied. 
SOR 1.h, $1,758, medical services. The services were rendered in September
2005. Though she denied the account in her answer to the SOR, she admitted the
account in her May 2009 interview. The account has not been paid.
5
SOR 1.I, $2,487, lease, collection. The account has been delinquent since March
2009. Applicant admitted she owes the debt. While she was on medical disability from
her job in approximately September 2008, she fell behind in her rent by two months and
was evicted. (GE 2)
SOR I.j, $116, bank account, collection, individual installment. Applicant opened
the account while she was in college. (Tr. 63) GE 4 indicates the account was
transferred for collection in April 2009. According to Applicant, after purchasing an item
for her stepfather, she had $4 in her bank account. She then called the bank to verify
her balance. According to Applicant, the automated communications system of the bank
mistakenly signed her up for a promotional banking offer. The bank kept deducting $19
from her account without her approval. She contacted the bank the day she discovered
her account was overdrawn by $99. (Tr. 65) She testified she did not produce any
documentation of the bank error because the account was closed in 2007. (Tr. 63-66)
The account remains unpaid. 
SOR 1.k, $99, bank account, collection, individual installment. The account was
transferred for collection in April 2009. Applicant explained she made a $500 deposit
into the account. Then, she made some purchases assuming the deposit would be
posted immediately. According to her May 2009 interview, the deposit was not posted
until several days later, causing a $65 overdraft. She testified that her checking account
balance eventually reached a negative $300. (Tr. 68-69) She talked to a branch
manager who refunded some of her money. A new branch manager told her that the
mistake could be resolved if she paid some additional money. She paid the money, but
the bank mistake was not resolved. (Tr. 66) Applicant provided no additional
documentation about the original transaction or information as to why she had to pay
additional money. She still owes the delinquent account.
SOR 1,l, $3,287, installment car loan, repossessed. The account was opened in
February 2005, and the car was repossessed in November 2005. The car was
repossessed after Applicant lost her job in August 2005. From February 2004 to August
2005, Applicant was a bank teller. Applicant’s son needed immunization shots, and she
believed her supervisor allowed her to take her son to the medical center. (Tr. 48) When
Applicant returned to work the next day, she was assigned to menial duties rather than
her original teller responsibilities, then she was terminated. (Id.) After losing her job in
August 2005 (Tr. 42), Applicant continued to make the car payments with her
unemployment compensation. (Tr. 41-42) The car was repossessed in November 2005.
Applicant still owes the account. 
SOR 1.m, $35, checking account overdraft, collection, individual. The overdraft
occurred in April 2007. Applicant indicated she forgot about it. As she stated in her May
2009 interview, she was going to pay the account, but was advised not to by her credit
repair (restoration) company. (GE 2; Tr. 43)
SOR 1.n, $75, medical services, collection. The medical services were rendered
in December 2008. Though she denied this account in her response to the SOR,
6
Applicant admitted this account in her May 2009 interview. The account has not been
paid. 
SOR 1,o, $100, medical services, collection. Medical services were received
January 2009. (GE 5) Though she denied the account in her response to the SOR, she
admitted the account in May 2009 interview. (GE 2)
SOR 1.p, $100, medical services, collection. The medical services were rendered
in March 2009. Applicant denied the debt in her response to the SOR, but admitted the
debt in her May 2009 interview. (Id.)The account remains her responsibility.
SOR 1.q, $125, medical services, collection. The medical services were rendered
in August 2005. In her May 2009 interview, Applicant stated she did not recognize the
account. (Id.) I find she does not owe the account. 
SOR 1.r, $334, modeling classes, collection. Applicant paid $300 and signed up
for modeling classes in January 2007 (GE 4). She claimed that when the
representatives told her after orientation that completion of the modeling classes did not
guarantee a modeling job, she cancelled the modeling contract. The representatives
advised her to send a cancellation letter by facsimile which she claimed she did.
Applicant testified she spoke to a representative demanding a return of her $300. (Tr.
68-70) Applicant indicated she did not bring documentation about the cancellation to the
hearing. (Tr. 69) No additional documentation was provided regarding the modeling
contract. 
SOR 1.s, $100, medical services, collection. The medical services were rendered
in March 2009. Applicant denied the account in her response to the SOR, but admitted
the account in her May 2009 interview. (GE 2, 4) 
SOR 1.t, $100, medical services, collection. The medical services were rendered
in January 2009. Applicant acknowledged this account in her May 2009 interview (Id.),
but denied it in her response to the SOR. Applicant still owes the account. 
SOR 1.u., $123, bank account, collection. The account was transferred for
collection in June 2007. The account is cited in the credit report in GE 6, but not in the
reports of GE 5 or GE 4. Applicant did not refer to this account in her May 2009
interview (GE 2), and denied the account in her response to the SOR. I find Applicant
does not owe this account.
Applicant’s personal financial statement (PFS) reflects that after subtracting her
expenses of $2,216 from her net monthly income of $2,269, her net monthly remainder
is $53. (GE 3) While she has eliminated the monthly computer rental bill ($164), she
now has to pay her stepfather the same monthly amount she paid to rent the computer
because he purchased a computer for her. (Tr. 30-31) She also purchased a six-month
auto insurance policy for $620. (Tr. 31-32)
7
Applicant testified she enrolled in a credit restoration plan on December 3, 2009.
(Tr. 26) She opted for the plan because she could not resolve the debts on her own. (Tr.
33) In the past, she contacted the collection agencies to remove accounts that were not
hers, but did not have documentation to support her claims. (Tr. 35) She was advised
by her credit restoration company contract not to do anything about the delinquent
accounts. (Tr. 36) As noted earlier under SOR 1.m, she was advised by the company
not to pay the $35 check overdraft. 
Applicant has never had financial counseling. (Tr. 76) When asked whether she
has a budget, Applicant identified the personal financial statement she submitted in GE
3. (Tr. 76-77) Applicant did not know whether her credit repair company offered financial
counseling, but company officials told her they had helped others who were applying for
a security clearance. (Tr. 55-56) She and her fiance plan to complete the credit
restoration program, stay on top of their bills, and never have to encounter these
financial problems in the future. (Tr. 55)
Applicant testified that some of the debts listed in her credit reports belonged to
her former husband. She claims she paid some of his debts (unidentified) in 2003, but
provided no documentation. Also, according to Applicant, the divorce decree required
her former husband to pay debts which he did not pay. (Tr. 57) Applicant did not submit
the divorce decree. Her SCA shows she divorced her former husband in May 2004. (GE
1) 
The credit restoration plan documents show that on January 15 and January 29,
2010, she signed paperwork to enroll in the plan On January 15, 2010, she signed an
agreement with the sponsors to pay a $175 processing fee and other fees. (AE A) On
January 29, 2010, Applicant signed an authorization to allow the credit company to
obtain her credit history. On the same day, she signed a Policies and Procedures form.
(Id.) 
Applicant testified her fiance made the payments to enroll in the program. (Tr. 27)
She had to make one payment after being advised that a payment had not been
received. (Id.) Applicant provided no verification that any payments were actually made
as required by the plan. She did not know how many creditors were included in the
restoration plan. (Tr. 27) 
Character Evidence
Applicant provided no character evidence from individuals or supervisors on her
job, or individuals in the community.
8
Policies
When evaluating an applicant's suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the AG. Each guideline lists potentially disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant's
eligibility for access to classified information.
The administrative judge's ultimate goal is to reach a fair and impartial decision
that is based on commonsense. The decision should also include a careful, thorough
evaluation of a number of variables known as the "whole-person concept" that brings
together all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, in making a decision. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Decisions include, by necessity,
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to
protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of
legally permissible extrapolation as to the potential, rather than actual, risk of
compromise of classified information.
Under Directive ¶ E3.l.14., the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.l.l5., the applicant is
responsible for presenting "witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . ." The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Financial Considerations 
The security concern for financial considerations is set forth in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
The Government has the responsibility of presenting sufficient information to
support all allegations of the SOR. Based on the credit reports, Applicant’s interrogatory
responses, and her answers to the SOR, the Government has presented sufficient
information to establish all the allegations in the SOR, except for SOR 1q and 1u. AG ¶
9
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations).
AG ¶ 19(a) applies based on Appellant’s inability to pay the delinquent accounts.
Having 19 delinquent accounts dating to 2003 triggers the application of AG ¶ 19(c).
Four mitigating conditions are potentially applicable. No mitigation is available
under AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment). Although several of the
debts are dated, 12 of the debts became delinquent in the past two years. Because
there is no evidence that any of the listed debts have been repaid, Applicant’s ongoing
financial difficulties continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness and
judgment. 
Applicant’s loss of employment and unemployment entitles her to mitigation
under AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances). The mitigation Applicant received because of her loss of employment in
August 2005 is diminished by the fact that she waited until the last moment to obtain flu
shots for her child so that the child would be permitted to attend school. In addition, her
job termination should have provided unequivocal evidence that her supervisor was not
authorized to grant her leave from work.
I have carefully evaluated the medical records and the reasons for Applicant’s job
dismissal in November 2008. As with her job termination in August 2005, Applicant
should have adequately investigated her leave options and notified her manager of
sudden changes in her health. Applicant has been employed with a defense contractor
since April 2009. But, the record indicates that none of the 19 creditors/collection
agencies have been satisfied. Though Applicant’s employment problems provide her
some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b), the probative weight of her enrollment in the credit
restoration program is problematic because she could not provide updated status
information on any of the listed debts, or any other documentation of her contacts with
the credit agencies. She could have contacted the plan, and submitted updated
information in her post-hearing submission, but chose not to do so.
Applicant receives no mitigation under AG 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control). She has never had financial counseling and did
not realize the purpose of a budget. She was unaware of whether the credit restoration
company had financial counseling. Having had no financial counseling, and having paid
none of the listed delinquent accounts, there is no basis to conclude Applicant’s
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. With no evidence showing
that the creditors have been paid, Applicant receives no mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d)
(the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts) either. 
10
AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence to resolve the issue) is
potentially applicable based on Applicant’s assertions of disputing certain debts. To
obtain mitigation credit under AG ¶ 20(e), an individual must not only have a reasonable
dispute with a creditor, but he or she must also provide documented proof to
substantiate the dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant
has had fraud alerts placed on her credit report. But, while she has persistently claimed
that she disputed several of the delinquent accounts with the listed creditors or credit
agencies, she provided no documents indicating she disputed specific accounts with the
credit agencies. When an applicant challenges specific accounts with the credit
agencies, he or she receives specific responses from the credit agency indicating the
status of the debt. Applicant has not provided that documentation. Therefore, Applicant
has failed to provide documented proof of the basis for the dispute or evidence of
actions to resolve the delinquent accounts. Applicant has not overcome the financial
problems set forth in the SOR. 
Whole Person Concept 
I have examined the evidence under the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in
my ultimate finding against Applicant under the financial considerations guideline. I have
also weighed the circumstances within the context of nine variables known as the
whole-person concept. In evaluating the relevance of an individual's conduct, the
administrative judge should consider the following factors:
AG ¶ 2(a) (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and, (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Since 2003, Applicant has accumulated 19 debts totaling more than $22,000.
Even though she has made repeated claims of disputing the listed debts and paying off
unlisted debts, the only documentation she provided of a paid debt is dated March 31,
2005. (AE A) She claimed she was victimized by the martial arts creditor and the
modeling service creditor. Yet, she presented no documentation to support her
testimonial claims. Applicant’s sudden job loss in August 2005 occurred after failing to
get proper authorization from her employer before taking her child to a medical center
for flu shots. While the medical records show Applicant was ill in September and
October 2008, it was Appellant’s responsibility to ensure she had proper authorization
for medical leave, and that she kept her employer aware of her health situation. 
11
A key element in the whole-person analysis of financial cases is whether an
applicant has launched a meaningful track record of reducing her debts. While the track
record does not mean that all debts have to be resolved at the same time, the track
record should demonstrate a plan and measurable actions to implement the plan. In
certain instances, a reasonable plan could be payment of delinquent debts one at a
time. Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant has presented no evidence of
paying off any of the listed delinquent debts. While the credit restoration company may
assist in removing certain creditors from Applicant’s credit report, her most pressing
need is financial counseling on how to satisfy all her delinquent accounts, even if it
includes seeking a discharge under the bankruptcy laws. Without a comprehensive plan
to deal with her creditors, her current financial problems will continue in the future. See
AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). Applicant has not met her burden of persuasion
under the financial considerations guideline.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a to 1.p Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r to 1.t Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u For Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                      
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
