 
 
 
1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03471 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions on April 16, 
2008. On November 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct, and Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 9, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
17, 2010. The case was assigned to me on February 19, 2010.  On March 11, 2010, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for April 15, 2010. The case was 
heard on that date. The Government offered five exhibits which were admitted as 
Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5. Applicant testified and submitted no documents. The 
record was held open until April 22, 2010, to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documents. He timely submitted three documents which were admitted as Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A – C. Department Counsel’s responses to AE A – C are marked as 
Hearing Exhibits (HE) II – IV. The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 27, 2010.  Based 
 
 
 
2
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant requested that his case be decided on the administrative record. 
Department Counsel converted Applicant’s case to a hearing pursuant to paragraph 
E3.1.7 of the Directive. The documents related to this action are marked as Hearing 
Exhibit I.   
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the overall concerns raised under the 
personal conduct and use of information technology guidelines but admitted the 
underlying factual SOR allegations.  
  
Applicant is a 43-year-old computer programmer for a Department of Defense 
contractor who seeks to maintain his security clearance. He has been employed in his 
current position since February 2006. He has held a security clearance since 2001. He 
has a bachelor’s degree in computer science. He married on September 12, 2009. He is 
separated from his wife and is in the process of filing for divorce. He has no children. 
(Tr. 5-6; 23; Gov 1)  
 
In June 2004, Applicant applied for access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI). In December 2004, he underwent a polygraph test. Applicant wanted 
to make sure that he passed the polygraph test. Before he took the test, he told the 
polygrapher there were a few items he needed to explain. He told her that between May 
2002 and March 2003, he claimed more hours at work than he actually worked. On 
occasion, he would take a longer lunch than he was supposed to and sometimes left 
work early if all of his work was completed. He also indicated that he had viewed 
sexually explicit material on his work computer. Over a period of six to eight months, 
Applicant would receive unsolicited e-mails containing pornographic information. He 
was not aware the e-mails were pornographic until he opened them. He would 
immediately delete them. He realized that he should have reported the e-mails 
immediately. The unsolicited e-mails stopped appearing when his computer was 
cleaned for an unrelated reason. (Tr. 25-34; Gov 4; Gov 5) 
 
In 2006, Applicant received a letter from another government agency denying his 
access to SCI. He believes his SCI access was denied for the reasons stated above. He 
did not save the letter and did not appeal the denial of SCI access. The letter informed 
Applicant that his security clearance was still valid for SECRET and below.  He did not 
appeal because he can find work as a computer programmer elsewhere. (Tr. 15-16, 40-
41, 45; Gov 2; Gov 4) 
 
Applicant testified that he exaggerated the number of hours that he claimed for 
work that he did not work because he wanted to make sure that he passed the 
polygraph. He told the polygrapher that he overcharged 20 hours. He actually over- 
 
 
 
3
charged between two and four hours a week. One of the reasons that he overcharged 
his employers for hours that he did not work was because he was angry that he did not 
get the job positions that he wanted. He has not overcharged his employers for hours 
that he did not work since this incident. (Tr. 34-40; Gov 2) 
 
There is nothing in the record from the other government agency indicating the 
basis for denying his access to SCI in 2006. In fact, there is nothing in the record from 
the other government agency verifying that Applicant’s access to SCI was denied in 
2006.  
 
Applicant worked for two-and-a-half years with access to SECRET information 
without incident. In December 2009, he accepted his current position for better 
opportunities. (Tr. 45) A performance evaluation covering the period December 1, 2008 
to November 20, 2009, states that he meets or exceeds standards. (AE A) 
 
A friend who has known him since 2000 wrote a letter indicating that Applicant is 
one of the most brilliant, helpful, honest, and generous individuals that she has ever 
met. She describes him as an “exceptionally honest individual with a lot of integrity.” 
She trusts him and states he is the first to offer a helping hand to anyone who needs it. 
(AE B) Another friend has known him for ten years. He has never observed any 
behavior that he thought would disqualify him for a security clearance. He describes 
Applicant, “as an honest and sincere person of high character and strong professional 
integrity.” (AE C) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
 
 
4
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The following personal conduct disqualifying conditions potentially apply to the 
facts of this case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of 
 
 
 
5
proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or 
other government protected information; (2) disruptive, violent, or other 
inappropriate behavior in the workplace; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources).  
 
 AG ¶¶ 16(d)(3) and 16(d)(4) apply because Applicant admits that between May 
2002 and March 2003, he claimed that he worked more hours than he did at his former 
employers. He also admits to exaggerating the hours that he falsely claimed he worked 
to the polygrapher in hopes that he would pass the polygraph test. His conduct reveals 
a pattern of dishonesty and significant misuse of his employer’s time and resources.   
 
 SOR ¶1.a is found for Applicant. While Applicant admits that from 2001 to 2002 
he viewed pornographic e-mails on his work computer, he opened these e-mails 
inadvertently and immediately deleted them when he saw them. There is no evidence 
that he downloaded pornographic files to his work computer. Applicant was 
conscientious during his pre-polygraph interview when he disclosed this information. 
Based on the record evidence, Applicant’s conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a does not raise 
a security issue under personal conduct.  
  
 The following personal conduct mitigating condition applies to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) applies because the conduct which was the basis for denying SCI 
access for Applicant happened between May 2002 and March 2003, over seven years 
ago. It does not cast doubt on Applicant’s present reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. If anything, Applicant appears to overcompensate in the honesty department. 
After his TS/SCI access was denied, Applicant still had access to SECRET information 
and handled SECRET documents without any security incidents. He no longer claims 
hours for work that he has not performed. The security concerns raised under personal 
conduct are mitigated.   
  
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information Technology 
Systems is set out in AG ¶ 39 which states,  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
 
 
 
6
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 Under Guideline M, disqualifying condition AG ¶ 40(e) (unauthorized use of a 
government or other information technology system) potentially applies in Applicant’s 
case with respect to SOR ¶1.a. I find that it does not apply. Although Applicant admitted 
to opening e-mails that contained sexually explicit content on his work computer during 
work hours, additional clarification during the hearing revealed that Applicant   
inadvertently opened these e-mails and was unaware of the content. Once he 
discovered the content of the e-mails, he immediately deleted them. He did not actively 
seek out files containing sexually explicit material. While not privy to the basis of the 
other government agency’s denial of Applicant’s access to SCI in 2006, I found him to 
be credible during the hearing. The issue raised under the Use of Information 
Technology Systems concern is found for Applicant. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. While Applicant’s explanation for the 
reason he was denied access to SCI was unusual, it was credible. There is nothing in 
the record which contradicts his testimony. He has not attempted to claim more hours 
than he actually worked since March 2003. He has learned a lesson. His performance 
evaluation and his reference letters support the premise that there is nothing in 
Appellant’s behavior or character which would raise doubts about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  The personal conduct concerns are mitigated. The 
Government did not meet its burden of proof to raise the Use of Information Technology 
concern. 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-c:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
    
           Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
