1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-05349
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 4, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On November 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline
H for Applicant. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 8, 2009, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing (Item 4),
and he requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  On
January 12, 2010, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered six documentary exhibits. (Items 1-6.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on February 18, 2010. Applicant
submitted timely an additional one page document, which has been marked as Item A,
2
and entered into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on March 11, 2010.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access
to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a. and 1.b. The admitted
allegations are incorporated herein as a finding of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted additional document, and the FORM, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 31 years old. He is married and has no children. Applicant is
employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in
connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
The SOR lists two allegations (1.a. and 1.b.) under Adjudicative Guideline H. The
allegations will be reviewed in the order that they were listed on the SOR. 
1.a. The SOR alleges, and Applicant has admitted in his RSOR (Item 4), that
Applicant “used marijuana, with varying frequency, from approximately 2003 until at
least April 2009.”
When Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application (SCA) on
September 15, 2009, he indicated that he had used marijuana from April 2002 to April
2009. (Item 5.) He identified his usage as “Recreational use, I’ve used it on and off in
social environments for the past 7 years. I would estimate that the number of times I
used it is less than 100.” Under Additional comments he added, “I have recently quite
[sic] using, but I did make an exception when I was on my honeymoon and we visited
Amsterdam in April 2009.” 
During an interview with a Department of Defense investigator on June 24, 2009,
(Item 6), Applicant stated that he first used marijuana when he was 15 years old in
approximately 1993, and he began using it around 3 times a month. Applicant had a
brief six month abstention period in 1996. Thereafter he used marijuana approximately
monthly until 2004, and then about bi-monthly until the spring of 2008. He also informed
the investigator that his most recent marijuana usage included a time in the fall of 2008
before a football game, in spring 2009 at his bachelor party, and in April 2009 while he
was on his honeymoon.
In the interview, Applicant also stated that he does still see his friends, with
whom he used to use marijuana, about four times a year. However, he explained that
3
he now has the intention to stop using marijuana, as he needs to grow up since he is
now married and plans to have children. 
In his SCA, Applicant indicted that he has been employed by his current
employer since July 2006. (Item 5.) Therefore, an additional concern is that Applicant
was using marijuana on numerous occasions after he began in his current employment. 
1.b. The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR (Item 4), that
Applicant “purchased marijuana.” Applicant further stated in Item 4 that the “purchase of
marijuana occurred over six years ago in college.” In Item 6, he described his purchase
as giving money to friends who would then purchase the marijuana from an unknown
person. 
In his post FORM submission (Item A), dated January 25, 2010, Applicant wrote
that “there were other long periods of abstention” from marijuana, although he did not
list any of these periods. He also wrote that he felt it was wrong to consider his drug
usage “prior to 2002 as this is outside of the scope of the 7 year evaluation.” However,
in considering the potential for Applicant’s future drug usage,  I find his entire drug use
history to be relevant and worthy of consideration.  
Finally, Applicant did not submit documentation or other evidence from any other
individual, who knows Applicant, has worked with him, or has any other relevant
evidence about his character. Nor was any documentation offered about Applicant’s
current or past employment, or anything else that could potentially give me insight about
his honesty, credibility or trustworthiness. Therefore, this decision had to be based
entirely on Applicant’s written statements, since he did not appear before me at a
hearing. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
4
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG ¶ 24:  
      Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgement and because it raises questions about a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case.
Applicant's improper and illegal drug abuse, specifically the use of marijuana for many
years, is of great concern, especially in light of his desire to have access to the nation's
secrets. Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to his illegal substance abuse clearly falls
within Drug Involvement ¶ 25 (a) “any drug abuse” and (c) “illegal drug possession,
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution.” It also is
disturbing that Applicant has used marijuana during the period that he has been working
for his current employer since July 2006.
5
In reviewing the mitigating conditions, I conclude that ¶ 26(a) “the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur again” has not been established in this case, because Applicant
used marijuana from 1995 to 2009, as frequently as three times a month, for many
years, he continued using marijuana  after he became employed at his current
employer, and he still associates with friends with whom he used marijuana.  I also find
that (b) “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future” is not applicable, as
there has been no independent evidence introduced to establish Applicant’s veracity or
credibility regarding his intent not to abuse drugs in the future. 
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has used illegal drugs for many years under Guideline H. Applicant, on the other hand,
has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation sufficient
to overcome the Government's case against him.  Applicant did indicate that he did not
intend to use any illegal substance in the future. However, his long drug usage, the lack
of any independent evidence as to Applicant’s character, plus the absence of
Applicant’s testimony, made his stated intention less than credible or persuasive.
Accordingly, Guideline H of the SOR is concluded against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the disqualifying conditions apply and the mitigating conditions do not
apply, together with the lack of any independent evidence of Applicant’s credibility, I find
that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
