                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07395 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement, but failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
G, Alcohol Consumption and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines G, H, and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 18, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 5, 2010. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 9, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on May 25, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant and one witness testified on 
his behalf. He offered Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 2, 2010.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel withdrew ¶ 1.d of the SOR. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 2.a, 2.b, 2.d, and 3.a. He denied the 
remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He attended vocational school as part of high school. 
He was married from 1997 to June 2003. He has no children. He worked in a casino 
from 1996 to 2007, until he was laid off. He has been employed by a federal contractor 
since May 2009.1  
 
 Applicant first used marijuana when he was in high school. He used it from 
approximately 1980 sometime in 2007. He believes he likely used it at his home. Using 
illegal drugs while working in a casino was not permitted. He stated that he disclosed 
his use to his former employer when he applied for the required license to work in a 
casino. He received his license in 1998. He was required to take a drug test during the 
initial employment process and did not have to take another one once he was 
employed. He stated he used marijuana about once a month on average and he did not 
purchase the drug. He did not use any other illegal drugs.2  
 
 In February 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of 
marijuana. He pled guilty to the offense. He stated the drugs were in his car. His driver’s 
license was suspended for six months and he was fined $1,200.3 
 
 In September 2000, Applicant was charged with possession of paraphernalia. He 
does not recall the offense.4  
 
1 Tr. 24-27. 
 
2 Tr. 26, 28-35, 49-50. 
 
3 Tr. 35-37, 46. 
 
4 Tr. 37; GE 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 In March 1982, Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana. He 
admitted he had been using marijuana that day. He stated the charge was later 
dropped.5  
 
 In March 1999, Applicant was charged with unlawful possession of a weapon and 
receiving stolen property, both felonies. He was driving and picked up two people, his 
friend, and a friend of his friend. He was stopped by the police and the other friend 
placed a hand gun underneath the seat of the car. The gun was stolen. Applicant stated 
he pleaded no contest to the charge and was awarded one year of probation. However, 
the records show he was found guilty of possession of a hand gun, a felony. He was 
sentenced to four years in jail, all of which was suspended. Applicant stated he thought 
he pleaded guilty to a lesser offense.6 
 
 In December 2006, Applicant was arrested for Driving Under the Influence of 
Alcohol (DUI). It was Christmas day and he was at a friend’s house where he had been 
drinking alcohol. He was fined and lost his license for three months. He attended group 
alcohol counseling three to four times a week. It was not court ordered. He did not go to 
court for this offense until June 11, 2008. He was found guilty of Operating under the 
Influence of Liquor or Drugs. His license was suspended for two years. He is required to 
attend a state mandated alcohol program, but because there are no vacancies, he has 
to wait to attend.7  
  
 Applicant continued to drink alcohol after his December 2006 DUI arrest. On 
October 1, 2008, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the Influence 
of Alcohol. He paid a fine and his license is suspended for three years. He attended a 
residential alcohol rehabilitation program after this incident. The state paid for the 
detoxification program. He received a scholarship for part of the rehabilitation program, 
and he paid the remaining amount. He stayed in a halfway house for about five months. 
He submitted to alcohol tests two to three times a week. He stated that he was 
diagnosed as an alcoholic. He admitted he was told by the staff personnel he should 
abstain from drinking alcohol. He was advised during the alcohol rehabilitation program 
that he should never drink alcohol again. He explained that one of the requirements to 
remain in the rehabilitation program was he was not permitted to drink any alcohol.8  
 
Applicant stated both his grandfather and father were alcoholics and he believes 
he is one too. He saw a few doctors about his alcohol problems. At one point he took 
antabuse. Applicant continues to consume alcohol. His last drink was four or five days 
prior to the hearing. He stated he has two glasses of wine with dinner, a red and a white 
glass. He estimated he drinks twice a week, usually on the weekend. He attends 
5 Tr. 37-38. 
 
6 Tr. 38-45; GE 3, 4. 
 
7 Tr. 50-58, 63. 
 
8 Tr. 58-71; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or Narcotics Anonymous meetings. He does not have a 
sponsor. The reason he stated was: “Because I believe he wouldn’t agree with me 
drinking on occasion.”9  
 
 Applicant stated he believed he likely drank alcohol and drove a car other times, 
but did not get caught. He has not driven since his driver’s license was suspended. He 
drinks at home. He walks to the store to buy his alcohol. He estimated in 2006, he was 
drinking a bottle of wine a day. He stated he has taken every step possible to quit 
drinking. He does not abstain and he would like to stop, but admitted it is tough. 
Applicant has struggled with alcohol his whole life and it will always be there and he 
admitted he has to learn to do without it. He knows he has a problem and he is ready to 
address it and has been addressing it. He does not believe his alcohol problems have 
affected his work. His intent is to quit drinking and he is trying to stop.10  
 
 In response to interrogatories dated December 11, 2009, Applicant indicated he 
did not currently drink alcoholic beverages. He indicated he did not intend to drink 
alcoholic beverages in the future. He indicated that he was participating in Alcoholics 
Anonymous to abstain from drinking alcohol and he was attending meetings on a 
weekly basis and participating in the 12-step program.11 
 
 A character witness testified on Applicant’s behalf. He has known him for 35 
years and has had both personal and professional contact. He was aware that Applicant 
got in trouble from time to time, but he believes he has taken steps to get on “the 
straight and narrow.” He has also taken steps to become responsible and be an 
upstanding member of the community.12  
 
 I have considered all of the character statements provided by Applicant. The 
letters describe Applicant as honorable, honest, and dependable. He is always willing to 
help people. He is considered a good man who made mistakes. He is a conscientious 
and responsible employee, who is motivated and a natural leader.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are considered in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
9 Tr. 23, 54-57, 68-70. 
 
10 Tr. 22, 71-73. 
 
11 GE 2. 
 
12 Tr. 83-87. 
 
13 AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
6 
 
 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 and conclude 
the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g. physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
Applicant was arrested twice for DUI. His first arrest was in December 2006. He 
was convicted of Operating Under the Influence of Liquor or Drugs on June 11, 2008. 
Four months later he was arrested again for DUI and was found guilty of the offense. 
Applicant entered a rehabilitation program, but insufficient evidence was provided 
regarding the qualifications of the personnel at the program to apply AG ¶ 22 (d) or (f). 
Therefore, I find AG ¶ 22(a) applies. 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and conclude the 
following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser”); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with a treatment recommendation, such as 
participation in meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization 
and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
profession or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
Applicant referred himself for alcohol treatment after his second alcohol-related 
driving incident in October 2008. He admitted he was diagnosed as an alcoholic and 
 
7 
 
 
was told to abstain from drinking alcohol in the future. He completed the program in 
March 2009. When he answered his interrogatories in December 2009, he stated he 
had abstained from drinking alcohol and did not intend to drink in the future. He also 
indicated he was attending AA and completing the 12-step program. Since then he has 
resumed drinking alcohol. He does not have a sponsor at AA because he knows the 
sponsor will tell him to abstain from drinking. He continues to struggle with alcohol. He 
last drank alcohol four or five days prior to his hearing.  He completed the treatment 
program. He acknowledges he is an alcoholic. I cannot find AG ¶ 23(a) applies because 
Applicant continues to drink alcohol and I am not convinced that his alcohol-related 
problems are unlikely to recur. Although Applicant acknowledges his alcoholism he has 
not provided sufficient evidence to conclude he has overcome this problem and 
established a pattern of abstinence. Therefore, AG ¶ 23(b) does not apply. Applicant 
successfully completed an alcohol rehabilitation program, but has not abstained from 
consuming alcohol as was recommended by the program. Although he participates in 
AA, he continues to drink. It appears in December 2009, he was attempting to abstain 
from consuming alcohol and was a full participant in the 12-step program. He has 
regressed and is consuming alcohol and does not have an AA sponsor for that reason. 
It appears Applicant is sliding back into his pattern of alcohol consumption. I find AG ¶ 
23(d) does not apply. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 
and conclude the following have been raised: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 1980 to 2007. He 
possessed marijuana during that time and was charged with possession of marijuana in 
 
8 
 
 
2004 and 1982. He was charged with possession of paraphernalia in 2000. I find the 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 
26. The following two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant has not used illegal drugs since 2007. He regularly used marijuana 
while working at a casino, which was against company policy. It has been three years 
since his last use. I find he has abstained from illegal drug abuse for an appropriate 
period. I find AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offense; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Appellant has an extensive criminal history, to include a felony conviction, and 
convictions for Operating Under the Influence of Liquor or Drugs a DUI conviction, and 
several drug related arrests. I find both of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 
9 
 
 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
 Appellant has a significant criminal record including a felony conviction for 
possession of a hand gun. Most of his arrests and convictions are substance abuse 
related. He was convicted of Operating Under the Influence of Liquor or Drugs on June 
11, 2008, and four months later was arrested for DUI. Because Applicant continues to 
consume alcohol, I do not believe enough time has elapsed to conclude that his criminal 
conduct is unlikely to recur. It has been less than two years since his last conviction. 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude the circumstances were unusual. Applicant 
sought treatment for his alcohol problems, but he continues to consume it, even though 
he was advised to abstain. There is insufficient evidence to conclude he is successfully 
rehabilitated. Therefore, I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept 
.        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a history of substance 
abuse. He attended a rehabilitation program and abstained from consuming alcohol for 
a period, but has resumed. It appears he stopped using illegal drugs in 2007. Applicant 
is conscious of his daily struggle with alcohol and its impact on his life. Until he 
establishes a significant period of abstinence, it is likely to continue to have a negative 
impact on his life. At this time, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
 
10 
 
 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Therefore, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under the guideline for Drug Involvement, but 
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for Alcohol 
Consumption and Criminal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
