                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05547  
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carolyn H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on March 24, 2009, to request a security clearance required as part of his 
employment with a defense contractor (Item 5). After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 See Executive Order 10865, as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 
On March 8, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant received the SOR on March 18, 2010. (Item 3) He signed his notarized 
Answer on March 19, 2010 (Item 4), and requested a decision without a hearing. In his 
Answer, Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR.2 On April 16, 2010, DOHA 
Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material (FORM) in support of the 
Government’s preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request to be granted a security 
clearance. The FORM contained eight documents, identified as Items 1 through 8. The 
FORM and attached Items were forwarded on April 20, 2010, and received by Applicant 
on May 6, 2010. He was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to 
respond. DOHA received his Reply on May 17, 2010 (Reply). The case was assigned to 
me on June 7, 2010, for an administrative decision based on the written record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated in this decision 
as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, the FORM, and Applicant’s 
Reply to the FORM, I make the following additional factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He is a high-school graduate, and since 2001, he has 
held a series of administrative positions. Some of these positions were held through 
temporary staffing agencies, and each lasted from a few months to 18 months. He 
completed a security clearance application in relation to an administrative position with 
a defense contractor in January 2009. Although his security clearance application does 
not list any periods of unemployment, he told the investigator at his security interview in 
May 2009, that he was unemployed at that time and had not worked since June 2008. 
He was unemployed as of the date of his Reply in May 2010. (Items 5, 6; Reply) 
 
 Applicant is single and has no children. He lives with relatives and uses public 
transportation. He contributes to his relatives’ expenses under an informal arrangement. 
The record contains no financial information on his income, expenses, or net remainder 
after expenses. (Item 6) 
 
 The SOR alleges six debts, totaling $38,545, which became delinquent between 
2005 and 2007. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each debt, but noted that 
the amount alleged in each allegation was not correct; he did not provide any further 
information or documentation to support this claim. In his response to the FORM, 
Applicant elaborated on his claim that the amounts owed were incorrect. (Items 7, 8) 
The SOR lists the following debts: 
 
2 In his March 2010Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all six allegations, 1.a. through 1.f. However, 
in his reply to the FORM two months later, Applicant denied allegations 1.c. and 1.e. I consider 
allegations 1.c. and 1.e. denied. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
- Allegation 1.a.: debt of $3,760 owed to bank A. Applicant states that he 
owes only $2,000. (Reply)  
 
- Allegations 1.b., 1.c., and 1.e.: three debts owed to bank B for $3,013, 
$6,562, and $8,687 (respectively), totaling $18,262. Applicant claims that 
he has only one delinquent account with this bank, and does not 
recognize the other two accounts. He states that he currently owes 
$15,000 to bank B. (Reply) 
 
- Allegation 1.d.: debt formerly owed to bank C, currently held by a 
collection agency, for $6,777. Applicant contends that he owes $3,000. 
(Reply)  
 
- Allegation 1.f.: debt formerly owed to bank D, currently held by a 
collection agency, for $9,746. Applicant states that he owes $5,000. 
(Reply)  
 
 In his Reply, Applicant opined that collection agencies engage in “excessive 
credit practices” that caused the amount he owes to be “inflated.” He also noted that he 
made payments on his debts when he was working, even though his positions were 
temporary. He did not provide documentation to support these debt payments. He 
stated that he is willing to pay his debts, and has worked with a law firm to help him do 
so. The record contains no additional information on any agreement he might have with 
this law firm, or any payments plans or settlements that may have been obtained by the 
firm. (Item 6; Reply) 
 
 During Applicant's security interview, the agent noted that Applicant had no 
detailed knowledge of any of the debts, was unaware of how to dispute debts, or that he 
could make small payments towards his debts. Applicant informed the agent that, when 
he is employed, he would make payments on the debts he recognizes. (Item 6) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the AG, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information.  
 
3 Directive § 6.3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the  
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may 
lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The record evidence shows that Applicant’s substantial debts became delinquent 
between 2005 and 2007 and remain delinquent. He is willing to pay them, but because 
of underemployment and unemployment, he has been unable to do so. Disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶19(c) (a 
history of not meeting financial obligations) apply.  
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 Id. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 
 Under AG ¶20, the following potentially mitigating conditions are relevant:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;  
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 As of the date the SOR was issued, Applicant had more than $38,000 in 
delinquent debt. His financial problems are not in the distant past, because these debts 
remain unpaid. Moreover, as it appears that Applicant has been unemployed for 
approximately two years, it is likely that he be not be able to resolve these 
delinquencies in the foreseeable future. AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) may be relevant because Applicant has worked only temporary and 
short-term jobs for the past ten years. However, I cannot determine from the record 
whether this situation results from lack of diligence on Applicant's part, or from 
circumstances beyond his control. In addition, Applicant has not provided 
documentation of reasonable efforts to deal with his debts. Applicant claims that he 
worked with a law firm on resolving his debts, but the record contains no substantiation 
of that claim. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) cannot be applied.  
 
 Applicant states that he owes less on each debt than alleged in the SOR. 
However, he failed to supply evidence to support his claim. Therefore, I cannot 
determine whether the basis for his contention is reasonable. Applicant provided no 
documentation supporting his statement that he made payments on his debts, that he 
has payment plans in place, or that the balances are, in fact, lower than the alleged 
amounts. There is no evidence indicating that Applicant has made any good-faith efforts 
to resolve his debts. The Appeal Board defines a “good-faith effort: as acting in a way 
that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty and adherence to duty or obligation.7 
Promises to act in the future are insufficient to constitute good-faith efforts. An applicant 
is not required to have paid every debt, but he or she must show a reasonable plan for 
repayment and actions to support the plan. Although Applicant promises to pay his 
7 ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004). 
 
6 
 
 
debts when he is able, he provided no documentation supporting a plan to do so. AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Applicant is a mature adult of 52 years. For almost ten years, he has had 
temporary positions of short duration, which resulted in his accumulation of significant 
debt. Applicant made several claims of mitigation in his Reply: (1) that he has made 
payments on his debts; (2) that he owes about half the alleged amount on each debt; 
and (3) that he has worked with a law firm to help him resolve his debts. However, 
Applicant requested an administrative determination, which requires reliance on the 
written record. Here, Applicant failed to submit any written evidence about his past 
efforts to address his delinquent debts, or his future plans to satisfy them. He did not 
provide documentation to substantiate his claims of debt payments, financial 
counseling, or current balances on each debt. He did not provide information about his 
current financial situation including his income, his expenses, or his net monthly 
remainder. Although he states that he is willing to pay his creditors, there is no evidence 
of a concrete plan to do so, nor any steps taken in that direction. He mentions that he 
“can give references of Vice Presidents of Companies, Directors, Pastors, Professional 
Individuals, and Company Managers who will vouch for my character” but did not 
provide any references. He noted that his job performance was rated “outstanding,” but 
did not supply performance evaluations. The written record is inadequate to find for the 
Applicant under Guideline F.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from the cited guideline. A fair and commonsense assessment of the 
available information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he 
has not satisfied the doubts raised by his substantial indebtedness. Such doubts must 
be resolved in favor of the national interest. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.f.  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
