                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01509 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s questionable behavior is mitigated by the passage of time, his 
character reputation, remorse, and his 22 years of honorable service which includes 
combat service. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted security clearance applications on November 5, 2008 and 
July 23, 2009. On September 22, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended, Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended, and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective within DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and 
Guideline D (Sexual Behavior). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and it recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted 
or denied. 
 
On October 9, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 19, 
2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 5, 2010, scheduling a hearing for 
March 25, 2010. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 and 2, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 31, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations. His admissions are 
incorporated here as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, 
and having considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old retired U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel working for a 
defense contractor. He graduated from college in 1988, and received a Civil 
Engineering degree. Applicant married his wife in 1988, and they have two sons, ages 
19 and 15. He completed his master’s degree in Aeronautical Science in 1998. 
Applicant was commissioned in 1988, and served in the Air Force until his retirement in 
November 2008. The Air Force characterized his service as honorable. Applicant had a 
distinguished flying career and graduated from the Air Force’s Fighter Weapons School. 
Moreover, he was commended twice with the Distinguished Flying Cross for Heroism 
for flying combat missions during Operation Iraqi Freedom. He also flew combat 
missions during Operation Southern Watch. While in the service, Applicant possessed a 
top secret security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information. 
There is no evidence that he ever mishandled, compromised, or caused others to 
compromise classified information. 
 
In January 2007, Applicant was a lieutenant colonel on active duty assigned for 
four months to work with the U.S. Military Assistance Group in a U.S. Embassy in a 
foreign country. Shortly after his arrival, Applicant established a sexual relationship with 
a woman from the foreign country that lasted approximately three weeks. During the 
relationship, he illegally used a U.S. Embassy car and driver to go to a resort during a 
weekend trip with another military member and two women from the foreign country. He 
provided meals and a tip to the driver for his services.  
 
In April 2007, Applicant established another sexual relationship with a second 
woman from the foreign country that lasted approximately two months. He shared his 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
apartment with the woman. After leaving the country in May 2007, he continued to have 
infrequent telephone contact with the woman for approximately six months. Applicant 
also admitted that in 1995, while serving in the Air Force and in temporary duty to 
another country, he engaged in a sexual relationship with a woman from that foreign 
country. Applicant has had no contact with any of the women since 2007.  
 
Applicant knew or should have known that engaging in an adulterous relationship 
was a violation of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), and that his improper 
use of an Embassy vehicle and driver for personal reasons was prohibited. Moreover, 
he knew or should have known that his relationship with a foreign national placed the 
security of his mission and unit at risk. He also placed himself in a vulnerable position to 
be extorted. In February 2008, Applicant received a general officer letter of reprimand 
for adultery, a violation of Article 134, UCMJ, and for his illegal use of the Embassy car 
and driver. Applicant also was reprimanded for paying off the driver to keep him quiet.1 
The letter of reprimand ended his promising career. 
 
During the course of the Air Force Office of Special Investigations (OSI) 
investigation (from around September 2007 to February 2008) and until August 2008, 
Applicant was not relieved from duty and he was allowed to continue working with 
classified information at the top secret level. Applicant’s supervisors did not consider 
him to be a security risk because of his character, performance, distinguished service 
record, and his full cooperation with the investigators. (AE 2) On August 27, 2008, the 
Air Force Central Adjudication Facility issued Applicant a memorandum of intent to 
revoke his eligibility for access to classified information. The memorandum suspended 
Applicant’s access to classified information. Applicant’s retirement in November 2008, 
prevented a full adjudication of the proceedings. 
 
Applicant was hired by his current employer, a defense contractor, in July 2008, 
to start working after his retirement, in November 2008. After his access to classified 
information was suspended, he immediately disclosed to his employer the facts and 
circumstances surrounding the suspension. He worked full-time for his employer until 
October 2009, when he was placed on leave without pay pending the adjudication of his 
security clearance. (AE 1) In October 2009, Applicant started working on a dual 
master’s degree in business administration and international relations. He expects to 
graduate in 2011. 
 
Applicant has kept his family in the dark about his misconduct and the 
suspension of his security clearance. At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged that his 
family’s lack of knowledge leaves him vulnerable to possible coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. In late 2008, Applicant sought counseling from his Catholic priest. He is trying to 
rectify and strengthen his commitment to his marriage. The priest advised him not to 
disclose to his wife his adulterous relationships in order to protect his marriage. (Tr. 71) 
 
1 Applicant provided meals and tipped the driver for his services at the time the services were performed. 
The record evidence does not support the conclusion that Applicant attempted to obstruct justice. 
Applicant was not reprimanded for obstruction of justice, nor is that allegation made in the SOR. 
 
4 
 
 
 
At his hearing, Applicant credibly and contritely accepted full responsibility for 
what he described as “his irresponsible, selfish, and immoral behavior.” He also 
apologized for placing his unit and himself in a compromising position. He credibly 
stated that he will never let it happen again. He promised his behavior will never cause 
his trustworthiness and judgment to be questioned again. Applicant highlighted his 
distinguished Air Force service, particularly, his 20 years handling classified information 
with no security violations, and his combat deployments when he honorably served the 
United States risking his life for national security and the defense of the United States. 
Applicant credibly testified that if anyone attempted to blackmail him with his 
misconduct, he would disclose the blackmail attempt to his security officer and his wife.  
 
Applicant’s Air Force supervisor at the time of the OSI investigation and his 
current supervisor provided strong statements on his behalf. Both references consider 
Applicant to be honest and trustworthy. Except for the misconduct reflected on the SOR, 
he was commended for his judgment, maturity, work ethic, and overall performance. His 
references recommended that he receive access to classified information. 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
 
5 
 
 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant was an Air Force active duty lieutenant colonel when he engaged in 
three adulterous relationships while on temporary duty to foreign countries in 1995, and 
twice in 2007. He also improperly used an Embassy car and driver for personal 
reasons. His behavior placed the security of his mission and unit at risk. He also placed 
himself in a vulnerable position to be blackmailed. As a result of his misconduct, his 
clearance was suspended. 
 
6 
 
 
 
Applicant’s behavior triggers the applicability of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 
16(c): “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, 
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations;” and AG ¶ 16(e): “personal conduct, or concealment of 
information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in a foreign 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that 
country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for exploitation or 
pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or other group.” 
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
 
7 
 
 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find that AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 
and 17(e) all apply, at least in part, to the facts of this case. Applicant’s questionable 
behavior occurred three years ago. Because he was a senior military officer, I do not 
consider his offenses minor. Notwithstanding, there is no evidence that he has been 
involved in similar activity since 2007, or that he has continued his association with the 
foreign women. He is no longer in the service. 
 
Applicant credibly expressed remorse for his behavior and has learned his 
lesson. His behavior ended his promising Air Force career and subjected him to the 
security clearance process. He is now clearly aware of the possible consequences of 
his actions and what could happen if he engages in future misconduct. He 
acknowledged his behavior, obtained counseling, and has taken positive steps to 
reduce his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
I specifically considered that Applicant could be vulnerable to exploitation 
because he has not told his family about his misconduct and the suspension of his 
clearance. I also considered Applicant’s 20-year-service record and track record 
complying with security regulations and procedures, the trust placed on him by his 
military supervisors when they allowed him to continue working with classified 
information while under investigation, and his significant contributions to the United 
States risking his life flying combat missions. On balance, I find that Applicant can be 
trusted to disclose to U.S. authorities if someone attempts to extort or pressure him. 
Considering the evidence as a whole, I find his questionable behavior is unlikely to 
recur, and it currently does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment.  
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior,  
 
AG ¶ 12 describes the concern about sexual behavior: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 provides four conditions relating to sexual behavior that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
8 
 
 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
In 1995, and twice in 2007, Applicant engaged in adulterous relationships while 
serving on active duty and assigned in temporary duty to foreign countries. His behavior 
constituted a criminal offense under the UCMJ, and placed him in a vulnerable position 
to be pressured. He is still vulnerable to coercion because his family members are not 
aware of his past behavior. Applicant receives credit for cooperating with Government 
investigators, disclosing the information to his employer, and for his candid testimony 
during his hearing; however, that does not fully eliminate his vulnerability concerns.  
 
Applicant was involved in high risk sexual behavior because he engaged in three 
adulterous relationships while on active duty and assigned on temporary duty to foreign 
countries. He knew or should have known that such behavior was a violation of the 
UCMJ. Moreover, he knew or should have known that his relationship with a foreign 
national placed the security of his mission and unit at risk. He also placed himself in a 
vulnerable position to be pressured. His sexual behavior shows a lack of judgment. AG 
¶¶ 13(a), 13(c), and 13(d) apply and create a concern.  
 
AG ¶ 14 lists four conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 AG ¶ 14(a) does not apply to this case. Concerning AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(c), the 
government cross-alleged the conduct involved in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. The analysis 
and comments contained in the Personal Conduct discussions, supra, are incorporated 
under this subheading.  
 
9 
 
 
 
Applicant’s questionable behavior occurred three years ago, while he was in the 
service, and on temporary duty. There is no evidence that he has been involved in 
similar behavior since 2007, or that he has continued his association with the foreign 
women. He is no longer in the service. 
 
Applicant credibly expressed remorse for his behavior. I believe he has learned 
his lesson. His behavior ended his promising Air Force career and subjected him to the 
possible revocation of his security clearance. He is now clearly aware of the possible 
consequences of his actions and what could happen if he engages in similar future 
sexual behavior. He acknowledged his behavior, obtained counseling, and has taken 
positive steps to reduce his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
I specifically considered that Applicant could be vulnerable to exploitation 
because he has not told his family about his misconduct and the suspension of his 
clearance. I also considered Applicant’s 20-year-service record and track record 
complying with security regulations and procedures, the trust placed on him by his 
military supervisors when they allowed him to continue working with classified 
information while under investigation, and his significant contributions to the United 
States risking his life flying combat missions. On balance, I find that Applicant can be 
trusted to disclose to U.S. authorities if someone attempts to pressure him. Considering 
the evidence as a whole, I find his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur, and it 
currently does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment.  
 
 Applicant’s evidence shows that after 2007, he was able to continue a normal life 
with his family, was successful at work with the Air Force, handled classified information 
until August 2009, and has recently continued his advance education. These factors 
indicate that his prior questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. I also find Applicant was 
candid during his testimony. AG ¶¶ 14(b), (c), and (d) partially apply to his case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
10 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and D in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and well-
educated man. Except for the misconduct addressed in this decision, there is no 
evidence of any other blemishes on Applicant’s behavior, or that he has otherwise failed 
to follow rules and regulations, or violated security procedures.  
 
Applicant has acknowledged his inappropriate behavior and expressed sincere 
remorse for his actions. He accepted full responsibility for his “irresponsible, selfish, and 
immoral behavior.” He also apologized for placing his unit and himself in a 
compromising position. He credibly stated that he will never let it happen again, and 
vowed his conduct will never cause his trustworthiness and judgment to be questioned 
again.  
 
Applicant had a distinguished 20-year career in the Air Force service. His service 
was characterized as honorable. He handled classified information during 20 years of 
service with no security violations. Applicant credibly testified that if anyone attempted 
to pressure him with his misconduct, he would disclose the pressure attempt to his 
security officer and his wife. I find that his character, service record, and his combat 
service provide a sufficient track record of past behavior to support a conclusion that it 
is likely that Applicant would disclose to proper authorities any attempted coercion, 
exploitation, or duress.  
 
He has reduced his vulnerability to exploitation or duress because of his 
cooperation with Government investigators, his full disclosure to his employer, and his 
candid participation during the DOHA security clearance process. He is considered to 
be honest and trustworthy. Except for the misconduct on this SOR, he was commended 
for his judgment, maturity, work ethic, and overall performance. His references 
recommended that he receive access to classified information. 
 
On balance, and after considering all the evidence, I conclude that Applicant’s 
favorable evidence is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
personal conduct and sexual behavior. Applicant’s favorable evidence outweighs his 
temporally remote questionable behavior. I believe he has learned from his mistakes 
and the security clearance process. He now understands what is required of him to 
maintain his eligibility for access to classified information. Overall, the record evidence 
convinces me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
