1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-02017
SSN: ----------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The record evidence
shows Applicant has a history of financial problems that are ongoing. In addition, in
2008, she pleaded guilty to the felony offense of cocaine possession, although
adjudication of guilt and sentencing were withheld based on her participation in a pretrial
diversion program. She completed the program and the criminal case was dismissed in
2009. There is insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security
concerns stemming from her financial problems and her relatively recent criminal history
record.  Accordingly, as explained in further detail below, this case is decided against
Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Tr. 46–50. 2
 Exhibit 2. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on November 24,1
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guidelines
known as Guideline J for criminal conduct and Guideline F for financial considerations.
The SOR also recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge to
decide whether to deny or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me January 25, 2010. The hearing took place April 6, 2010. The
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received April 13, 2010. 
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She is seeking to
obtain a security clearance for her current employment, which she began in April 2008,
as an aviation life support technician. She is divorced and has two minor children in her
household. 
Applicant’s employment history includes approximately 16 years of active duty
military service in the U.S. Army. She was granted early retirement in 1997. She retired
as a noncommissioned officer (pay grade E-6). She receives retired pay of about
$1,000 monthly.  
In 2007, Applicant was involved with a man who was selling cocaine out of her
home. Although she knew he was selling drugs, she did not know he was using her
home to do so.  In September 2007, the police executed a search warrant on2
Applicant’s home in which they found cocaine.  Applicant was arrested and placed in jail3
until released on a bond. Subsequently, she was charged with possession of cocaine, a
 Exhibits 3–7. 4
 Exhibit C (This exhibit, together with Applicant’s testimony, has enough detailed information to constitute5
proof of payment). 
 Exhibits A and B. 6
3
class C felony in this particular state. In February 2008, she pleaded guilty per a plea
bargain agreement that included a sentence of 23 months as well as her acceptance
into a pretrial diversion program. As a result, adjudication of guilt and sentencing were
withheld pending completion of the program. She successfully completed the program
and the court dismissed the criminal case in February 2009.  
Applicant has a history of financial problems that are ongoing.  The SOR alleged4
18 debts in some form of delinquency (for example, in collection, charged-off, past-due,
or in foreclosure). In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that all the debts were
delinquent except for two, which were being paid as agreed via allotment from her
military retired pay (SOR ¶¶ 2.m and 2.n). She explained that she was unable to
maintain payments and support her family at the same time. She points to a separation
in 2005 and divorce in 2007 as contributing circumstances. She also points to job loss in
October 2007, when she was fired after the company discovered her arrest. 
At hearing, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to establish that she paid nine
debts, some of which are not alleged in the SOR, for a total of about $1,475.  She is5
also making monthly payments on the two accounts alleged to be past due in SOR ¶¶
2.m and 2.n.  She was able to repay the nine debts in 2010 after receiving a federal6
income tax refund of about $6,000. From that money, she spent about $1,475 on debt
repayment; she spent $2,000 on a necessary car repair; she gave $600 to her mother;
and she spent the balance on her family. The debts alleged in the SOR are summarized
in the table below.  
Debts Status
SOR ¶ 2.a–$205 collection account. Paid in 2010. (Exhibit C)
SOR ¶ 2.b–$24 collection account. Unresolved.  
SOR ¶ 2.c–$92 collection account. Unresolved. 
SOR ¶ 2.d–$160 collection account. Paid in 2010. (Exhibit C)
SOR ¶ 2.e–$433 collection account. Unresolved. 
SOR ¶ 2.f–$45 collection account. Paid in 2010. (Exhibit C)
SOR ¶ 2.g–$1,036 charged-off account. Unresolved. 
SOR ¶ 2.h–$1,040 collection account. Unresolved. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a7
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.8
4
SOR ¶ 2.i–$33 collection account. Same as SOR ¶ 2.f. 
SOR ¶ 2.j–$226 collection account. Paid in 2010. (Exhibit C)
SOR ¶ 2.k–$12,598 charged-off account
(second mortgage).
Unresolved. 
SOR ¶ 2.l–$870 past-due student loan. Unresolved. 
SOR ¶¶ 2.m and 2.n–$1,107 and $1,331
past-due accounts.
Making monthly payments. (Exhibits A
and B)
SOR ¶ 2.o–$6,556 past-due mortgage
loan.
Foreclosure; status unknown and
unresolved. 
SOR ¶ 2.p–$727 collection account. Unresolved. 
SOR ¶ 2.q–$625 state tax lien. Unresolved. 
SOR ¶ 2.r–$74 collection account. Paid in 2010. (Exhibit C)
The several debts were found to be unresolved because Applicant did not produce
sufficient documentary evidence to determine their status.  
Applicant earns a current salary of $42,000. She has little money in the bank with
less than $20 in a savings account. She does not use or possess credit cards. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As7
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,8
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 15
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).16
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.17
5
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An9
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  10
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting11
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An12
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate13
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme14
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.15
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it17
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 30, 31, and 32 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 18
 AG ¶ 30. 19
 AG ¶ 31(c) (Allegations or admissions of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally20
charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.). 
 AG ¶ 32(a) – (e). 21
6
Analysis
Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  the suitability of an applicant may be18
questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a criminal history record
regardless of whether the criminal conduct at issue has been subject to prosecution and
adjudication in a court of law. The overall concern under Guideline J is that:
Criminal activity creates doubts about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  19
The record here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a criminal history
record. The evidence shows she was arrested for and charged with a felony-level drug
offense. Via a plea bargain in which she pleaded guilty, she obtained a disposition
through a pretrial diversion program. She successfully completed the program, and the
criminal case was dismissed in 2009. Although she may not have a formal conviction
under state law, her relatively recent criminal history record is of concern.   20
Under Guideline J, there are five conditions that may mitigate security
concerns.  Of those, the following were considered as applicable here:21
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement. 
Applicant’s criminal history record appears to be a one-time event that took place
due to her involvement with a man with whom she no longer associates. Moreover, the
event was handled through the criminal justice system, which deemed her suitable for a
pretrial diversion program. She successfully completed the program in 2009, and there
is no other evidence of criminal activity. Standing alone, I might be inclined to decide
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 22
 AG ¶ 18.  23
 AG ¶ 19(a).  24
 AG ¶ 19(c). 25
 AG ¶ 20 (a) – (f). 26
7
this one-time event in Applicant’s favor. But her criminal history record should be taken
together with her record of financial problems. 
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant22
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness, financial problems or difficulties, or financial irresponsibility. A security
concern typically exists due to significant unpaid debts. The overall concern under
Guideline F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  23
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
The record here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. This history raises concerns because it indicates inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within24 25
the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying
conditions.   
Under Guideline F, there are six conditions that may mitigate security concerns:26
(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).27
8
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Of those mitigating conditions, the most pertinent here are subparagraphs (b)
and (d). But the credit in mitigation is insufficient to overcome the security concerns.
Applicant is facing a large amount of delinquent debt that she has not addressed in any
meaningful way. Although she paid nine debts for a total of $1,475, she could have
used more of her tax refund to repay debt; some of the small debts could have easily
been repaid. In addition, Applicant has limited financial means with an annual income of
about $54,000 (salary plus retired pay). And she has essentially zero cash reserves,
which suggests she is living paycheck-to-paycheck. These circumstances make it
unlikely that she will be able to make forward progress in the near future without the
benefit of another windfall. Although I am persuaded Applicant is sincere and genuinely
wants to take care of her delinquent debts, the record is insufficient to make any safe
predictive judgments that Applicant will resolve the remaining debts anytime soon.     
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s ongoing
financial problems and her relatively recent criminal history record, when taken
together, justify current doubts about her judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.
Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, these doubts are resolved in favor
of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to
the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence. Nevertheless, Applicant27
did not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.
This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
9
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.b–2.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.g–2.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.j: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.k–2.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.m–2.n: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.o–2.q: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.r: For Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
