 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-01917 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On December 29, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 11, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On January 21, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 12, 2010, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing 13 Items, 
 
2 
 
 
and mailed Applicant a complete copy on March 16, 2010. Applicant received the 
FORM on March 22, 2010, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. Applicant did not submit any additional information. On June 2, 
2010, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations. Those admissions 
are incorporated in the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 41 years old. He is married and has four children. He has worked 
for a defense contractor since August 1989. He is a crane foreman. (Item 4.)  
 
 In January 2009, a government investigator interviewed Applicant to discuss two 
tax liens, delinquent credit accounts, and a December 2008 foreclosure. Applicant 
explained that he and his wife stopped paying their mortgage sometime in 2007 when 
her mortgage business closed and their income decreased. Around that time, he 
financially helped family members with unforeseen medical expenses and other 
emergencies. Both situations created additional financial difficulties for him. (Item 8 at 6-
7.) He told the investigator that he was resolving a credit card debt and making 
arrangements to settle other debts. His wife was negotiating a settlement with the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for the tax lien entered in 2009 and resolving the 2007 
state tax lien. (Id.) 
 
 In February 2009, the IRS sent a letter to Applicant and his wife advising them to 
file an Offer in Compromise to resolve the outstanding federal tax lien. (Item 3 at 3.) In 
May 2009, Applicant hired a lawyer to handle his mortgage problems. In September 
2009, Applicant executed a Loan Modification Agreement that required him to make 
monthly payments of $2,643, beginning on October 1, 2009.1 He asserted that his 
payments are current, but did not submit proof that he made those payments over the 
past several months. (Item 3.)  
 
 In July 2009, Applicant completed a set of Interrogatories, in which he 
acknowledged that the state tax lien for $1,676 was unresolved and anticipated 
consolidating the debt “with other debts next month.” (GE 10 at 2.) He reiterated his 
intention to consolidate a charge card debt and two other debts into a repayment 
agreement. (Id.) 
 
 In September 2009, Applicant spoke to a debt consolidation company over the 
telephone for assistance in resolving his debts. After the consult, the company informed 
                                                          
1According to the “Making Home Affordable” documents applicable to the Loan Modification 
Agreement, Applicant is required during the trial period payment plan to work with an approved housing 
counseling agency to create a budget and plan to reduce household debts. (Item 3 at 9.)  Applicant did 
not provide documentation that he has done that to date. 
 
3 
 
 
him that his budget was unable to accommodate a plan for repaying his delinquent 
debts.2 (Item 3 at 12, 13, 14.)  
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from January 2009,  March 2009, October 
2009, and March 2010, the SOR alleged seven delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$127,924, and consisting primarily of past due mortgage payments and unpaid taxes 
that started to become delinquent in March 2006.  
 
 In his January 2010 Answer, Applicant stated that his 2008 tax refund resolved 
the 2007 state tax lien of $1,676, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, but that he was waiting for 
verification. He answered that he was “applying for Offer in Compromise” to resolve the 
$45,014 federal tax lien, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He provided no evidence to corroborate 
his statements that he made the revised mortgage payments per the Loan Modification 
Agreement, in resolution of the unpaid mortgage amounts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and ¶ 
1.d.   
 
Applicant’s Answer acknowledged three debts and noted that he was unable to 
manage them because he could not establish a debt consolidation plan based on his 
limited income.3  The $658 credit card debt, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, remains unresolved. 
The $490 debt owed to a collections service agency, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, is 
unresolved. The $305 insurance company debt, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, is unresolved.   
 
 Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his recent job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
                                                          
2Applicant’s Answer referenced the date of contact with that agency as “9/14/2008,” but the 
exhibits submitted reference 2009 as the year of the contact. (Item 3 at 1.) 
 
3Applicant did not submit his monthly budget or any other documents related to his financial 
status.  
 
4 
 
 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The evidence established security concerns under two Guideline F disqualifying 
conditions; specifically, AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,@ and 
AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ Based on four CBRs and his 
admissions, Applicant has been unable or unwilling to satisfy debts that began accruing 
in March 2006. He demonstrated a four-year history of not meeting significant financial 
obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise these two disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of those security concerns. The guideline includes 
four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties in 
AG ¶ 20. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant’s financial delinquencies 
arose in 2006 and remain unresolved to date. The debts are ongoing and not isolated. 
Because there is insufficient evidence to support a finding that the delinquent 
indebtedness is unlikely to recur, this condition does not apply.   
 
AG & 20(b) states that it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant 
attributed his financial problems to unexpected family obligations and his wife’s 
business closing. Those may have been circumstances beyond his control; however, he 
did not offer evidence demonstrating that he attempted to act responsibly while the 
debts were accruing, or after they accrued, until 2009. This mitigating condition 
marginally applies.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows that Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant established no mitigation under these 
two provisions. He submitted evidence that he had one telephone session with a credit 
counseling service in September 2009, after which he learned that the company could 
not help him. That is some evidence of mitigation under AG & 20(c). However, he did 
not submit evidence indicating that his finances and delinquent debts are under control. 
He did not provide substantive evidence that he paid or established a repayment plan 
for any debt, including his tax liens or the smaller debts of $658, $490, and $305. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
6 
 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual with 
a long employment history with his employer. In January 2009, he learned of the 
government’s security concerns related to his financial obligations. In February 2009, 
the IRS advised him to file a form to resolve his large tax lien. In January 2010, he 
indicated that he was “applying for” a tax settlement, but provided no proof that he had 
filed the requested document. He stated in his Answer that he resolved a state tax lien 
with a 2008 refund, but had not received verification from the taxing agency. In his 
Answer, he asserted that he resolved his unpaid mortgage and began making payments 
on a revised payment amount in October 2009, but did not submit proof of any 
payments. After learning from one debt consolidation company in September 2009 that 
his current income would not accommodate delinquent debt payments, he did not take 
further steps to resolve the smaller debts. In March 2010, the government notified him in 
the FORM that his file lacked sufficient proof of the resolution of his debts and gave him 
30 days to file additional documents to support his request for a security clearance. He 
did not provide further information.  
 
Applicant has had over a year to substantiate his claims that he was resolving his 
delinquent financial obligations. He failed to demonstrate financial rehabilitation so a 
recurrence of his financial problems is likely. The record contains insufficient other 
evidence about his character, trustworthiness, or responsibility to mitigate these 
concerns or make their continuation less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:       Against Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
