 
 
 
 
1
                                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-06150 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
On June 11, 2009, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (e-QIP). On December 16, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 11, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On March 15, 2010, DOHA assigned the case 
to me. On March 24, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the case for April 
 
 
 
 
2
27, 2010. The case was heard as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. He offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E into evidence without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript on May 5, 2010.                                                         
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.s, and 1.u. He denied the allegations contained in ¶ 1.t, and offered an 
explanation. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and divorced. He was married from 1996 until 1998. He 
does not have children. In 1996, he earned a college degree in computer science and 
then started working as a computer programmer for his current employer, a defense 
contractor. He has worked steadily for this employer, except for three months in 2007 
when he received disability compensation after being involved in a motorcycle accident. 
(Tr. 20.) He held a Secret security clearance from the time of his initial employment until 
it was recently revoked pending this proceeding. 
 
 Applicant started accumulating significant credit card debt in 2007 when he 
began accepting credit card promotions to transfer balances from one card to another 
for lower interest rates. Instead of reducing his debt, the transfers resulted in an 
increase of his debt, as he continued using the cards. (Tr. 22, 37; GE 2 at 178.) During 
that year, he also incurred medical bills from the motorcycle accident. (Tr. 27.) 
 
 Late in 2007, Applicant hired a debt consolidation company to help manage his 
debt. He initially paid the company $1,600 and anticipated making monthly payments of 
$200. However, the company wanted him to pay $400 per month on the debts and to 
put $400 into savings. (Tr. 25-26.) He was unable to afford that and discontinued 
working with the company at the end of 2008. He then contacted a bankruptcy attorney 
about filing a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The attorney advised him that he could not initiate 
the bankruptcy until Applicant filed his federal income tax returns for 2006, 2007, and 
2008. (Tr. 24.) Applicant had no explanation for not timely filing his tax returns, other 
than he is ”terrible with paperwork.” (Tr. 37, 31.) He has not obtained financial 
counseling. (Tr. 25.) 
 
 On April 13, 2010, Applicant filed his federal tax returns for 2006, 2007, and 
2008. (AE C, D, E.) On that same day, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) issued a 
Release of Levy for his unpaid taxes for 2005. The IRS had previously garnished his 
wages for a $6,700 outstanding tax liability for 2005. Applicant is currently paying $300 
per month on a $2,000 outstanding tax liability for 2004. (Tr. 23.) He accumulated the 
unpaid taxes because he did not change his federal deduction status after he divorced 
in 1998. (Tr. 38.) (¶¶ 1.t and 1.u.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
 Based on a credit bureau report (CBR) dated November 5, 2009, the SOR 
alleged that Applicant accumulated 19 delinquent debts between 2004 and 2009, which 
total $138,267. Applicant admitted that all of the debts are unpaid, as he intends to file a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy to resolve them. (Tr. 24.) 
 
1. Eleven debts are owed to credit card companies, three of them are 
judgments. They are alleged in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, 1.r, 
and 1.s. They total $129,083.        
 
2. Six debts are owed for medical services; one of them is a judgment. They are 
alleged in ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i. They total $ 6,803. 
 
3. The debt alleged in ¶ 1.q for $1,740 is owed to a department store.  
 
4. The debt alleged in ¶ 1.j for $639 is owed to a cellular company.  
  
 Applicant submitted a budget. He earns $65,000 annually and has a net monthly 
income of $2,657. After paying monthly expenses and a $300 payment on the 2004 tax 
liability, he has $137 remaining. (Tr. 42; GE 2 at 160.) He no longer uses credit cards. 
(Tr. 28) 
 
 Three witnesses testified for Applicant: his supervisor and two colleagues. All of 
them have worked with Applicant for several years and do not believe that he is a 
security risk.  
 
 Applicant was candid about his financial situation. He acknowledged that he has 
not properly handled his finances and provided no excuses for failing to address them 
sooner. He was remorseful and embarrassed by the situation. 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
 
 
 
5
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent credit card debt that 
began accruing in 2007, which he has been unwilling to diligently manage. He also 
accrued tax liability for 2004 and 2005, resulting from his failure to responsibly monitor 
his tax exemption status until recently. He willingly failed to timely file his 2006, 2007, 
and 2008 federal tax returns. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those potential 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut and prove 
mitigation. AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could potentially mitigate the above security 
concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Applicant=s financial irresponsibility is recent, involves numerous creditors, and 
continues to date. He remains substantially in debt, and he provided no evidence (other 
than his intention to file a Chapter 13 bankruptcy) that would support a finding that the 
indebtedness is unlikely to recur. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 
20(a). 
 
 
 
 
6
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to indicate that his delinquent debts 
arose from circumstances outside of his control. In fact, the evidence is to the contrary, 
the situation was within his control. Other than a three month period of time in 2007, he 
has been gainfully employed for the past 15 years and earning a decent salary. He was 
married for two years, more than ten years ago, but has no ongoing obligations as a 
consequence of that marriage. AG ¶ 20(b) cannot be applied.  
 
  In April 2010, Applicant filed his 2006, 2007, and 2008 federal tax returns, 
warranting the application of AG ¶ 20(c) to SOR ¶ 1.u, but not to any of the 19 other 
delinquent debts. He has not received counseling for the problem or presented 
evidence that there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or under 
control. All debts are unresolved. Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply to those 19 debts 
because he has not made a good-faith effort to pay or address them. He paid his tax 
liability for 2005 and is paying his 2004 tax liability. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶ 1.t. 
There is no evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(e) and AG ¶ 20(f).   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and educated 
individual, who is responsible for his voluntary choices and conduct that underlie the 
security concerns alleged in the SOR. He failed to demonstrate financial rehabilitation or 
evidence of an implemented plan to resolve his obligations. In 2008, he sought advice 
from a lawyer regarding a Chapter 13 bankruptcy and learned that before filing the 
bankruptcy, he would be required to file all outstanding tax returns. He waited another 
two years to do that. He testified candidly and does not excuse his procrastinating 
behavior. Although his colleagues asserted that he is trustworthy, his financial record 
exhibits a pattern of significant poor judgment and a lack of reliability.  
 
 
 
 
7
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did 
not mitigate the security concerns arising under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.s:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.t and 1.u:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
