1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-05893
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 4, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On November 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline
H for Applicant. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On November 24, 2009, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  On
December 17, 2009, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered five documentary exhibits. (Items 1-5.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on February 4, 2010. Applicant
submitted timely an additional two page document, which has been marked as Item A,
2
and entered into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on March 11, 2010.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access
to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegation 1.a. The admitted allegation
is incorporated herein as a finding of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted additional document, and the FORM, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 32 years old. He is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks
a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
The SOR lists one allegation (1.a.) under Adjudicative Guideline H. The SOR
alleges, and Applicant has admitted, in his RSOR (Item 3) that Applicant “used
marijuana, with varying frequency, from about 2003 until at least May 2009.”
When Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application, he estimated that
he had used marijuana about five times (Item 4.) In his RSOR (Item 3), Applicant stated
that his actual frequency of marijuana usage “has been on average once a year where it
was more frequent at the beginning and then [Applicant] did not use any drugs for a
period of years and so usage became more infrequent as time went on.” He explained
that since he got the “same results” by having a glass of wine of or a couple of beers
when he was with friends, he asked himself “what was the sense of trying to skirt the
law when other items were much more easily accessible, much more acceptable and
were perfectly good substitutes.” He further indicated that his last usage was in May
2009, and that he planned to continue to abstain from all illegal drugs for the rest of his
life “whether or not a clearance is granted to [him].”
Applicant also submitted six Performance Assessments from his current
employer for the years 2004 through 2009. (Item 3.) In three of them, he was rated as a
“Successful Contributor,” and in three he was rated a “High Contributor.” He was
described as a “can-do, self-starter, who continually seeks ways to improve.”
In his post FORM submission (Item A), dated February 1, 2010, Applicant wrote
that his career is extremely important to him, so that is “a good enough reason to stop
taking marijuana.” He also confirmed that he never purchased or sold marijuana or any
drug paraphernalia, and that drugs never were a significant part of his life. He continued
to affirm that he has no intention to use any drugs in the future. 
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
4
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG ¶ 24:  
      Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgement and because it raises questions about a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case.
Applicant's improper and illegal drug abuse, the use of marijuana for many years, is of
great concern, especially in light of his desire to have access to the nation's secrets.
Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to his illegal substance abuse clearly falls within
Drug Involvement ¶ 25(a) “any drug abuse” and (c) “illegal drug possession, including
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution.” It also is disturbing
that Applicant has used marijuana during the period that he was working for his current
employer. 
However, the evidence indicates that Applicant’s marijuana usage was not
frequent, and that he has abstained from any usage for approximately one year. I find
credible his statements that he intends to abstain from using marijuana in the future.
(Items 3, 4, 5, and A.) I also find that his excellent employment evaluations make his
stated intentions more credible and convincing.  Therefore, I conclude that  ¶ 26(b) “a
demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future” applies and is mitigating,
because of (3) “an appropriate period of abstinence”, and (4) “a signed statement of
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” (Item A.) 
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has used illegal drugs under Guideline H. Applicant, on the other hand, has introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or mitigation which is sufficient to
overcome the Government's case against him.  Accordingly, Guideline H of the SOR is
concluded for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
5
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the mitigating conditions apply, including the limited and infrequent
usage of marijuana, together with the positive employment evaluations received by
Applicant, I find that the record evidence leaves me with no significant questions or
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the
whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has  mitigated the
security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
