 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-00010 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
raised by Applicant’s ties to Iraq. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on March 11, 2009. On July 
27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline B. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 28, 2009; answered it on October 26, 
2009; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on October 29, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
1, 2010, and the case was assigned to me on the following day. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on March 23, 2010, scheduling the hearing to be conducted by video 
teleconference on March 29, 2010. On March 25, 2010, the notice of hearing was 
amended to change the time of day for the videoconference. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through E, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 6, 2010. 
 
Notice of Hearing 
 
 Although Department Counsel and Applicant corresponded by email for several 
weeks before the hearing, the formal, written hearing notice was dated March 23, 2010, 
only six days before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived the 15-day written notice 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.8. (Tr. 16-17.) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Iraq. The request and the documents attached as enclosures were not admitted 
in evidence but are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. I took 
administrative notice as requested by Department Counsel (Tr. 16.) The facts 
administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.e 
and 1.h. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old Iraqi linguist employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since May 2008, and he has been supporting U.S. 
forces in Iraq since June 2009. He participated in the video teleconference from Iraq. 
(Tr. 41-42.) He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant was born in Iraq. He completed his mandatory military service in the 
Iraqi Army in 1987. He worked as a self-employed engineer, architect, and designer in 
Iraq from 1987 to 1991. He then worked for the Kurdish Relief Association, a non-
governmental agency devoted to rebuilding the Kurdish regions of northern Iraq, from 
1991 to 1996. He married an Iraqi citizen in September 1993. (GX 2 at 3.) 
 
Applicant, his mother, his spouse, and his son were among the thousands of 
Iraqi Kurds who fled from Iraq and sought asylum in the United States. He and his 
 
3 
 
 
family fled Iraq and temporarily resided in Guam from December 1996 to March 1997, 
when the U.S. military brought them to the United States. (GX 2 at 3.) 
 
Applicant’s father, mother-in-law, and father-in-law are deceased. (GX 2 at 7.) 
His four brothers, a half-brother, and a half-sister are citizens and residents of Iraq. His 
oldest brother, a businessman involved in agricultural products, was a local party 
representative, but he is no longer involved in local politics. (Tr. 29.) They have 
telephonic contact every three or fourth months. (GX 2 at 6.) His second oldest brother 
is a dual citizen of Iraq and Austria and a self-employed farmer, and they have contact 
about twice a year. His third oldest brother is an Iraqi citizen, also working as a self-
employed farmer, and they have telephonic contact every three or four months. His 
youngest brother is a sales representative for an air conditioning company, and they 
have contact every five or six months. Applicant’s half-brother is a local government 
inspector, and they have contact about twice a year. His half-sister is a homemaker and 
not employed outside the home, and they have contact about once a year. His half-
brother, half-sister, and all his brothers except the oldest reside in the semi-autonomous 
Kurdish regions in northern Iraq. (GX 2 at 5-7; AX A at 1.) 
 
Applicant maintains contact with a high school friend who is now a self-employed 
building contractor. They lost contact in 1996, but since 2002 they have had contact 
every six or eight months. (GX 2 at 7-8.) 
 
Applicant, his spouse, mother, and two children traveled to Iraq in October and 
November 2000 to attend the funeral of a half-brother and to visit his relatives. Applicant 
traveled by himself to Iraq in December 2004 and remained there until March 2005 to 
attend the funeral of his father-in-law and to visit his relatives and his high school friend. 
(GX 2 at 4, 7-8; AX A at 2.) Applicant’s mother, spouse, and children traveled to Iraq in 
2009 to visit his relatives. (Tr. 26-27.) 
 
Applicant applied for U.S. citizenship in February 2005, and he became a U.S. 
citizen in April 2008. He renounced his Iraqi citizenship in June 2008. (GX 2 at 11.) His 
mother and son became U.S. citizens in April 2009, and his spouse became a U.S. 
citizen in May 2009. (GX 2 at 3; AX B, C, and D.)  
 
Applicant and his family have lived in a rented home in the United States since 
1997. They own no real estate or other assets in Iraq. (Tr. 28, 39.) 
 
 In 2004 and 2005, Applicant served as a board member for an Islamic civic 
association dedicated to help fellow Iraqi exiles. His organization taught classes, 
provided social services, and translated documents to help other Iraqi émigrés gain 
employment, register their children in school, and obtain other community services. (GX 
1 at 15.) 
 
 In September 2007, Applicant assisted an Iraqi whom he had never met, by 
helping him find a place to live and become acquainted with the local Kurdish 
community in the United States. (GX 2 at 8; AX E.) He assisted the Iraqi in response to 
 
4 
 
 
a request from a U.S. Army colonel commanding the unit with whom the Iraqi served as 
a translator under combat conditions. The Iraqi was highly regarded by the unit 
commander. (AX E; Tr. 37.)   
 
 Applicant’s site supervisor since his arrival in Iraq, a retired Air Force master 
sergeant, testified that Applicant is a “model linguist.” He is very talented, intelligent, and 
conscientious. She recommended approval of Applicant’s security clearance application 
without hesitation. (Tr. 45-46.) 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the following facts about Iraq. In 2003, a 
coalition led by the United States removed Saddam Hussein and his Ba’athist regime 
from power. In March 2006, Iraq’s new government took office after being freely elected 
by the Iraqi people. Despite recent improvements in security, Iraq remains dangerous, 
volatile, and unpredictable. Remnants of the former Ba’ath regime, transnational 
terrorists, criminal elements, and numerous insurgent groups remain active throughout 
Iraq. Terrorists armed and trained by Iran continue to endanger the security and stability 
of Iraq. Foreign terrorists from North Africa and other Middle Eastern countries continue 
to flow into Iraq, primarily through Syria. Al-Queda in Iraq possesses the means to 
launch high-profile attacks against Iraqi civilians and infrastructure. Travel in Iraq is 
dangerous. The security situation in the northern Kurdish areas of Iraq is relatively more 
stable that the rest of Iraq, but there are still incidents of violence in the northern areas. 
 
I have also taken notice that the U.S. State Department has substantiated reports 
of human rights abuses in Iraq, including a climate of violence; misappropriation of 
authority by sectarian, criminal, and insurgent groups; arbitrary killings; torture; and 
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. The Iraqi government’s 
effectiveness in adhering to the rule of law is hampered by ongoing violence, corruption, 
sectarian bias, and lack of oversight and accountability. Treatment of detainees has 
been generally poor. The judiciary is weak, and judicial independence is impaired by 
threats and killings by insurgent, sectarian, tribal, and criminal elements. Security 
threats hinder access to the courts, and witness intimidation is common. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
 
5 
 
 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of an applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s spouse, son, and mother are citizens of Iraq (¶ 1.a); 
his two brothers, half-brother, and half-sister are citizens are residents of Iraq (¶ 1.b); 
one of his brothers is a local political party official (¶ 1.c); another brother is a dual Iraqi-
Austrian citizen residing in Iraq (¶ 1.d); and another brother is a dual Iraqi-German 
citizen residing in Iraq (¶ 1.e). It also alleges Applicant maintains contact with a friend in 
 
6 
 
 
Iraq (¶ 1.f), sponsored an Iraqi citizen whom he had never met for entry into the United 
States (¶ 1.g), and traveled to Iraq in 2000 and 2004 (¶ 1.h).  
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Family ties with persons in a foreign country are not, as a matter of law, 
automatically disqualifying under Guideline B. Those family ties must be evaluated, 
however, to determine whether they put an applicant at risk of exploitation, pressure or 
coercion, or have the potential to put an applicant in the position of having to chose 
between the interests of family members and the interests of the United States. The 
totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family 
tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). 
 
 
7 
 
 
A disqualifying condition under this guideline may be raised by “contact with a 
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who 
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). The 
“heightened risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low 
standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. A disqualifying condition 
also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, 
group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b).  
 
Even though the United States and Iraq are allies, Applicant’s brothers, half-
brother, half sister, and his high school friend are vulnerable to terrorists, insurgents, 
and criminal elements, making Applicant vulnerable to indirect pressure or coercion. 
The volatile, dangerous conditions in Iraq create the “heightened risk” contemplated by 
AG ¶ 7(a) and the potential conflict of interest contemplated by AG ¶ 7(b). Thus, these 
two disqualifying conditions are raised. 
 
A security concern may be raised if an applicant is “sharing living quarters with a 
person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” AG ¶ 7(d). 
Applicant’s spouse, mother, and son are citizens and residents of the United States. 
They have no living family members in Iraq and no financial or political connections to 
Iraq. Thus, AG ¶ 7(d) is not raised. No other enumerated disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline are raised. 
 
 Applicant’s travel to Iraq in 2000 and 2004, and his family’s travel to Iraq in 2009 
were to visit his family members in Iraq. As such, that travel has no independent 
security significance. See ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. Sep 21, 2005). 
 
 Since the Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). The presence of Applicant’s family members in the volatile and 
dangerous conditions in Iraq precludes application of this mitigating condition. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant has renounced his Iraqi citizenship. He, his spouse, his mother, and his son 
have become U.S. citizens. He put himself and his family at risk to resist oppression, 
lawlessness, and terrorism from 1991 to 1996. He came to the United States as a 
refugee, and he became heavily involved in assisting other Iraqi refugees. He has now 
left his spouse, mother, and son behind, and again placed himself in harm’s way to 
support the interests of the United States. His track record of selfless service 
demonstrates that he will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, 
terrorist organization, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit him. I conclude AG ¶ 8(b) 
is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing that 
“contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is 
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 8(c). 
There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family member in a 
foreign country are not casual.  ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
Although Applicant’s contacts with his family members in Iraq are infrequent, he has not 
rebutted the presumption that they are not casual. AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. No 
other enumerating mitigating conditions are established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult, who has lived in the United States. 
since 1997. He has shown great concern for his fellow Kurdish refugees, working with a 
civic association to assist them, and helping a total stranger to establish a new life in the 
United States. He has renounced his Iraqi citizenship and sworn allegiance to the 
United States. He has demonstrated his willingness to put himself and his family at risk 
to support the interests of the United States. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to resolve close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
 Administrative Judge 
