 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-04993 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations, personal conduct, and criminal conduct.  Eligibility for a security 
clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 1, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigation Processing version of a Security Clearance 
Application (e-QIP).1 On August 14, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) furnished her a set of interrogatories pertaining to her financial situation, drugs, 
and other unspecified issues. She responded to the interrogatories on September 22, 
2009.2 On an unspecified date thereafter, DOHA furnished her with another set of 
interrogatories pertaining to her financial situation and other unspecified issues. She 
responded to those interrogatories as well on September 22, 2009.3 On November 9, 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (e-QIP), dated April 1, 2009.  
 
2 Government Exhibit 8 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated September 22, 2009). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
2009, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and 
modified (Directive); and Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access 
to Classified Information (effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006) (hereinafter AG). The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F 
(Financial Considerations), E (Personal Conduct), and J (Criminal Conduct). It detailed 
reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 30, 2009. In a sworn, 
written statement, dated December 29, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on February 25, 2010, and 
the case was assigned to me on March 4, 2010. A Notice of Hearing was issued on 
March 12, 2010, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on March 30, 2010. 
 
 During the hearing, eight Government exhibits and one Applicant exhibit were 
admitted into evidence, without objection. Applicant testified. The record remained open 
to afford Applicant the opportunity to supplement it, and on April 6, 2010, she submitted 
four additional documents, which were admitted into evidence as Applicant exhibits B 
through E, respectively, without objection. On April 29, 2010, she submitted an 
additional document, which was admitted into evidence as Applicant exhibit F, without 
objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 7, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the Guideline F factual 
allegations (¶¶ 1.b. through 1.j.), one of the Guideline E factual allegations (¶ 1.c.), and 
one of the Guideline J factual allegations (¶ 3.a.) of the SOR. She denied the remaining 
factual allegations (¶¶ 1.a., 2.a., 2.b., and 3.b.). 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
a part-time independent contractor for a federal contractor,4 and she is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance. She had previously been granted an interim security 
clearance which was subsequently terminated.5 She earned a bachelor’s degree in an 
unspecified discipline in May 1999, and an M.A. in Sociology in December 2007.6 From 
June 1997 until March 2009, when she commenced her current employment with the 
 
3 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated September 22, 2009). 
 
4 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 20.  
 
5 Tr. at 6. 
 
6 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 17-18; Id.  
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
defense contractor, Applicant was employed by a number of employers in a variety of 
positions, including answering service telephone secretary and supervisor, assistant 
contract administrator, human resources assistant, elementary school teacher, tutor and 
administrative assistant, secretary, teaching assistant and research assistant, marketing 
assistant, social worker, and speakers bureau outreach coordinator.7 She also went 
through a three-month period of unemployment (October 2007 until January 2008).8 
Applicant has never been married.9  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s current finances until about mid-
2007. She admits to previously having been deeply in debt when she got out of college 
because she had “no financial savvy.”10 However, she contends that after working hard 
for seven years, she was able to get herself out of debt.11 She was living within her 
means and paying more than the minimum on all of her credit cards.12 In March 2007, 
she satisfied the monetary portion of a court-ordered stipulated judgment and costs of 
$6,000 for wrongfully distributing and reproducing copyrighted songs.13 In April 2007, 
Applicant got engaged, and in preparation for her March 2008 wedding, she made a 
“conscious decision” to increase the credit limits on her credit cards.14 She anticipated 
being able to reduce the balances once she was married with financial assistance from 
her husband-to-be.15  
 
In October 2007, she lost her primary job as a social worker, and for the next 
three months, was barely able to pay her rent, car, telephone, and food.16 Although she 
obtained employment at a new primary job in January 2008, at a salary comparable to 
what she had been earning, now as a salaried employee, she was no longer eligible for 
10-20 hours of overtime pay per paycheck.17 At the same time, her engagement was 
7 Id. at 20-37. 
 
8 Id. at 22-23. 
 
9 Id. at 42-43. 
 
10 Tr. at 43, 64; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated December 29, 2009, at 1; Applicant Exhibit A 
(Statement, dated March 30, 2010), at 1. It should be noted that Applicant Exhibit A is merely an updated version of 
her Answer to the SOR.  
 
11 Id. 
 
12 Id.; Tr. at 37, 65. 
 
13 Government Exhibit 2 (Notice of Satisfaction of Monetary Portion of Judgment, dated March 7, 2007), at 
1-6. 
 
14 Tr. at 37.  
 
15 Id. 
 
16 Government Exhibit 8 (Personal Subject Interview, dated April 28, 2009), at 1. 
 
17 Tr. at 37-38. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
broken, and she incurred the added expenses of lost deposits and other wedding-
related expenses.18 Throughout 2008, Applicant was barely able to keep her head 
above water and was “overwhelmed by the debt” facing her, as well as depressed about 
her personal situation.19 Accounts became delinquent. Some accounts were placed for 
collection or charged off.  
 
In an effort to address her debts, Applicant started searching for additional part-
time jobs to generate money to pay those debts.20 She obtained a third job – a part-time 
teaching position – earning a little over $400 each month.21 In February 2010, Applicant 
became aware that layoffs at her primary job were coming, so she started preparing, 
financially, for the inevitable. She was still living paycheck-to-paycheck, and was not 
able to make payments towards her debts. She was finally laid off from that job the 
week before the hearing.22 She was temporarily suspended from her part-time work for 
the government contractor, where she was earning $30 per hour, when her interim 
clearance was terminated.23 At the time of the hearing, no decision had yet been made 
on her application for $240 per week in unemployment compensation.24 
 
The SOR identified 10 purportedly continuing delinquencies, totaling 
approximately $20,726. Some accounts have been transferred, reassigned, or sold to 
other creditors or collection agents. Other accounts are referenced repeatedly in the 
credit reports, in many instances duplicating other accounts listed, either under the 
same creditor or collection agent name, or under a different creditor or collection agent 
name. Some accounts are identified by complete account numbers, while others are 
identified by partial account numbers, in some instances eliminating the last four digits 
and in others eliminating other digits. Those debts listed in the SOR, nine of which 
Applicant admitted, and their respective current status, according to the credit reports, 
documents submitted by Applicant, and Applicant’s written and testimonial comments 
relative thereto, are described below: 
 
 
SOR ¶ TYPE DEBT AMOUNT STATUS 
1.a. Satellite television $283 Collection. Contract term disputed by 
Applicant, claiming the signature is not 
hers.25 Attempting to resolve.26 Unpaid.27  
                                                          
18 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 10, at 1; Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 1, at 1. 
 
19 Id. 
 
20 Tr. at 38.  
 
21 Id. at 50. 
 
22 Id. 49.  
 
23 Id. at 50. 
 
24 Id. at 54. 
 
25 Id. at 28. Applicant claimed to have a copy of the disputed document, but failed to furnish it. 
 
26 Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 10, at 2. 
 
5 
                                      
 
SOR ¶ TYPE DEBT AMOUNT STATUS 
1.b. Mobile phone service $316 Collection. Applicant believes she paid 
account when she cancelled service. If not, 
she intends to eventually pay it.28 Unpaid.29 
1.c. Credit card $2,763 Collection. $3,063 charged off. Monthly $50 
payments since May 2009, under payment 
plan.30 Balance as of Mar. 2010: $2,463.31 
1.d. Department store 
charge card 
$753 Collection. Charged off. Account settled for 
$414.48, and paid Feb. 5, 2010.32 
1.e. Line of credit $11,295 Charged off. Unpaid.33 
1.f. Credit card $1,239 Collection. Charged off. Unpaid.34 
1.g. Credit card $1,141 Collection. Unpaid.35 
1.h. Credit card $610 Collection. $563 charged off. Unpaid.36 
1.i. Mail order $1,163 Collection. Unpaid.37 
1.j. Department store 
charge card 
 
$1,16338 Collection. Account settled for $221.18, to 
be paid by Oct. 25, 2009.39 Unpaid.40 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
27 Government Exhibit 3 (Equifax Credit Report, dated March 26, 2010), at 1. 
 
28 Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 10, at 2. 
 
29 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 27, at 1; Tr. at 32. 
 
30 Government Exhibit 2 (Collection Agency letter, dated September 22, 2009); Applicant Exhibit A, supra  
note 10, at 3; Bank ATM & Debit Card Withdrawals Register, attached to Applicant Exhibit A; Tr. at 32-34. 
 
31 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 27, at 1. 
 
32 Id. at 2; Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 10, at 3; Tr. at 38-39. 
 
33 Id. at 39-40. 
 
34 Id. at 45-46. 
 
35 Id. at 46-47. 
 
36 Id.  
 
37 Id.; Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 10, at 4. 
 
38 Although the SOR reflects the delinquent balance as $1,163, an amount identical to the delinquent 
balance reflected in SOR ¶ 1.i., it appears that the stated amount is erroneous, as no other evidence supports that 
balance. The balances for this particular account, reflected in the various credit reports in evidence, are: $462 - 
Government Exhibit 5 (Combined Experian, Trans Union, and Equifax Credit Report, dated April 15, 2009), at 18; 
$498 - Government Exhibit 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated September 30, 2009), at 3; and $437 – Government 
Exhibit 3, supra note 27, at 2. In addition, according to the creditor’s collection agency, the balance in September 
2009, was $506.58. See Government Exhibit 2 (Collection Agency letter, dated September 22, 2009). Department 
Counsel conceded the amount should be reflected as $498. Tr. at 63. 
 
39 Id. 
 
40 Id. at 46-47. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
all in 
collection.   
r reduced 
income still does not enable her to present a more positive financial outlook.  
                                                          
When she was laid off in March 2010, Applicant stopped making payments on 
her delinquent debts and started using the money for necessities.41 She is now in what 
she calls her “unemployment mode,” reducing her spending.42 She has no active credit 
cards.43 As of the hearing date, she estimated she had $600-$700 in savings.44 In 
addition to the SOR debts, Applicant also has two dozen, non-SOR, student loan 
accounts, totaling approximately $55,000, which previously became delinquent.45 In 
November 2009, she applied to have some of those loans consolidated,46 but, to date, 
they have not been consolidated because they first have to be in good standing.47 She 
still has not completed the required paperwork for the consolidation of the remaining 
student loans.48 In addition, Applicant contends her income is such that the loans 
should be in “hardship deferment,”49 but has submitted no documentary evidence to 
support her contention. The March 2010 credit report indicates they are 
50
 
On September 22, 2009, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement 
indicating monthly net income of $2,470.56, monthly expenses of $2,339, an additional 
$160 scheduled monthly debt payments, and a net remainder of minus $29.03 available 
for discretionary spending.51 Now, although she reduced her expenses, he
 
Applicant met with a credit union loan officer one time, seeking financial 
counseling.52 The loan officer advised her to pay down her debt substantially before 
seeking a loan on her automobile.53 There is no evidence that Applicant ever received 
any other counseling on debt management, loan consolidation, budgets, or repayment 
plans. She has not addressed the bulk of her delinquent debts because she claims she 
has not had the opportunity to do so. She worked 50 to 60 hours per week at her 
41 Id. at 52. 
 
42 Id. at 53. 
 
43 Id. at 55. 
 
44 Id. at 52. 
 
45 Id. at 56. 
 
46 Applicant Exhibit E (Direct Loans letter, dated November 7, 2009); Tr. at 58. 
 
47 Id. at 73, 79. 
 
48 Id. at 73-74. 
 
49 Id. at 56. 
 
50 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 27, at 1-4. 
 
51 Applicant’s Personal Financial Statement, dated September 22, 2009, attached to Government Exhibit 2, 
supra note 3. 
 
52 Tr. at  39-40, 55-56. 
 
53 Id. at 56. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
ntractor was to make enough additional income to help pay 
ff her delinquent debts.57  
ersonal Conduct 
primary job, was on the road, making presentations, and teaching, and prioritized those 
activities ahead of addressing her delinquent debts.54 The entire process was just “so 
overwhelming.”55 Applicant’s primary goal was to obtain a permanent job to replace the 
one she recently lost. The type of job is important to her, for it must be one that “makes 
a difference,” and gives back to the community.56 Her reason for obtaining the part-time 
job with the government co
o
 
P
 
 At some point prior to September 2006, Applicant’s computer was utilized to 
wrongfully download music. Applicant contends that her former roommate did so, 
expressly against her wishes. Nevertheless, despite her admonition, the downloading 
took place. Her roommate subsequently acknowledged that he did the download 
against her directions.58 By the time she found out about it and had received the 
summons and went to court, she and her roommate no longer resided together and the 
computer had crashed so it had been given away. She could not prove the download 
took place on her roommate’s login rather than hers.59 Applicant was sued in a civil suit 
in federal court for wrongfully distributing and/or reproducing copyrighted sound 
recordings owned by the owners of those copyrighted sound recordings, in violation of 
Title 17, U.S. Code, § 501 (infringement of copyright). In March 2007, she satisfied the 
onetary portion of a court-ordered stipulated judgment and costs totaling $6,000.60  
23.a., Applicant 
eliberately failed to disclose her illegal use of drugs or drug activity:61 
 
                                                          
m
 
 On April 1, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted a 
completed e-QIP. The SOR alleges that in response to e-QIP § 
d
In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for 
example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants 
(amphetamines, speed, crystal methamphetamine, Ecstacy, ketamine, 
54 Id. at 75-77. 
 
55 Id. at 76. 
 
56 Id. at 109. It should be noted, effective May 3, 2010, Applicant obtained a new job in which she will earn 
an annual salary of $35,000. Applicant Exhibit F (E-mail from Applicant to Department Counsel, dated April 29, 2010). 
 
57 Tr. at 105. 
 
58 Facsimile from former roommate, dated November 30, 2009, attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, 
supra note 10. 
 
59 Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 10, at 4; Tr. at 83-84. 
 
60 Id. at 85. 
 
61 It should be noted that the quoted question from the e-QIP above is not actually the one cited in SOR ¶ 
2.b., but somewhat similar to it. While the exact wording differs, the quotation is sufficiently similar to still have 
furnished sufficient notice to Applicant of the nature of the inquiry. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
ng, experimenting with or 
suming any controlled substance.  
ege, after acquiring it from a cousin who had a prescription for medical 
arijuana use.67 
estion carefully and made a mistake.70 She denied knowingly 
lsifying her response.71 
Criminal Conduct 
                                                          
etc.), depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), 
hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants (toluene, amyl 
nitrate, etc.) or prescription drugs (including painkillers)? Use of a 
controlled substance including injecting, swallowi
otherwise con
  
Applicant answered “no” to the question,62 and certified that her response was true, 
complete, and correct to the best of her knowledge and belief and was made in good 
faith.63 Contradicting that response was information appearing in a December 2006 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) application for employment where she 
acknowledged having used marijuana during “the last 3 years.”64 Applicant 
subsequently denied intentionally falsifying her response, and stated that her brief 
experimentation with marijuana was so long ago, and believed to be more than seven 
years ago, that she barely remembered it.65 She tried marijuana in high school,66 and 
once, while in coll
m
 
 The SOR also alleges, that in response to question 9 of the interrogatories 
propounded by DOHA (Government Exhibit 2), pertaining to ever having used 
substances, including marijuana, on September 22, 2009, she said “no.” She swore or 
affirmed that the information was true and correct to the best of her knowledge and 
belief.68 Applicant subsequently denied intentionally falsifying her response, and stated 
that in the rush to complete the answers and get them notarized, her response was an 
oversight. Also, the substance abuse had been so long ago because she did not 
currently use drugs and had not done so in a long time.69 During the hearing she added 
that while she knows it is a very poor excuse, in her rush to complete her answers, she 
simply did not read the qu
fa
 
62 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 53. 
 
63 Id. at 64. 
 
64 Government Exhibit 6 (FBI Records Management Division, National Name Check Program, Official Name 
Check Response, dated April 16, 2009). 
 
65 Government Exhibit A, supra note 10, at 5; Tr. at 85. 
 
66 Tr. at 89. 
 
67 Id. at 88-89. 
 
68 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 3, at 3. 
 
69 Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 10, at 5. 
 
70 Tr. at 86-87, 107. 
 
71 Id. at 87. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
ut it.76 She 
contacted the authorities and, on January 19, 2010, paid the $158 charge.77 
ies as plaintiffs, not a 
criminal matter prosecuted by the government before the court. 
Character References 
tuations and multiple tasks.78 She is hard working, 
trustworthy, reliable, and efficient.79   
 
Policies 
                                                          
 
While attending college in 2005, Applicant generally took a train to school. She 
claimed that, at times, when the automatic ticket machine was broken, she would get on 
the train without a ticket, get off at the next stop to purchase a ticket, and resume her 
train ride to her destination.72 On March 31, 2005, she was charged with evasion of 
fare.73 The date to appear was changed and eventually extended, and, on July 10, 
2005, a warrant was issued for failure to appear.74 Applicant initially claimed she was 
not aware of the citation until she learned of it through the security clearance process.75 
At the hearing, she modified her explanation to include having forgotten abo
 
The SOR also alleges that Applicant’s actions resulting in the 2006 court-ordered 
stipulated judgment for infringement of copyright constituted criminal activity. As noted 
above, that action was merely a civil lawsuit filed by compan
 
 
Two of Applicant’s former university professors, for whom she was both a student 
and a teaching assistant, have known Applicant for approximately 19 and 17 years, 
respectively. They are both impressed by her scholarship, organizational and leadership 
skills, and ability to handle stressful si
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”80 As Commander in Chief, 
72 Id. at 92; Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 10, at 6. 
 
73 Government Exhibit 7 (Case Report, dated September 30, 2009). Under the relevant state penal code, the 
actual act is an infraction characterized as evasion of the payment of a fare of the system, and is treated the same as 
such activities as smoking, eating, or drinking on the system, expectorating upon a system facility or vehicle, and 
willfully disturbing others by engaging in boisterous or unruly behavior. The maximum fine is $250 and 48 hours 
community service. 
 
74 Id. 
 
75 Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 10, at 6. 
 
76 Tr. at 92-93. 
 
77 Bank ATM & Debit Card Withdrawals Register, attached to Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 30. 
 
78 Applicant Exhibit C (Letter from professor, dated July 13, 2008); Applicant Exhibit D (Letter from 
professor, dated July 22, 2008). 
 
79 Id. Applicant Exhibit C. 
 
80 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
ion “only upon a 
nding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”81   
 
hich are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
erson, past and present, favorable and 
nfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.83  
                                                          
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified informat
fi
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, w
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the p
u
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”82 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
81 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
82 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
83 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
e, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”84 
ewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Anal sis 
 
uideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
elating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
ut in AG ¶ 18:       
 
ed is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
 ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns.  
e has not 
done so for the remaining delinquent accounts. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
                                                          
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermor
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”85 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Lik
y
G
The security concern r
o
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextend
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying. 
Similarly, under AG
 
As noted above, there was nothing unusual about Applicant’s current finances 
until about mid-2007, when she satisfied the monetary portion of a court-ordered 
stipulated judgment and costs for infringement of copyright, and she started to increase 
her credit card limits in preparation for her expected March 2008 wedding. Account 
balances were increased with the anticipation of being able to pay them once she got 
married. For a variety of reasons, accounts became delinquent and were placed for 
collection, and some were charged off. Now there are additional delinquent non-SOR 
accounts. While she has submitted some documentation to support her contentions 
regarding payments supposedly made or accounts supposedly disputed, sh
84 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
85 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
12 
                                      
 
antiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
eviden e of actions to resolve the issue.”  
mstances, 
does cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
                                                          
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@86 Also, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply where “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to subst
c
 
Applicant’s current financial problems commenced in mid-2007. Because the 
financial situation is frequent and continuing in nature, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant’s significant inaction in the handling of her finances, under the circu
 
Likewise, Applicant receives minimal application of AG ¶ 20(b), for Applicant has 
not documented evidence that the conditions that resulted in her financial problems at 
some point were largely beyond her control. She has noted the loss of her primary job in 
October 2007, her relatively brief period of unemployment until January 2008, and her 
broken engagement, but has not explained how they interfered with her handling of her 
finances. As she stated, she made a “conscious decision” to increase her credit limits. 
She drew unemployment compensation resulting from the loss of her primary job. Later, 
she received a rather limited salary from her part-time teaching position. And she made 
a substantial salary after being hired part-time by the government contractor in March 
2009. Applicant failed to act responsibly under the circumstances. Instead, she became 
“overwhelmed by the debt” facing her, as well as depressed about her personal 
86 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
ncial predicament and seeking 
repayment plans, she continued to spend unwisely.87  
 
automobile loan. She has not provided documentation to support any other conclusion. 
as taken no significant 
actions to address the satisfaction of those delinquent debts.88  
 1.b., she has not provided 
“documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute.” 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 1
ss or any other 
ilure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
                                                          
situation. Also, rather than seeking any reasonable job to help her reduce her financial 
delinquencies, she limited herself to seeking only socially significant jobs that make a 
difference and give back to the community. Rather than consolidating and minimizing 
expenses, or approaching creditors about her fina
 
AG & 20(c) has very limited application because Applicant has not received 
financial counseling on debt management, loan consolidation, budgets, or repayment 
plans, but only very brief advice from a credit union loan officer on how to qualify for an
 
AG ¶ 20(d) only partially applies because Applicant initiated a very limited good-
faith effort to repay her creditors. She paid one non-SOR account (the $158 evasion of 
fare charge in January 2010). She entered into two settlement and repayment plans 
before the SOR was issued, made monthly $50 payments on one plan since May 2009, 
but never followed through with the agreement on the other plan. And, she settled one 
other account and paid it off in February 2010. Except for those payments, she ceased 
all other voluntary action. As for the other non-SOR accounts, after years of ignoring her 
delinquent student loans, she now finds herself too overworked to submit the proper 
paperwork to address them. Over the years, Applicant did not act aggressively, timely, 
or responsibly to resolve her delinquent debts. Instead, she h
 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because, while Applicant might have a legitimate 
reason to dispute the accounts set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and
  
 
The
5:  
      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance proce
fa
87 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)).  
 
88 The Appeal Board has previously held that “[A] applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim” he or she initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay creditors or otherwise resolve debts. ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004). 
 
14 
                                      
 
                                                          
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), a “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used 
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities,” is potentially disqualifying. Also, under AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately 
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative,” may raise security concerns. Similarly, under AG ¶ 16(e), “personal 
conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if 
known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. . . ” may 
raise security concerns.  
 
Applicant’s omissions in her responses to inquiries in the e-QIP and DOHA 
interrogatories, of critical information pertaining to illegal substance abuse, provide 
sufficient evidence to examine if her submissions were deliberate falsifications, as 
alleged in the SOR, or were the result of simple oversight or negligence on her part, as 
she contends. Applicant repeatedly claimed she had a bad memory and omissions by 
her were caused either by that bad memory or by short suspenses. Yet, according to 
her professors, she had the ability to handle stressful situations and multiple tasks 
because she is hard working and efficient. During the hearing, her subsequent 
refinement of her explanations did not serve her well, for they offered alternative 
explanations. Either she could not remember the incidents or they took place over 
seven years ago. Nevertheless, as to her reasoning pertaining to SOR ¶ 2.b., other than 
her responses to the FBI employment application, there is no evidence to show that her 
marijuana use occurred within seven years, as no actual dates have been alleged, 
much less proven. Accordingly, there is no evidence that she deliberately omitted, 
concealed, or falsified the substance abuse information on her e-QIP.  
 
The same cannot be said for her response to the DOHA interrogatory inquiring 
about ever having used illegal substances. Her explanations that she didn’t currently 
use marijuana, and she was too busy to fully read the question, convey the impression 
that she is unconcerned, unprepared to be candid, or deliberately evasive. I find 
Applicant’s explanations are not credible in her denial of deliberate falsification.89 As to 
SOR ¶ 2.c., AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) have been established. Pertaining to the 2006 court-
ordered stipulated judgment for infringement of copyright, on its face, AG ¶ 16(e) has 
been established.  
 
89 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally 
permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case 
under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission. 
 
15 
                                      
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct.  Under AG ¶ 17(c), evidence that “the offense 
is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is potentially 
mitigating. There is the 2006 court-ordered stipulated judgment for infringement of 
copyright, as well as Applicant’s explanation, supported by the statement of the 
individual who purportedly actually did the wrongful action. It is unclear as to when the 
actual wrongful action occurred, but it had to have taken place prior to 2006, meaning 
that at least four and probably more years have passed since the wrongful action took 
place. It was a one-time action, and occurred under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur. Furthermore, in light of Applicant’s contention that she had instructed 
the other individual not to do what he had done, and his confirmation that she had done 
so, in this instance, the court-ordered stipulated judgment does not cast doubt on the 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. She receives the full 
application of AG ¶ 17(c).  None of the other mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), an Aallegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted,@ may raise security concerns. Applicant’s 2005 evasion of fare infraction 
does not qualify as a single serious crime and is not part of multiple lesser offenses. 
Accordingly, AG ¶ 31(a) does not apply. However, under the circumstances herein, AG 
¶ 31(c) has been established. As noted above, the 2006 court-ordered stipulated 
judgment for infringement of copyright was merely a civil lawsuit filed by companies as 
plaintiffs, not a criminal matter prosecuted by the government before the court. 
Accordingly, as to that activity, the Government has failed to establish AG ¶¶ 31(a) or 
31(c).   
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Aso much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@  
 
 
16 
                                      
 
AG ¶ 32(a) applies to Applicant’s 2005 evasion of fare. That infraction occurred 
five years ago, and has not been followed by further, more recent criminal conduct, 
Although there was a warrant issued for her, upon being reminded of the infraction and 
the warrant, she paid the fine in January 2010, and the matter is apparently resolved. 
Considering the isolated criminal conduct, and the five years since it occurred, I believe 
the time elapsed does satisfy the intent of AG ¶ 32(a).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Well after her 
finances got out of control, she initiated some belated good-faith efforts to address some 
SOR and non-SOR debts, but, with the exception of a few, ignored the remaining debts. 
She obtained some basic financial guidance from her credit union loan officer, but failed 
to follow through due to lack of funds and distractions caused by other activities. She 
was simply too busy to act on her financial delinquencies. Eventually, all of her efforts 
ceased, and have not resumed. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant continued to obtain services and goods from a variety of creditors, but had no 
ability to pay for them. While on a tight budget, she stretched her credit limits and 
incurred many wedding-related expenses. When she lost her primary job and went 
through three months of unemployment, and then broke off her engagement, she 
continued to accumulate delinquent debt. In November 2009, she had approximately 
$20,726 in delinquent SOR debts and approximately $55,000 in non-SOR delinquent 
student loans. Nevertheless, since acquiring another primary job in January 2008, and 
her part-time job with the federal contractor in March 2009, with the exceptions 
described above, Applicant did not make significant good-faith efforts to pay a variety of 
delinquent debts. While she ignored most of her creditors, she made a number of 
promises and claimed to have paid several creditors. Yet, there is insufficient 
 
17 
                                      
 
                                                          
documentation to support her contentions that she had fully, or partially, satisfied some 
of the creditors. Her long-standing failure to repay creditors, at least in reasonable 
amounts, or to arrange payment plans, while creating new debts, reflects judgment 
traits which raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. And then 
there is her inability to focus on some of her debts because of limited opportunity to do 
so caused by working long hours, being on the road, making presentations, and 
teaching, and prioritizing those activities ahead of addressing her delinquent debts. 
 
Of course, the issue is not simply whether all her debts are resolved or at least 
under repayment arrangements; it is whether her financial circumstances raise 
concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. And there is the personal 
conduct surrounding the submission to DOHA of a false answer to an interrogatory 
pertaining to her past substance abuse and her omission of that substance abuse. I am 
mindful that while any one factor, considered in isolation, might put Applicant’s credit 
history and personal conduct in a sympathetic light, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.90 Her insufficient good-faith efforts or evidence to 
reflect actual payments to her SOR creditors, and her inability to satisfactorily explain 
her interrogatory response, are sufficient to raise continuing security concerns. See AG 
¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:91 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “ . . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
90 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
91 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
18 
                                      
 
Although there are a few positive signs in Applicant’s favor, such as her efforts to 
take corrective actions, and her maintenance of some of her payments of her daily living 
expenses, these steps are simply insufficient to show she can “live within [her] means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations.” See AG ¶ 18. Moreover, the personal 
conduct issue raises questions about her honesty and trustworthiness. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her personal conduct 
and financial considerations, but has mitigated the security concerns arising from the 
criminal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:    For Applicant 
   
 
19 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
