1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-03061
SSN: -------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The record evidence
shows Applicant has a history of financial problems, which she does not dispute. The
record evidence also shows that her financial problems are the result of a combination
of circumstances largely beyond her control; she has obtained financial counseling and
education; and her financial problems are being resolved through a Chapter 13
bankruptcy case, which also amounts to a good-faith effort to repay creditors or
otherwise resolve the debts under the facts of this case. There is sufficient evidence to
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns stemming from her history of
financial problems. Accordingly, as explained in further detail below, this case is decided
for Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.  
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on November 18,1
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR also recommended that the
case be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me February 2, 2010. The hearing took place April 6, 2010. The
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received April 14, 2010.     
The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentary
matters. She did so in a timely fashion, and those documents are admitted, without
objections, as Exhibits O through U. The record closed April 16, 2010. 
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She is now a single
parent with two young children at home. She is employed as an information technology
manager. In addition, she serves as information assurance officer and unit software
licensing manager for the military client her employer supports. Her current annual
salary is about $70,000. She is seeking to retain a security clearance previously granted
to her. 
She began living with her current husband in 2007, they married in 2008, and
they are now separated and pending divorce. She has a six-year-old son from a
previous relationship and a 19-month-old son from her marriage. She does not receive
child support payments for the benefit of her children, but she is in the process of
seeking it from both fathers. 
Applicant’s employment history with federal contractors dates back to 1999,
when she began a job as a computer operator. She has since worked as a work group
 Exhibits 1, 2, 3, and 4. 2
 Tr. 56–58. 3
 Tr. 65. 4
 Exhibit L. 5
 Tr. 48. 6
 Tr. 49–50. 7
 Exhibit A. 8
3
manager and as an engineer assistant. She began working for her current employer in
about May 2008. 
Applicant has a history of financial problems,  which she traces to 2007, when2
she became involved with the man whom she is now divorcing. Before that, she reports
that she handled her finances in a responsible manner as shown by owning several paid
for vehicles and buying and selling a home for a profit. In 2007, she earned about
$52,000 annually working for her then employer. The couple moved in together in 2007,
she with her son, and he with his son. He was laid off from his job in about August 2007,
the same month she became seriously ill, which resulted in a short-term disability for
about two months at 60% of her salary.  She returned to work in October 2007. She3
learned she was pregnant in November 2007, and this pregnancy, like her first, had
complications.  
By January 2008, Applicant was concerned about falling behind on her financial
obligations. She consulted a bankruptcy attorney to explore her options.  In addition,4
she notified her company’s security manager of her situation.  She reported that5
medical bills (from her and her son, who had several surgeries for ear problems, tonsils,
and adenoids ) caused her to fall behind on her bills and that she had made an6
appointment to see a bankruptcy attorney.  
The couple married in February 2008. In May 2008, Applicant decided to change
jobs to earn a higher salary since she was concerned about supporting a household of
two adults and soon to be three children. Although the new job had a higher salary of
$64,000, the job change resulted in some financial strain because she went without a
salary for about six weeks due to the pay-period system with her new employer and
tuition reimbursement to her former employer.7
During this period, Applicant’s husband found a job and worked during
January–June 2008, when he was laid off again. He found a part-time job but was laid
off in November 2008.  Her husband did not stay home and care for the children during8
his periods of unemployment. This situation required Applicant to pay for childcare
expenses.
 Exhibit M. 9
 Tr. 52. 10
 Tr. 86. 11
 Tr. 69–70; Exhibits I, Q, S, and T. 12
 Tr. 52. 13
 Tr. 52–53. 14
 Exhibit J. 15
 Tr. 41. 16
4
At this point in about June 2008, Applicant had been on her new job for about a
month when her pregnancy grew more complicated. She was admitted June 30, 2008,
and discharged a few days later with orders for strict bed rest due to premature labor.9
As a result, Applicant then began a combination of family and medical leave from work
on July 7, 2008, and she was approved for short-term disability benefits. Her income
was again reduced to 60% of her salary and her husband was again unemployed.  
Her son was born in August 2008. Applicant returned to work in about October
2008, and she was required to reimburse her employer for the benefits paid on her
behalf while she was on short-term disability.  As a result, she went about a month10
without a paycheck. 
Returning home after child birth, Applicant learned a vehicle was repossessed
when she was in the hospital.  In addition, Applicant learned her husband was not11
taking care of their bills as she expected. She had to get utility services restored, and
she resumed loan payments to a credit union and repaid the loans in full.  12
By May 2009, Applicant felt she had given her husband every chance to find a
job, and he was still unemployed (and he remains so as far as she knows).  She asked13
him to leave, and she placed her stepson with her mother-in-law. Applicant then
removed her sons from day care and placed them with a close friend (a woman who is
the functional equivalent of her children’s grandmother) who agreed to provide childcare
at no expense to Applicant.  Also in an effort to reduce monthly expenses, Applicant14
worked with her landlord (her father) to reduce her rent in exchange for cleaning his
home on a monthly basis. Likewise, Applicant changed her medical, dental, and vision
benefits coverage by eliminating her husband and stepson,  which reduced her15
expenses further.16
 
In November 2009, the Agency issued the SOR to Applicant. The SOR alleges
25 delinquent debts with various creditors for a total of approximately $45,000. More
than half of the debts, about 14, are medical creditors stemming from medical expenses
 Exhibit G. 17
 Exhibit H.18
 Exhibit H. 19
 Exhibit N. 20
 Exhibits G and P. 21
 Exhibit P. 22
 Exhibit P. 23
 Exhibit P. 24
 Exhibits B, C, D, and N. 25
 Exhibits G and U. 26
 Exhibit K. 27
5
not covered or paid by Applicant’s healthcare insurance. She denied five of the debts for
various reasons, but otherwise admitted the indebtedness alleged.
In December 2009, Applicant retained the bankruptcy attorney to represent her in
a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case.  Applicant completed the mandatory counseling on17
February 22, 2010.  In addition, Applicant completed three other computer-based18
courses on the subjects of credit, financial first aid, and financial planning.  The19
bankruptcy petition was filed the following day.  It includes a Schedule F listing20
unsecured creditors for about $81,000. This total amount is higher than the SOR total
amount because it includes student loans that Applicant intends to pay outside of the
bankruptcy. Many of the debts, about 25, listed in the Schedule F are for medical
creditors or medical bills. 
According to her bankruptcy attorney, they have proposed a plan that would have
Applicant pay her creditors back in full over the life of the Chapter 13 case at the rate of
$455 semimonthly for 60 months for a total of $54,600.  Applicant has also agreed to21
increase her payment if necessary and she has committed her tax refunds to the plan,
which may result in a shorter plan length.  The bankruptcy case is now ongoing, and22
the attorney anticipates it will go to the bankruptcy judge for final approval in August
2010.  The attorney views Applicant’s case as fairly routine and anticipates the plan will23
be approved as proposed.  Based on her current income and expenditures, Applicant24
has a positive cash flow and is able to make the bankruptcy payment.  Applicant began25
making her expected semimonthly payments in March 2010, and had made two
payments when the record closed.26
Also in March 2010, Applicant initiated a child-support case against the father of
her eldest son.  That matter is pending. In the same month, Applicant’s youngest son27
 Tr. 86–89. 28
 Exhibit G. 29
 Exhibit E. 30
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to31
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.32
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 33
6
was accidentally burned by hot water in the bathroom.  The medical treatment results28
in out-of-pocket expenses for Applicant, because she is responsible for 10% while her
healthcare insurance covers 90% of the medical expenses.29
Several individuals submitted letters in support of Applicant’s security clearance
application.  Both her childcare provider and landlord (her father) submitted letters in30
which they vouched for Applicant’s good character and trustworthiness. They also
corroborated Applicant’s testimony about her efforts to get her finances on track. Also,
current and previous coworkers vouched for Applicant’s good character and
trustworthiness. In particular, a field grade military officer, who is Applicant’s direct
government oversight, wrote a strong letter of recommendation vouching for her
trustworthiness, devotion, and loyalty to her job and this country. He described
Applicant as a key player, a hard worker, and a valuable employee. He had sufficient
trust in Applicant that he recommended she take on the roles of information assurance
officer and unit software licensing manager, roles in which she has excelled and
improved the unit’s ability to protect information.   
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As31
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,32
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An33
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 34
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).35
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.36
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.37
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.38
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 39
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).40
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.41
7
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  34
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting35
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An36
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate37
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme38
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.39
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.40
The Adjudicative Guidelines set forth the relevant standards to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the Government. The Government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the41
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG, ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).42
 AG, ¶ 18.  43
 AG, ¶ 19(a).  44
 AG, ¶ 19(c). 45
 AG, ¶ 20 (a) – (f) (setting forth six mitigating conditions). 46
8
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant42
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness, financial problems or difficulties, or financial irresponsibility. A security
concern typically exists due to significant unpaid debts. The overall concern under
Guideline F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  43
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
The record here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties as shown by the large amount of delinquent debt that she is now
facing. This history raises concerns because it indicates inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of44 45
Guideline F. The facts are more than sufficient to establish these two disqualifying
conditions.  
Under Guideline F, there are six conditions that may mitigate security concerns.46
The six conditions are as follows: 
(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances
9
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
The record evidence here supports a conclusion that ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply in
Applicant’s favor.  
First, Applicant’s financial problems resulted from a combination of
circumstances largely beyond her control and she did not act irresponsibly when
experiencing these circumstances. The medical problems and expenses, her periods of
unemployment when she was on short-term disability, her husband’s periods of
unemployment, the current separation and pending divorce, and the lack of child-
support payments are circumstances largely beyond her control that had a negative
effect on her financial stability. 
Second, Applicant has received financial counseling and taken additional classes
on her own. Moreover, there are clear indications that, since she separated from her
husband in May 2009, Applicant has taken charge of her finances, reduced her
expenses, and the larger problem is being resolved through the bankruptcy case. 
Third, Applicant is making a good-faith effort to repay her overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve the debts by pursuing the Chapter 13 bankruptcy case. Unlike a
Chapter 7 case where a debtor is no longer required to pay their debts and creditors are
barred from further collection activity, in a Chapter 13 case (also referred to as a wage-
earner’s plan) the bankruptcy court approves a realistic plan where the debtor pays
back the debts over a certain period (three to five years is common). While an applicant
pursuing a Chapter 7 case is entitled to claim little good-faith effort, the same cannot be
said for an applicant pursuing a Chapter 13 case. That is the case for this Applicant, as
she has proposed a plan to pay her creditors in full and has made the initial payments. 
Looking forward, I am persuaded that Applicant will successfully complete her
Chapter 13 plan, once it is approved, as she has already made initial payments. In this
regard, I am also impressed and persuaded by Applicant’s persistence and
determination. The evidence shows she has faced challenging and difficult
circumstances in the past and some of those matters are ongoing. Many people would
give up under these circumstances and simply take the easy way out via a Chapter 7
 AG, ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).47
 AG, ¶ 2(e)(1) – (6). 48
10
case, but Applicant is doing just the opposite. Her persistence and determination under
these circumstances show true strength of character, which speaks volumes about her
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s financial
problems do not justify current doubts about her judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-
person concept  and the adjudicative factors applicable to individuals who currently47
have a security clearance.  Concerning the latter factors, a core value of the industrial48
security clearance program is willingness to self-report adverse information. Here,
Applicant receives substantial credit in mitigation because she self-reported her financial
problems in January 2008. In addition, she sought assistance and followed the
professional guidance of a bankruptcy attorney; she appears likely to favorably resolve
the financial problems via the Chapter 13 case, although doing so will take time; and
she has demonstrated positive changes in behavior by ending an unhealthy marriage,
reducing her living expenses, and getting her finances under her control. Based on the
record evidence as a whole, I have no doubts or concerns about Applicant’s security
suitability or fitness. Applicant met her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.y: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.         
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
