 
 
 
 
1
                                                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                              DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ADP Case No. 09-00526 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
ADP I/II/III sensitive information is granted. 
 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office 
(CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence 
(ASDC3I), entered into a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provide 
trustworthiness determinations for contractor personnel employed in Sensitive 
Information Systems Positions (ADP I/II/III), as defined in the Department of Defense 
(DoD) Regulation 5200.2-r, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended 
(Regulation).  
 
On December 14, 2005, Applicant completed a Public Trust Position Application 
(SF 85P #1). She submitted a second application on June 5, 2008 (SF 85P #2).  On 
September 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B 
 
 
 
 
2
(Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 30, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On February 18, 2010, DOHA assigned the 
case to me. On February 25, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case 
for March 26, 2010. The case was heard as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and called four witnesses. She offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through N into 
evidence without objection. The record remained open until April 16, 2010, to give 
Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. On April 9, 2010, Applicant 
submitted three documents that were marked as AE O, P, and Q. I admitted them into 
evidence without objection.  DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 6, 2010.                     
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iran. The request and the attached documents pertinent to 
Iran are included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through XV. Those documents 
were admitted by stipulation. (Tr. 16.) The facts administratively noticed are limited to 
matters of general knowledge and pertinent to Iran, and not subject to reasonable 
dispute. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in SOR ¶ 
1, and ¶ 2, and provided information in support of her answers.  
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and never married. She was born in Iran. She went to 
high school and earned a bachelor’s degree in computer science there. After finishing 
college, she worked at an Iranian university in the field of information technology from 
July 1991 until June 1996. (Tr. 90.)  
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1996. At the time, her parents were 
living here. From October 1996 to January 2000, she worked as a programmer for a 
private company. (GE 2.) From January 2000 to June 2004, she worked as a director of 
development for another private company. In May 2002, she earned a master’s degree 
in computer science from a U.S. university.  (Tr. 85.) She became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in September 2002 and obtained a U.S. passport in October 2002. (GE 2.) 
 
 Applicant began employment with a federal contractor in July 2004, as a software 
development manager. Her annual salary is $106,000. (Tr. 102.) She owns a house and 
 
 
 
 
3
condominium in the United States. (Tr. 103.) She contributes to a 401(k) retirement plan 
through her employer. (Tr. 104) Her assets total approximately $687,000 and are 
located in the United States. She does not have any assets in Iran. (Tr. 104; GE 3 at 
23.) She does not receive any form of pension or retirement benefits from Iran. (Tr. 
102.)  
 
 Applicant’s parents were born in Iran. Her father worked as an accountant for a 
government agency from October 1960 to May 1980. Her mother taught school from 
July 1964 to June 1984. (GE 3.) They moved to the United States in 1990 and later 
became U.S. citizens. They reside with Applicant, who provides their financial support. 
(Tr. 88.)  They do not receive any monies from the Iranian government. They do not 
own property in Iran. (Tr. 103.) They do not have active Iranian passports. (Tr. 86.) The 
last time they traveled to Iran was in 2008 with Applicant. (Tr. 89.) 
 
 Applicant has one sister, who was born in Iran. She is a naturalized U.S. citizen, 
residing in the United States. (Tr. 87.) At this time, she has two cousins, who are 
citizens and residents of Iran.  One of them works for a pharmaceutical company and 
the other owns an orchard. (Tr. 101.) They have telephone contact a couple times a 
year. (GE 2 at 11, 12.) She visited them on her trips to Iran. One of her Iranian cousins 
is studying in Sweden. Another Iranian cousin immigrated to the United States with his 
wife. (Tr. 100-101.) Her aunts and uncles live in the United States. (Tr. 100.) 
 
 Applicant has two friends from college who are Iranian citizens. (Tr. 96.) One of 
them works for a private company there. They have not spoken for about a year, but 
have emailed one another over the years. (GE 3 at 8.) She visited her in 2008. (Tr. 98.) 
Another college friend lives in Dubai. She is married to U.S. immigrant, and is waiting to 
move to the United States. They email one another occasionally.  (Tr. 97.)   
 
 Applicant renewed her Iranian passport in November 2007, which is valid until 
November 2012. (GE 4 at 2.) She did so, in order to enter Iran, which will not recognize 
any foreign passport for an individual born in Iran. (GE 3.) After becoming a U.S. citizen, 
she used that passport to enter and exit Iran in January 2004, March 2006, and April 
2008. (Tr. 92.) She has not used that passport for travel to any other country. (Tr. 92.) 
On a couple trips, her parents accompanied her. All of them stayed with family or 
friends. (Tr. 93.) In Interrogatories that Applicant completed in July 2009, she indicated 
that she was willing to destroy the passport, if necessary. (Id. at 28.) On April 6, 2010, 
Applicant’s employer destroyed her Iranian passport. (AE P, O.) She is willing to 
formally renounce her Iranian citizenship, but does not know how to legally do so. (Tr. 
94-95.) She has no intention to return to Iran in the future. (Tr. 76.) Her closest friends 
are no longer there and it is dangerous to visit Iran. (Tr. 105.) 
 
 Four witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant, all of whom work for her 
employer. The vice-president of operations, a retired Army colonel, has daily contact 
with Applicant. He previously held top secret clearances and now holds a secret 
clearance. As a former military officer, he understands the security clearance process 
and security concerns. He is aware that Applicant’s Iranian background and passport 
 
 
 
 
4
have raised concerns. He does not question her loyalty and considers her performance 
to be “unequivocally outstanding.” (Tr. 30.)  He believes that should she be confronted 
with having to choose between a relative or a friend in Iran and American interests, she 
would choose the United States. (Tr. 31, 16-28.) The vice president of the reserve 
health readiness program testified.  He has worked with Applicant at both her current 
and previous place of employment. He has a secret clearance. He considers her a “very 
trustworthy individual. And I wouldn’t be here if I didn’t believe that 100 percent. “(Tr. 41; 
36-42.)  
 
 The director of event management testified. He met Applicant in February 2005. 
He considers her to be honest and a person of high integrity. He has no reason to 
believe that she should not have access to sensitive information. (Tr. 47; 43-53.)  
Another former employer testified. He met Applicant 15 years ago, when she applied for 
a position in 1996 with a company he co-founded.  He now works for her current 
employer and is her direct supervisor. Based on his observation of her over the years, 
he believes she is loyal to the United States and prefers it to Iran. (Tr. 57; 56-65.) 
 
 Applicant submitted copies of her 2007, 2008 and 2009 performance evaluations. 
Appellant’s performance appraisal reflected that she consistently met the expected 
standard of the critical elements of her job and often exceeded the standards.  (AE L, N, 
and M.) She also submitted recommendation letters from eight co-workers. All of the 
letters compliment her work ethic and integrity. (AE B, C, D, E, F, G, H, and I.)   
 
 Applicant expressed her loyalty to the United States. She stated, “There is no 
question or no, really no doubt in my mind about the preference that I have between 
U.S. and Iran. I mean U.S. is where I live and I want to live. And that’s where I came to 
live to have this life.” (Tr. 111.) 
 
Iran 
  
 Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The U.S. has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since 1980. 1 
 
 The U.S. Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
(1) Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction; 
(2) Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; (3) Its support for violent 
opposition to the Middle East peace process; (4) Its dismal human rights record; and (5) 
Iran’s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq.2 The U.S. has designated and 
                                            
1 U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Iran, dated March 2010. 
 
2 Id.  
 
 
 
 
 
5
characterized Iran as the most active state sponsor of terrorism. Iran provides critical 
support to non-state terrorist groups.3 
 
 The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary 
arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; 
severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement 
and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and 
legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.4  
 
 The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens who were born in Iran and the children of Iranian 
citizens, even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian, 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter and depart Iran using their 
U.S. passports; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or 
departure. U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian 
government. Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. 
Hotel rooms, telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personal 
possessions in hotel rooms may be searched.5 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
                                            
3U.S. Department of State, State Sponsors of Terrorism, April 30, 2009.  
 
4U. S. Department of State, 2009 Human Rights Report: Iran, Country Reports on Human Rights 
Practices, dated March 11, 2010.  
 
5 U.S. Department of State, Travel Warning: Iran, dated July 1, 2009. 
 
 
 
 
6
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] 
decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “[a]ny determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, and then he or she may be prone 
to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests 
of the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and  
 (b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
Applicant was born in Iran. She arrived in the United States in 1996 and became 
a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 2002. She obtained a U.S. passport in October 
2002. In November 2007, she renewed her previously issued Iranian passport, which 
she was able to do because she was born in that country. Renewing her passport was 
an action she took in order to obtain recognition of Iranian citizenship, so she could 
travel there. In January 2004, March 2006, and April 2008, she used that passport to 
enter and exit Iran. She possessed that current passport until April 2010, when it was 
destroyed. These facts are sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
After the Government raised a potential disqualification, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to establish any appropriate mitigating condition. AG ¶ 11 provides three 
conditions that could mitigate those concerns: 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 (b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 (e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 
 
 
8
Applicant’s previous Iranian citizenship was based on her parents’ citizenship 
and her birth in Iran. Applicant expressed her willingness to formally renounce her 
Iranian citizenship during the hearing, but does not know how to legally do so. In April 
2010, she surrendered her current Iranian passport to her employer, who then 
destroyed it. She has no intention to return to Iran. Accordingly, the above mitigating 
conditions provide mitigation of the security concerns that were raised. 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;6 and, 
 (b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
Since leaving Iran, Applicant periodically telephones two cousins, residing in Iran. 
Both are citizens of Iran. She also contacts a college friend periodically.  Applicant’s 
connections to these two family members and one friend could create a potential 
conflict of interest between her security obligations and desire to help them, only in a 
                                            
6 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
9
situation wherein they were taken hostage or otherwise threatened with harm if she did 
not cooperate with terrorists or their governments. None of these people have 
connections with the Iranian government or have positions in which they could 
otherwise benefit from her access to sensitive information or technology. However, 
under either disqualifying condition, security concerns in this case could arise in 
connection with the potential that hostile forces might seek protected information from 
Applicant by threatening harm to her family members and her long-standing friend who 
are citizens of and reside in Iran.  
  
  The Government produced substantial evidence of these disqualifying conditions, 
and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of the 
resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 8 provides three conditions that could mitigate the 
above security concerns:  
 (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
In this case, Applicant has contact with two cousins and one friend, who are 
residents and citizens of Iran. The current positions and activities of those people do not 
involve the government or military and they would have no interest in acquiring 
protected information. However, her relationships and contact with them potentially 
create a heightened risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because terrorists 
in Iran seek intelligence and are hostile to U.S. interest. Their physical presence in Iran 
creates the potential that their well-being could be threatened to the point that Applicant 
would confront a choice between safeguarding their interests versus those of the United 
States. Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) has limited application to the raised security concerns.   
 
Applicant produced significant evidence establishing AG ¶ 8(b). Based on her 
relationship and depth of loyalty to the United States, she can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. She has lived in the United States 
since 1996 and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2002. She received an advanced 
degree from a U.S. university. Her parents are U.S. citizens, residing in the United 
 
 
 
 
10
States with her. Her sister and other family members are citizens and residents of the 
United States. She owns property and holds bank accounts in the United States. Her 
U.S. assets total more than over $600,000 and no financial interests in Iran. She has 
limited contact with two cousins and friend, residing in Iran. She is a valued employee at 
her current position, earning a good salary and accolades from her employer.   
 
Since leaving Iran, Applicant has maintained ongoing, albeit sporadic, 
communication with two cousins and one friend in Iran. She visited them in 2002, 2004, 
2006, and 2008. Hence, AG ¶ 8(c) cannot apply, as those contacts have been 
sufficiently frequent and not casual over the years.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a public trust position must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The Appeal 
Board requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal 
loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family ties to the U.S. relative to his [or 
her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others 
raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 
2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Four circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole-person analysis.  First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and 
human rights abuses Iran. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists are hostile 
to the United States and actively seek classified information. Terrorists could attempt to 
use Applicant’s two cousins and friend to obtain such information. Second, she had 
numerous connections to Iran before she immigrated to the United States in 1996. 
Following her birth, she spent her formative years there. She was educated at an 
Iranian university where she subsequently worked for several years. Third, two cousins 
and one friend are citizens and residents of Iran. Fourth, she visited friends and family 
 
 
 
 
11
in Iran in 2002, 2004, 2006, and 2008, using her Iranian passport for three of those trips 
after becoming an American citizen. 
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant access to 
sensitive information. She is a mature person, who has lived in the United States for 13 
years, and has been a naturalized citizen for seven years. Her parents have lived in the 
United States since the early 1990s and subsequently became U.S. citizens. They 
reside with her. Her only sibling is a naturalized U.S. citizen and resident. Her aunts and 
uncles are U.S. citizens and residents, as are some of her cousins. Her familial and 
financial ties to the United States are much stronger than her ties to two cousins and 
one friend residing in Iran.  She is successfully working for a federal contractor, as 
impressively documented by her supervisors’ testimony and numerous letters of 
recommendation from other colleagues. The witnesses that testified at her hearing 
uniformly believed Appellant to be dependable, honest, trustworthy, and dedicated to 
her job. None of the witnesses had any reservations about Applicant having access to 
sensitive information. She credibly asserted her allegiance to the United States and 
desire to renounce her Iranian citizenship. Her Iranian passport was destroyed and she 
does not intend to return there. There is no derogatory information about her in the 
record. 
 
On balance, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to fully mitigate reliability 
and trustworthiness concerns arising under the guidelines for foreign preference and 
foreign influence. Overall, the record evidence leaves no doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:           For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position.  Eligibility for access to ADPI/II/III is granted. 
                                    
 
             _________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
