 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ISCR Case No. 09-06519 
SSN: 1 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
                                                               
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns created by her history of financial 
irresponsibility and the false information she provided in the security clearance application 
she submitted in July 2009. She has failed to take any meaningful action to resolve the 
debts listed in the Statement of Reasons (SOR). Her testimony and the evidence she 
presented give little reason to anticipate she will resolve those debts in the foreseeable 
future. 
 
                                                 
 
  
1 Applicant=s social security number was incorrect as listed in the original SOR. On motion of 
Department Counsel, without objection from Applicant, the SOR was amended on its face to list Applicant=s 
correct social security number. 
  
 
  
  
2
                                                
On November 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.2 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and 
Guideline E (personal conduct). Applicant submitted a response to the SOR that was 
received by DOHA on January 4, 2010. She admitted SOR allegations 1.a, 1.b, and 1.f, 
denied all other allegations, and requested a hearing. 
 
The case was assigned to me on February 18, 2010. A notice of hearing was issued 
on March 12, 2010, scheduling the hearing for April 13, 2010. The hearing was conducted 
as scheduled. The government submitted five documentary exhibits that were marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-5 and admitted into the record without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted two documentary exhibits that were marked as Applicant=s Exhibits 
(AE) 1 and 2 and admitted into the record without objection. The record was held open to 
provide Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation in support of her case. 
One document was timely received, marked as AE 3, and admitted into the record without 
objection. The transcript was received on April 27, 2010.      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant=s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old woman who has been employed aboard a military base as 
a material handler by a defense contractor since July 2009. Applicant graduated from high 
school in May 1987. She worked full-time as an hourly employee from November 1997 until 
May 2004, and as a project manager from May 2006 until January 2007. She worked at a 
variety of part-time jobs between May 2004 and May 2009.  
 
Applicant was married in August 1992, and that marriage ended by divorce in 
January 2010. Applicant has three children from this marriage, ages 16, 14, and 10. 
Applicant and her ex-husband share joint custody of the children who divide their residence 
time equally between Applicant and her ex-husband. Neither parent is required to pay child 
support or alimony to the other. The terms of the divorce included sale of the marital 
residence and an equal division of the proceeds of the sale. Applicant=s share of those 
proceeds was $7,200. Applicant is also to receive one-half of the couple=s 2009 income tax 
refund, which will be $2,600. The divorce decree allocated each person those debts that 
were acquired in their individual names and a home equity loan to Applicant. 
 
The SOR alleges two credit card debts (subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b), totaling 
$12,212, that have been charged off as bad debts. A lawsuit was filed against Applicant on 
March 29, 2010, for the largest of those two accounts owing in the amount of $11,477 (AE 
 
2 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, 
as amended and modified (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
  
  
3
2). Applicant admits she is responsible for both of these debts. She has not made any 
payments on either debt. 
 
The SOR alleges two accounts that have been submitted for collection (SOR 
subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d), totaling $1,566. A comparison of the various account numbers 
contained in Applicant=s credit bureau reports (GE 4 and GE 5) discloses these accounts 
originated as delinquent credit card accounts. Applicant agreed to a repayment plan on the 
account listed in SOR subparagraph 1.d in April 2010 (AE 1). However, she had not made 
any payments on that account as of the date of the hearing. Applicant testified she is 
uncertain what the account listed in SOR subparagraph 1.c relates to and she has, 
therefore, not made any attempt to satisfy that account because she is attempting to obtain 
documentation verifying that she is responsible for the debt (Tr. 36-37).  
 
The next two accounts alleged in the SOR (subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f) are accounts 
that have been submitted for collection in the total amount of $425. The underlying 
accounts on those debts are returned checks that were made payable to two different 
merchants. Applicant has not done anything to satisfy either of those accounts.  
 
Applicant disputes the final account listed in the SOR (subparagraph 1.g) which is 
owing in the amount of $150. In a statement she provided in August 2009 (GE 2), Applicant 
stated this account arises from a cell phone service early cancellation fee that the company 
had agreed to waive. She testified in a similar manner at the hearing (Tr. 21). The account 
remains unresolved. 
 
Applicant attributes the delinquent debts listed in the SOR to her ex-husband=s 
failure to pay them. While she acknowledges that the debts were opened in her name and 
allocated to her in their divorce, Applicant claims her ex-husband was solely responsible for 
handling the family finances during the course of their marriage and she had no idea that 
he was not making payments on these debts. However, she also acknowledged that the 
largest debt, owing in the amount of $11,477 (SOR subparagraph 1.a), represents a debt 
from a credit card she opened in or about April 2003, and which she stopped using in 2007 
because: AI quit using it because I was trying - - we went through and closed all of our 
accounts because I wanted to get out of my credit card debt.@ (Tr. 49)     
 
Applicant did not disclose any of her delinquent debts in the security clearance 
application she submitted in July 2009 (GE 1). She attributes her failure to disclose the 
accounts to her claim that her ex-husband was solely responsible for the family finances 
and that she was unaware he had not been paying these bills. She also claimed that while 
she was aware of one delinquent debt, she had discussed that debt with her employer=s 
security officer, and he informed her not to list it in the security clearance application 
because: Ashe did not have all of the proper information to list the debts.@ (GE 2) Her 
employer=s security officer submitted a memorandum wherein he admits he advised her to 
leave one subsection of section 26 blank in the security clearance application she 
submitted (AE 3). However, instead of leaving any subsection blank, Applicant answered 
ANo@ to every question inquiring about delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant=s net monthly income is approximately $1,800 - 1,900 (Tr. 43). Her net 
monthly expenses are about $2,130 (Tr. 43-44). Applicant does not have any savings, other 
 
  
  
4
                                                
than the money she recently received from the sale of the marital residence and the money 
she expects to receive from an income tax refund.     
 
Policies 
 
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a 
person=s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision 
must be a fair and impartial decision based upon the relevant and material facts and 
circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors listed in & 6.3.1 through & 6.3.6 
of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or 
against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be 
followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guideline F 
(financial considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct), with their disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, are most relevant in this case.  
   
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an 
applicant.3 The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.4 The burden of 
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,5 
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of 
proof.6 ASubstantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the 
evidence.@7 Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to 
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against 
her.8 Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
clearance decision.9 
 
No one has a right to a security clearance10 and Athe clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.@11  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.12      
 
3 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2. 
4 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14.  
5 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
6 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted). 
7 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2. 
8 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15. 
9 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15. 
10 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
11 Id. at 531. 
12 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive. 
 
  
  
5
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual=s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . . 
(Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 18) 
 
Applicant has multiple accounts that have either been submitted for collection or 
charged off as bad debts. The total owing on those accounts is $14,353. The largest of 
those debts resulted in a lawsuit being filed against Applicant in March 2010. Applicant has 
entered into a repayment agreement on one debt, but has not made any payments on any 
of her delinquent accounts. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts; and DC 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations apply. 
 
Applicant attributes all her delinquent debt to her ex-husband assuming sole 
responsibility for the family finances and then failing to pay her bills without her knowledge. 
However, as she admits, the largest debt arose from a credit card that was issued in her 
name and which she stopped using in 2007 because: A. . . we went through and closed all 
of our accounts because I wanted to get out of my credit card debt.@ (Tr. 49) Her testimony 
makes clear that she was aware of the large credit card debt as far back as 2007 after a 
discussion with her then husband about the credit card debt she was accumulating. 
Accordingly, Mitigating Condition (MC) 20(a): the behavior . . . occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and MC 20(b): the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and 
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances do not apply. 
 
Applicant has been aware of the delinquent debt since at least when she was 
questioned in August 2009 (GE 2). Shortly before the hearing, Applicant received $7,200 
from the proceeds of the sale of the marital residence which could have been applied to 
satisfy all but the largest debt listed in the SOR by the date of the hearing. Instead, 
Applicant had not made any payment on any of the debts as of that date. Therefore, MC 
20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and MC 20(d): the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts 
do not apply.   
 
Applicant disputes one debt listed in the SOR. However, she failed to present any 
evidence in support of her assertion that the creditor had agreed to waive the charge that 
underlies that debt and/or that the debt is erroneously listed in her credit bureau reports. 
Accordingly, MC 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
 
  
  
6
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue 
does not apply. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual=s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is 
any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. (AG 15) 
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose her delinquent debts in the security 
clearance application she submitted in July 2009. Her testimony that she was unaware of 
those debts because her husband was solely responsible for the family finances and she 
was unaware that he was not paying her bills is not credible in view of her admission that 
they discussed her need to control her credit card debt as far back as 2007. Her employer=s 
security officer confirms he instructed Applicant to leave a subsection of section 26 blank in 
the security clearance application she submitted. However, Applicant did not leave any 
subsection blank but, instead, affirmatively denied that she had any delinquent accounts. 
DC 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security quesionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities 
applies. I have considered all mitigating conditions and none apply. 
 
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case, 
the whole person concept, the factors listed in & 6.3.1 through & 6.3.6 of the Directive, and 
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the 
financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. She has not overcome the 
case against her nor satisfied her ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Guidelines F and E are 
decided against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-g:  Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-c:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 
  
  
7
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
Clearance is denied.           
 
_________________ 
Henry Lazzaro 
Administrative Judge 
 
  
  
 
