 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-00744 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
raised by Applicant’s family ties to Iran. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 1, 2008. On 
August 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines B and C. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 27, 2009; answered it on August 31, 
2009; and requested an administrative determination on the record without a hearing 
before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on September 3, 2009. On 
January 8, 2010, Applicant changed his mind and requested a hearing. Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed on February 12, 2010, and the case was assigned to me 
on February 19, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 24, 2010, 
scheduling the hearing for March 25, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government withdrew the Guideline C allegations at the hearing. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented 
the testimony of five witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 2, 2010. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Iran. The request and the documents attached as enclosures were not admitted 
in evidence but are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. I took 
administrative notice as requested by Department Counsel. (Tr. 20.) The facts 
administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old computer systems analyst for a federal contractor. He 
has worked for his current employer since August 2007. He has never held a security 
clearance. He previously applied for a clearance with another agency, but his 
application was denied because he had an active Iranian passport. (Tr. 47-48.) 
 
 Applicant was born in Iran. He came to the United States in December 1978, 
when he was 19 years old. He was accompanied by his aunt. He received a bachelor’s 
degree in industrial technology in 1986. (Tr. 36-39.) He became a U.S. citizen in 
January 1992. (GX 1 at 7.) 
 
Applicant worked for another federal contractor from November 1998 until he 
was hired by his current employer. He married a U.S. citizen in May 1983 and divorced 
her in January 1986. He married another U.S. citizen in October 1994. He has two 
children from his current marriage, ages 11 and 9. (GX 1 at 13-18; Tr. 48-49.) 
 
 Applicant obtained an Iranian passport in April 1997 to visit his ailing father in 
Iran. He visited his father for two weeks. His father passed away a few months later. His 
Iranian passport expired in April 2007, and he has not renewed it.  
 
 Applicant’s parents are deceased. His only sibling is a sister who is a citizen and 
resident of Iran. He has telephonic contact with his sister about 12 times a year. (GX 2 
 
3 
 
 
at 3.) In September 2004, he filed a petition for his sister to immigrate to the United 
States. His sister is a homemaker, married to an Iranian, and has one daughter. 
Applicant does not know what his sister’s husband does for a living, but he knows her 
husband is not connected to the Iranian government or military. (Tr. 55-56.) Applicant 
has seen his sister for only two weeks in the last 31 years, when he went to Iran to visit 
his dying father. His sister will be required to leave her family behind if she comes to the 
United States. (Tr. 59-60.) Applicant was notified in January 2010 that the U.S. 
Citizenship and Immigration Service had approved the petition. The notification does not 
grant any immigration status and does not guarantee that his sister will be eligible for a 
visa. (AX A.) 
 
 Applicant has telephonic contact about once a year with the aunt who 
accompanied him to the United States in 1978. She is a retired university professor. A 
second aunt with whom he maintained contact recently passed away. (Tr. 61-63.)  
 
Applicant has telephonic contact about five times a year with a cousin who is an 
Iranian citizen but lives in Canada. He has telephonic contact about five times a year 
with a nephew who is a citizen of Iran but lives in the United Kingdom. All his other 
relatives (an uncle, his uncle’s wife, and a cousin) are naturalized citizens and residents 
of the United States. (GX 2 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant has no real estate or other assets in Iran. He owns a home in the 
United States worth about $700,000, a second home worth about $300,000, and a 
vacation time share worth about $7,000. He has retirement accounts worth $229,700, 
personal property worth $50,000, and savings of $137,000. (AX B.) 
 
 Applicant testified that his loyalty is to the United States, and that he has no 
loyalty to Iran. He is devoted to the United States, his spouse, and his children. (Tr. 31-
32.) 
 
 Applicant’s sister-in-law has known him since he and her sister began dating in 
the early 1990s. She described Applicant as a “very honorable, honest man.” She 
testified that Applicant would never to anything to hurt someone he cares about. If 
anyone tried to coerce Applicant, he would report the effort to the appropriate 
authorities. (Tr. 73-75.) 
 
 A coworker testified he does not regard Applicant as a security risk. The 
coworker was not familiar with the SOR, but he is aware that Applicant has a sister and 
an elderly aunt in Iran, and that Applicant’s family is close knit. (Tr. 79-80.) 
 
 Two of Applicant’s close friends who have known him for 20 years testified that 
they do not regard Applicant as a security risk. They are aware that Applicant has a 
sister in Iran and is sponsoring her for immigration to the United States. (Tr. 83-84, 87-
89.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s spouse testified that Applicant is a very devoted husband and father. 
He is close to his sister in Iran, but they do not talk about his work, and his sister is 
unaware of his work. She testified that Applicant’s life revolves around his spouse and 
children. She is confident that if anyone attempted to coerce him through his sister, he 
would report it immediately. (Tr. 91-96.) 
 
 I have taken administrative notice that Iran is a theocratic Islamic republic 
dominated by Shia Muslim clergy, with ultimate political authority vested in a learned 
religious scholar. Current U.S. concerns about Iran are based on its efforts to acquire 
nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction; support for and involvement in 
international terrorism; support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; 
and its human rights abuses, including summary executions, torture, arbitrary arrest and 
detention, and restrictions on civil liberties. Iran has provided guidance, training, and 
weapons to Shia political and militant groups in Iraq. It also provides encouragement, 
training, funding, and weapons to anti-Israeli terrorist groups in its efforts to undermine 
the Arab-Israeli peace process (HX I at 1-5). 
 
I also have taken administrative notice that the U.S. has designated Iran as a 
state sponsor of terrorism. The U.S. broke diplomatic relations with Iran in April 1980, 
prohibits most trade with Iran, and uses multilateral sanctions and diplomatic pressure 
to contain the threats posed by Iran (HX I at 3).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s sister, aunts, and cousins are citizens and residents 
of Iran (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b), and he traveled to Iran “at least” in July 1997 (SOR ¶ 1.c). The 
evidence establishes that Applicant has a sister and one elderly aunt living in Iran. He 
has two cousins who are Iranian citizens, but one resides in Canada and the other in 
the United Kingdom. All his other relatives are naturalized citizens and residents of the 
United States. He traveled to Iran in July 1997 for two weeks to visit his dying father, 
and has not returned to Iran since the death of his father. 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
 
6 
 
 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. First, a 
disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). Second, a disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “connections to a foreign person . . . that create a potential 
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person . . . by providing that 
information.” AG ¶ 7(b).  
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S.  
 
Iran’s hostility to the United States places a “very heavy burden of persuasion” on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his family members in Iran do not pose a security risk, 
and he is not in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States 
and his family members. See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005) 
(stating an applicant has “a very heavy burden of persuasion to overcome the security 
concerns” when parents and siblings live in Iran). See also ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 
4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (articulating “very heavy burden” standard when an applicant 
has family members living in Iran). 
 
 The nature of Iran’s government, its quest for sensitive information, its deplorable 
human rights record, and its hostility to the United States create the “heightened risk” 
 
7 
 
 
contemplated by AG ¶ 7(a) and the “potential conflict of interest” contemplated by AG ¶ 
7(b). Both disqualifying conditions are raised by the evidence, shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).  
 
 Two mitigating conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant’s sister and aunt are not connected to the Iran government. 
Nevertheless, the nature of that government, its abuse of its citizens, and its hostility to 
the United States preclude application of AG ¶ 8(a).  
 
 The application of AG ¶ 8(b) is a closer question. Applicant undoubtedly has 
strong ties to the United States, but his witnesses also testified that Applicant, his sister, 
and his aunt are members of a close-knit family. His aunt accompanied him to the U.S. 
in 1978. His sister-in-law testified he is the kind of person who would never do anything 
that would hurt someone close to him.  
 
 Applicant testified that his loyalty is solely to the United States, his spouse, and 
his children, and that he has no loyalty to Iran. His witnesses testified that he would 
resist and report attempts to coerce him. This testimony is of limited value, however, 
“unless there is record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner in the 
past in comparable circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous track record of 
complying with security regulations and procedures in the context of dangerous, high-
risk circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the national security.” 
ISCR Case No. 07-06030 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 19, 2008). Mindful of my obligation to 
decide close questions in favor of national security, I conclude that AG ¶ 8(b) is not 
established. 
 
 Applicant’s one trip to Iran to visit his dying father in July 1997 has no 
independent security significance. See ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. Sep 21, 
2005). Accordingly, I resolve SOR ¶ 1.c in his favor. 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 At the beginning of the hearing, Department Counsel withdrew the Guideline C 
allegations. (Tr. 21.) Accordingly, I resolve all the allegations under Guideline C for 
Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has spent most of his adult life in the United 
States. He is deeply devoted to his family and his love for the United States is 
unquestionable. He has pursued and attained the American dream. On the other hand, 
he comes from a close-knit Iranian family. He has never been required to resolve the 
kind of conflict of interest that AG ¶ 8(b) contemplates. It is unlikely that the conflict of 
interest raised by his family ties to Iran will be resolved quickly. It took more than five 
years for his sister’s immigrant application to be approved, and there is no indication 
that his sister will receive a visa in the near future.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    For Applicant (withdrawn) 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
