                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06313 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On March 11, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline H. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 2, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 11, 2010. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on May 19, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
June 10, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant did not object 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
and they were admitted. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through J, which were 
admitted. Applicant and three witnesses testified on his behalf. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 18, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and has been married since July 2009. He has no 
children. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2008. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in 1997 and a master’s of business degree in 2008. While in college he was 
recognized as an outstanding senior, was the recipient of two scholarships, and was 
president of a student association. Applicant was granted an Interim Secret security 
clearance in April 2009.1  
 
 Applicant serves as a volunteer on the Board of Directors of a condominium 
association which enforces the rules and regulations of the property. He is also a 
volunteer consultant to a nonprofit charter school.2 
 
After graduating from high school, Applicant attended community college for two 
years. He decided he wanted to serve his country so he enlisted in the Marine Corps. 
He served in the Marine Corps from 1988 to 1993. During his enlistment he applied for 
and was selected to serve in the elite Marine Security Guard Battalion. The selection 
process and training requirements are rigorous, both academically and physically, and 
attrition is high. He served on embassy duty in Portugal and Tanzania. He held a Top 
Secret security clearance and a Diplomatic passport. He was praised for his 
performance and received a Meritorious Mast for his professionalism and dedication. 
His commanding officer noted in a letter of recommendation written at the time of his 
service: “I would eagerly seek [Applicant’s] service where the highest moral and 
personal character is required.”3 He also commented on Applicant’s performance as a 
Marine security guard stating: “[t]he constant daily demand for integrity, loyalty, 
initiative, and personal appearance were far beyond those of an average Marine 
sergeant.”4 Others noted his professionalism, dedication, knowledge, and leadership 
were above and beyond others.5 He earned two Good Conduct Medals and was 
honorably discharged in the rank of sergeant (E-5).6  
1 Tr. 43-44, 48-51, 79. 
 
2 Tr. 51-53; AE H. 
 
3 AE B. 
 
4 Id. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Tr. 44-48, 65, 105-107. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant was married on July 4, 2009. In August 2009, he and his wife traveled 
to several Asian countries, including Country A, for their honeymoon. Applicant had 
some friends living in Country A and arranged to visit them while there. He first met 
these friends in the late 1990s. Applicant and his wife met them all one night for dinner. 
After dinner Applicant’s wife was tired and retired to their room. Applicant and the others 
had some drinks and went to a boxing event. While at the event, a friend offered 
Applicant some ecstasy. He stated he took it without thinking about his actions. One 
friend refused it. Applicant credibly testified that as soon as he took the drug, he knew 
he should not have done so. He knew it was a mistake and knew his wife would be 
upset. He was also immediately aware that he was required to report his drug use to the 
government. He immediately felt terrible and regretted his actions. He admitted he has 
no excuses for his actions, that he let his guard down, and his actions rightfully raised 
concerns about his judgment that night. He regretted his actions and was remorseful 
and disappointed in himself.7 
 
Applicant describes himself as a person with a healthy lifestyle. He swims four 
days a week, does yoga, plays golf, and hikes. His diet is healthy and he consumes 
alcohol moderately. When drugs are prescribed for a recurring back problem he is 
reluctant to use them.8  
 
When Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA) on March 30, 
2009, he disclosed he held two foreign passports because his mother was born in 
Ireland and his father was born in Switzerland. Applicant was born in the United States. 
He knew that he would be interviewed at a later date by a government investigator 
regarding the passports and foreign contacts. After he used the ecstasy in Country A, 
his intention was to disclose the use to the investigator when he was interviewed. He 
stated it took longer than he had anticipated to be contacted by the government. He 
received interrogatories from DOHA and in his response he disclosed his August 2009 
drug use. His written disclosure is consistent with his testimony.9  
 
Applicant also disclosed his drug use to his wife when he received the 
interrogatories in October 2009. He explained he did not tell his wife immediately 
because he did not want to ruin their honeymoon. He described his wife as being very 
upset and disappointed in him. His wife testified on his behalf and confirmed she was 
disappointed with Applicant’s conduct. She understands he made a mistake and 
supports him. She is unaware of any other drug use by Applicant. She believes he 
exhibits the highest level of integrity. She believes that her husband’s drug use was an 
isolated incident and uncharacteristic of him. She also stated that if there was a 
recurrence of drug use by Applicant she does not know if they would remain married. 
She described Applicant as extremely honest, caring, thoughtful, and loving. He has a 
 
 
7 Tr. 53-55, 62, 86. 
 
8 Tr. 57-59. 
 
9 Tr. 51, 57, 73-76, 86. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
very supportive network of friends. She stated that although Applicant is a very social 
person, drugs are not part of his lifestyle. She and her husband are starting a family and 
she believes he will never repeat his actions. She stated that Applicant has “beaten 
himself up over this,”10 and really regrets his action. He is very remorseful.11 
 
Applicant testified and explained:  
 
I knew my wife also had a need to know as well, and I didn’t hold this back 
for… my first obligation-again, I know my wife does not understand this, 
when I served in the U.S. Marine Corps, we were, you know, Marine 
Corps first, and I that (sic) has been drilled into me. 
 
* * * 
I was a security guard. We had intelligence threats. We had terrorist 
threats. It was drilled into us how important transparency, honesty, 
integrity was, and I hate to say this, and I know my wife would not want to 
hear this, but in that case, my wife comes second, and my first obligation 
is to the U.S. government, 100 percent. And again, she said I sound like a 
robot when I say that. I love my wife dearly, and I did tell her at the same 
time I was disclosing it to the government.12 
 
Applicant has not seen the friends he met with on his honeymoon since August 
2009. He occasionally will see information about his friends on Facebook. He has had 
contact with one friend through “Skype” on his computer in the last couple of months. 
These friends continue to live overseas.13 Applicant admitted he used illegal drugs a 
couple of times in his past, but never while in the Marine Corps.14  
 
Applicant’s coworker and friend testified on his behalf. He served in the Navy 
prior to obtaining his bachelor’s and master’s degree. He is the father of three children 
and has been married since 1994. He has held a security clearance and worked with 
classified material since 1994. He has known Applicant for three years and they have 
worked together on the same team for two years. They see each otheronce or twice a 
week. He is aware that Applicant used ecstasy on his honeymoon. He volunteered to 
testify on behalf of Applicant because he is a valued member of their company and a 
close personal friend. He believes Applicant made a mistake. He described him as a 
thoughtful, diligent, and cerebral planner. He is always on time, prepared, and is 
competent and capable. He has leadership qualities. He considers Applicant’s 
10 Tr. 101. 
 
11 Tr. 63, 81, 85, 96-103. 
 
12 Tr. 89-90. 
 
13 Tr. 76-78. 
 
14 Tr. 59, 67-71. These matters were not alleged and will not be considered for disqualifying purposes, but 
may be considered when analyzing the whole-person. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
experience as a motivating factor to not repeat his actions. He believes he is deserving 
of a second chance.15 
 
Applicant’s friend testified on his behalf. He is a graduate of a service academy, 
spent nine years on active duty, and served as a liaison to the White House. He has 
held a security clearance since he was at the academy. He presently works for a 
consulting firm. He has known Applicant for five years. They see each other about twice 
a month socially. Although he was surprised about Applicant’s drug use, he believes 
this was a minor lapse in judgment. He commented about Applicant self-reporting his 
drug use and it was indicative of his integrity. He stated:  
 
I know people who have made false claims on security clearance 
[applications], been less than forthright, and I know that you are a person 
that, even having made this mistake and how painful this process would 
be after the fact, you would admit to having done in that fashion, and I 
thought that it was important for people to know that this was a minor 
lapse in judgment and not necessarily indicative of your character or your 
integrity. And I feel strongly about that.16 
 
The witness believes Applicant is open and candid. He has a genuine respect for him 
and relies on him as a trusted friend. He believes Applicant can reliably handle 
classified and sensitive information. He commented that “we are never too old to learn 
lessons” and Applicant has learned one.17  
 
I have considered all of the documents Applicant provided. A letter from a 
Marine, who is now a civilian, who served with him on embassy duty in Tanzania, 
provided a statement. He has known Applicant since 1991. He commented on the 
difficulties of embassy duty for young Marines who are far away from home in a strange 
country and the requirement that they are expected to immediately meet or exceed 
operational expectations. Applicant demonstrated his confidence in embracing those 
requirements and proved to be an asset to his detachment. He considered Applicant to 
be “a person with a high level of integrity that can understand the significant and 
potential consequences of his actions.” He concluded by stating:  
 
In conclusion, I think it is fair to say we all make mistakes in life and I 
firmly believe everyone deserves a second chance. It think [Applicant] 
should be judged not by one incident, but rather the strength of his 
character as evidenced by a lifetime of honorable service, actions, and 
behavior.18 
15 Tr. 32-41. 
 
16 Tr. 23-24. 
 
17 Tr. 20-31. 
 
18 AE F. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant signed a “statement of intent.” It stated: 
 
I, [Applicant] herby confirm that I will not abuse any drug (as defined in 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement, DoD Directive 5220.6, 02 January 1992) 
in any manner at any point in the future while holding a security clearance. 
 
I understand that if I were to abuse any drug, my clearance would be 
automatically revoked.  
 
Finally, should I abuse any drug at any point in the future while holding a 
security clearance I will voluntarily and immediately notify the U.S. 
Government that I have violated my statement of intent.19 
 
 Applicant voluntarily, and at his own expense, submitted a sample for drug 
screening. The sample was screened for ten illegal drugs. Applicant’s drug test result 
was negative.20 He volunteered to submit to periodic or random drug testing at his own 
expense. Applicant credibly testified that he will never engage in illegal drug use 
again.21  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
19 AE I. 
 
20 AE J. 
 
21 Tr. 60-63. 
 
7 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 
and conclude the following have been raised: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
8 
 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
Applicant admitted he used ecstasy on one occasion while holding an Interim 
Secret security clearance. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 
26. The following two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
  
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant used ecstasy in August 2009. His use was an aberration. He readily 
recognized his mistake and he voluntarily disclosed his actions. Although it appears he 
experimented with illegal drugs when he was younger, they were clearly not part of his 
lifestyle when he used ecstasy on his honeymoon. He immediately recognized his 
failure and was remorseful for his out-of-character actions. His use of an illegal drug 
while holding an Interim security clearance is inexcusable. However, it appears that it is 
a lesson that Applicant will never forget and is very unlikely to recur. He used poor 
judgment when he acquiesced to accepting the drug. The friends with whom he was 
with live overseas and his contact is minimal. There is no evidence he associates with 
drug users. His witnesses and character letters confirm that his conduct was 
uncharacteristic of the person they view as having an extremely high level of integrity. 
Applicant signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation should he use illegal 
drugs in the future. Applicant cannot turn back the clock, but he has done everything he 
possibly could do to show that he is remorseful, not an illegal drug abuser, and he is 
worthy of deserving a second chance.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
9 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant went 
to college for two years before deciding he wanted to serve his country. He enlisted in 
the Marine Corps and served in the Marine Security Guard Battalion, in difficult and 
dangerous jobs overseas protecting American Embassies. He was honorably 
discharged and completed his college education. He received scholarships and was 
recognized while a student. Applicant pursued a career and has acted responsibly and 
admirable. He is uniformly considered a man of integrity by those who know him well. 
However, he made a serious mistake by using ecstasy after he was granted an Interim 
security clearance. He immediately recognized the seriousness of his mistake and he 
reported it. His actions post-drug use reflect the character described by those who know 
him. He took full responsibility for his actions; he reported his actions to DOHA on his 
interrogatories; he disclosed his actions to his wife and friends; he signed a “statement 
of intent;” and he participated in a drug test. I have considered the statements from 
those who know him best. I have also considered that he is a devoted husband and he 
and his wife intend on having a family. His wife’s response that she is not sure they 
would remain married if he was to use drugs again, reflects the magnitude of the 
consequences he might face. I considered Applicant’s demeanor, his candor, and his 
credibility. No one, especially Applicant, disputes he made a terrible mistake. However, 
he did not hide from his mistake, rather he knew immediately that he had to disclose his 
drug use to the Government, and he voluntarily did so. Self-reporting is an important 
requirement and shows that despite the consequences, he complied. The record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
successfully mitigated the security concerns arising under the Drug Involvement 
guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
