1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-03757
SSN: --------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The record evidence
shows Applicant has a history of financial problems that are ongoing. He does not
appear to have a firm grasp or command of his finances. It is too soon to tell if he will be
able to make and maintain progress on repaying his delinquent debts. There is
insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns stemming
from his financial problems. Accordingly, as explained in further detail below, this case
is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Exhibit G; Applicant’s Exhibits A–F were admitted during the hearing.2
 Tr. 42; Exhibit A. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on November 30,1
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR also recommended that the
case be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me February 2, 2010. The hearing took place April 7, 2010. The
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received April 15, 2010.
The record was kept open until June 7, 2010, to provide an opportunity for
Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He made a timely submission,
and that document is admitted without objections.  2
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 64-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is seeking to
retain a security clearance at the current level. He is married, his wife is unemployed
and now receiving Social Security disability benefits, and he has two adult children.  
Applicant is employed as an aircraft mechanic supervisor working in the field of
unmanned aerial targets. He has been continuously employed since at least 1978. His
annual salary is now about $69,000.  His employment history includes honorable3
military service in the U.S. Navy during 1964–1967, to include service in Vietnam.  
Applicant has a history of financial problems that he does not dispute. This
history dates to approximately 1992, when he and his wife sought relief via a Chapter
 Exhibit 5. 4
 Exhibit 2. 5
 Exhibit B. 6
 Tr. 72–73. 7
 Tr. 61–62. 8
3
13 bankruptcy case.  Although they filed the necessary petition and related documents,4
they eventually decided not to pursue it and repaid their creditors directly. As a result,
the Chapter 13 case was dismissed. 
Applicant traces his current financial problems, set forth as delinquent debts in
the SOR, to the use of credit cards and to his wife’s loss of employment due to medical
problems.  His wife had gastric bypass surgery in 2004. She was able to return to her5
job without undue delay. Beginning in late 2006 and continuing into 2007, she began to
experience complications. In 2007, she had a procedure to address the complications.
Thereafter, she was unable to return to work due to her medical condition. 
Applicant’s wife applied for Social Security disability benefits, and her claim was
eventually granted in about March 2010.  Social Security determined that Applicant’s6
wife became disabled under their rules as of December 4, 2008, and was entitled to
monthly disability benefits beginning June 2009. A lump-sum payment of $8,370 was
made in March 2010, and a regular monthly payment of $930 began in April. Social
Security has chosen Applicant as his wife’s representative payee due to concern about
her ability to handle her finances.7
In addition to the 1992 Chapter 13 bankruptcy case, the SOR alleges and
Applicant admits seven delinquent debts for a total of about $44,000. Applicant used
money from the lump-sum payment, money from selling unused vacation days, and an
income tax refund to repay some of the debts.  The debts in the SOR are summarized8
in the table below.  
Debts Status
SOR ¶ 1.a–$17,768 collection account
based on a credit card account. 
Making $400 monthly payments; balance
of $18,168 as of Sep. 2009. (Exhibit 2)
SOR ¶ 1.b–$3,401 unpaid judgment
based on a credit card account.
Paid in full (about $5,300) in Mar. 2010.
(Tr. 48–49, 72; Exhibit F)  
SOR ¶ 1.c–$60 collection account based
on a medical bill. 
Paid in full Mar. 2010. (Exhibit D) 
 Exhibits 3 and 4. 9
 Exhibit 2. 10
 Exhibit 2. 11
 Exhibit 2 at 8.12
 Exhibit 3 at 15. 13
4
SOR ¶ 1.d–$4,800 charged-off account
based on a credit card account. 
Paid in full ($3,000) in May 2010; account
number 7351 (last four digits). (Exhibit G)
SOR ¶ 1.e–$12,548 charged-off account
based on a credit card account. 
Unresolved; account number 6160 (last
four digits).
SOR ¶ 1.f–$5,201 collection account. Same account as SOR ¶ 1.b. (Exhibit 2)
SOR ¶ 1.g–$299 collection account
based on a medical bill. 
No longer liable; removed from collection.
(Exhibit E) 
One debt was found to be unresolved because Applicant did not produce
sufficient documentary evidence to determine its status. Although the two debts in SOR
¶¶ 1.d and 1.e concern the same creditor, a major bank, the credit reports  and other9
documentary evidence  show that these were two separate credit card accounts10
opened with the same creditor. Indeed, when discussing these two accounts during his
background investigation, Applicant explained that he and his wife used the credit cards
to purchase various goods and services, to pay other bills, and for family travel and
short vacations.  He also explained that it was during this time that he and his wife11
“went nuts” using credit cards.  12
The most recent credit report, dated September 2009, discloses a credit score
from one of the major credit reporting agencies. The score is 599, which is considered
“very poor.”  13
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to14
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.15
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 16
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 17
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.19
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.21
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 22
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).23
5
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As14
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,15
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An16
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  17
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting18
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An19
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate20
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme21
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.22
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.23
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.24
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 25
 AG ¶ 18.  26
 AG ¶ 19(a).  27
 AG ¶ 19(c). 28
 AG ¶ 19(e). 29
6
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it24
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant25
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness, financial problems or difficulties, or financial irresponsibility. A security
concern typically exists due to significant unpaid debts. The overall concern under
Guideline F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  26
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
The record here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. This history raises concerns because it indicates inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within27 28
the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying
conditions. In addition, the record supports a conclusion of consistent spending beyond
Applicant’s means.  This is indicated by the amount of indebtedness, the apparent29
misuse of credit cards, and the low credit score. 
 AG ¶ 20 (a) – (f). 30
7
Under Guideline F, there are six conditions that may mitigate security concerns:30
(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Of those mitigating conditions, the most pertinent here are subparagraphs (b)
and (d). Applicant deserves credit in mitigation based on his wife’s medical problems
that resulted in loss of employment and disability. These were circumstances beyond
his control that hindered his ability to repay creditors. He also deserves credit for his
good-faith efforts to resolve his indebtedness as shown in the table above. But the
credit in mitigation is insufficient to overcome the security concerns. Applicant is facing
a large amount of delinquent debt—two accounts for about $30,000. He has not
addressed one account (SOR ¶ 1.e) in any meaningful way. On the other account (SOR
¶ 1.a), the most recent payment information he provided is from September 2009. For a
man of his age and maturity, he does not appear to have a firm grasp or command of
his finances. Looking forward, it is too soon to tell if he will be able to make and
maintain progress on repaying his delinquent debts. Although I am persuaded Applicant
is sincere and genuinely wants to take care of his delinquent debts, the record is
insufficient to make any safe predictive judgments.     
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s ongoing
financial problems justify current doubts about his judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, these doubts are
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).31
8
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due
consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence.31
Nevertheless, Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b–1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f–1.g: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
