                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-01793 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James Fleisher, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 25, 2008, Applicant submitted his security clearance application (SF 
86). On July 31, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
C (Foreign Preference) and B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 14, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 7, 
2009, setting the hearing for October 22, 2009. On October 14, 2009, the previously 
assigned administrative judge granted Applicant’s request for a delay until he could hire 
counsel. DOHA issued a cancellation of that hearing on October 20, 2009.  
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
I received the case assignment on October 21, 2009. DOHA issued a second 
Notice of Hearing on December 2, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
December 15, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through F, which were 
received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 4, 
2010. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until January 5, 2010, to 
submit additional matters.  On that day, he submitted Exhibits G-1 to G-4 and a revised 
Exhibit B, without objection from Department Counsel. The record closed on January 5, 
2010. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding to ¶ 1.a “September 3, 
2007,” as the issuance date for Applicant’s current Iranian passport, which is valid 
through “September 2, 2012.” Applicant’s counsel had no objection to this amendment 
and I granted the request. (Tr. 108, 109.)  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iran. (Tr. at 10-12.) The request and the attached documents 
were admitted into evidence as Hearing Exhibit 3. Applicant’s counsel argued that Sub- 
Exhibits XIII, XIV and XV were irrelevant and immaterial because they pertain to certain 
individuals of Iranian origin who were prosecuted under United States laws for various 
crimes. (Tr. 18, 19.) The Department Counsel asserted that the information was offered 
to show that Iran is an active collector of classified information. I admitted the 
documents and allowed Applicant to submit other exhibits pertaining to Iran which were 
marked as Exhibits G-1 to G-4. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶ 1.b, and 
Paragraph 2 of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1. a 
and 1.c of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support his request for 
eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He was born in Iran. His father is deceased and his 
mother is 80 years old. She is a citizen of Iran and lives there. Applicant telephones her 
once a month. He married his second wife in 2006 and has a child born on November 
12, 2008, in the U.S. They live in the United States. Applicant departed Iran when he 
was 21 years old to obtain college and masters degrees in England. His current 
 
3 
 
 
employment is as a staff engineer for a defense contractor. (Tr. 24-28, 45, 81, 82, 84, 
102; Exhibits 1, 2.) 
 
 Applicant came to the United States (U.S.) in 1997 after working in England since 
1977. He is a mechanical engineer. During those 20 years, Applicant traveled to Iran 
annually or biennially to visit his mother and other family members. Applicant became a 
citizen of the United Kingdom (U.K.) in 1990. He has a British passport that expires in 
October 2015. Applicant wanted to immigrate to the United States to work in a better job 
market. He travelled to the United States on a work visa (H-1) in 1997. He then obtained 
a “green card” and later United States citizenship on February 7, 2007. Applicant 
obtained a U.S. passport on Mach 16, 2007. Applicant has tripartite  citizenship with the 
U.K., Iran, and the U.S.  He maintains his U.K. citizenship to obtain his pension benefits 
earned while working in the U.K. for 10 years. (Tr. 28-39, 66; Exhibits 1, 2, C-E.) 
 
 Applicant’s spouse is 38 years old. Applicant’s son has a U.S. passport. His 
spouse was born in Iran and has Iranian citizenship with a “green card” in the U.S. She 
came to the U.S. three years ago after they were married. He met her in Iran on one of 
his earlier trips to visit his family. They own a home in the U.S. and have their bank 
accounts in the U.S. They do not have any foreign investments or bank accounts. Her 
parents are alive and live in Iran. Applicant talks to his father-in-law several times a 
month when his wife telephones her parents. (Tr. 39-42, 62, 78, 88, 93, 94; Exhibits 1, 
2, F.) 
 
Applicant renewed his Iranian passport in September 2007, which is valid until 
September 2012. He originally obtained the passport when he was 18 years old. 
Applicant renewed the Iranian passport after he became a U.S. citizen, though he may 
have completed the application before he became a U.S. citizen. He did so, in order to 
enter Iran, which will not recognize any foreign passport for an individual born in Iran. 
He retains the passport so he can visit his family. Applicant traveled to Iran in June 
2002 and 2003. Also, he went to Iran in June 2005, April 2006, July 2006, January 
2007. After becoming a U.S. citizen, he used his Iranian passport to enter and exit Iran 
in the April and September 2009, after using his U.S. passport to fly to Europe. He has 
not used his Iranian passport for travel to any other country. Applicant traveled to Iran 
after he received the SOR in July 2009, knowing that his travels to Iran and possession 
of the Iranian passport were a security concern to the U.S. Government. (Tr. 51-59, 70-
72.) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant stated he was willing to relinquish and destroy the U.K 
and Iranian passports, if necessary. Applicant surrendered his U.K. and Iranian 
passports to his company’s security officer on September 8, 2009, after someone 
advised him to do so.  Applicant did not state he would renounce either the U.K. or 
Iranian citizenships, just that he would allow the passports to be destroyed to obtain a 
security clearance. He asked his security officer if he could be allowed to retain the 
passports. Applicant is also willing to conduct his foreign travel using only his U.S. 
passport. He has no present plans to return to Iran in the future, except to attend his 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
mother’s funeral when that event occurs. (Tr. 48, 49, 59, 61-64, 67-69, 89. 92, 98, 105-
107, 113; Exhibits 1, 2, B, B-1, C, D, E.) 
 
Applicant also has three sisters and three brothers still living. They were born in 
Iran. The oldest brother, the fourth brother, died several years ago. The youngest 
brother lives in England and Applicant has not seen or spoken to him in several years. 
Applicant’s siblings are married to Iranian citizens, except for his youngest brother who 
lives in the U.K. Two brothers live in Iran. One brother and his wife are teachers, 
employed by the Iranian government. Applicant contacts them about every three 
months. Another brother works in an office and he is a widower. Applicant has not seen 
him for five years. Applicant’s three sisters live in Iran. A sister is a housewife. He has 
not seen her since his wedding in 2007. That sister’s husband may work in an Iranian 
Navy office. Applicant’s second sister is a housewife married to a children’s clothing 
manufacturer. His third sister is 60 years old. Her husband sold shoes for a living. 
Applicant’s father-in-law is a tailor. He lives in Iran and is a citizen. Applicant’s mother-
in-law is a citizen and resident of Iran. He speaks with his siblings several times a year. 
(Tr. 82-88; Exhibits 1, 2.)  
 
Applicant proclaimed his loyalty to the U.S. He does not have any financial 
interests outside the U.S. He acknowledged it is expensive to travel to Iran, even on his 
$83,000 annual income. (Tr. 65, 93, 102) 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding Iran: 
 
Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The U.S. has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since 1980. 1 
 
The U.S. Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
(1) Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction; 
(2) Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; (3) Its support for violent 
opposition to the Middle East peace process; (4) Its dismal human rights record; and (5) 
Iran’s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq.2 The U.S. has designated and 
characterized Iran as the most active state sponsor of terrorism. Iran provides critical 
support to non-state terrorist groups.3 
 
The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary 
1 U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Iran, dated March 2008 and 2009. 
 
2 Id.  
 
3U.S. Department of State, State Sponsors of Terrorism, April 30, 2009, and December 14, 2009.  
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; 
severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement 
and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and 
legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.4  
 
The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens, who were born in Iran and are the children of Iranian 
citizens, even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian, 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter and depart Iran using their 
U.S. passports; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or 
departure. U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian 
government. Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. 
Hotel rooms, telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personal 
possessions in hotel rooms be searched.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
4U. S. Department of State, 2009 Human Rights Report: Iran, Country Reports on Human Rights 
Practices, dated February 25, 2009.  
 
5 U.S. Department of State, Travel Warning: Iran, dated July 1, 2009. 
 
6 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference 
for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone 
to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests 
of the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship 
after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;  
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or           
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
7 
 
 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
and 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country. 
 
 Applicant was born in Iran. He arrived in the United States in 1997 and became 
a naturalized U.S. citizen in February 2007. He obtained a U.S. passport on March 16, 
2007. In September 2007, he renewed his previously issued Iranian passport, which he 
was able to do because he was born in that country. Renewing his passport was an 
action he took in order to obtain recognition of Iranian citizenship, so he could travel 
there. Between June 2002 and September 2009, he used that passport to enter and exit 
Iran for his own convenience, including after he became a U.S. citizen in 2007. He 
possesses that passport, which will not expire until September 2012, though he 
surrendered it to his security officer in September 2009. AG ¶ 10 (a)1 applies. 
 
Applicant also has a U.K. passport because he is a citizen of the U.K. and lived 
there from 1977 to 1997. He retained that passport so he could continue the future 
opportunity to collect government retirement benefits from that government. As stated 
above, he renewed his Iranian passport to make it easier for him to enter Iran to visit his 
family. AG ¶ 10 (a) 3, (a) 4, and (a) 5 apply.  
 
After the Government raised a potential disqualification, the burden shifts to 
Applicant to establish any appropriate mitigating condition. AG ¶ 11 provides four 
conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or 
birth in a foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce 
dual citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. 
citizen or when the individual was a minor; and 
 
 (e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant was born in Iran. His citizenship is derived from that circumstance. 
However, over the past 33 years he has renewed his Iranian passport at each 
opportunity to do so, even after he obtained U.K and U.S. citizenships. His dual 
citizenship is based on that action. AG ¶ 11(a) does not apply. Moreover, he moved 
voluntarily to the U.K. and lived there for 20 years. AG ¶ 11(a) does not apply to that 
citizenship.   
 
8 
 
 
Applicant recently expressed a willingness to relinquish his Iranian and U.K. 
passports, if it were necessary for him to do so to obtain a security clearance and 
maintain his employment. He did not state he would renounce both foreign citizenships. 
In fact, he asked his security officer if he could retain his passports and citizenships 
while having a U.S. security clearance. AG ¶ 11(b) does not apply.  
 
Applicant accumulated U.K. pension credits before moving to the U.S. in 1997 
and becoming a U.S. citizen in 2007. He wants to collect them in the future and 
intended to do so for the past three years after he became a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 11(c) 
does not apply 
 
Both of Applicant’s foreign passports were surrendered to his security officer in 
September 2009. He surrendered them only after he was advised to do so. They have 
not been destroyed, though Applicant testified he is willing to have them destroyed and 
use only his U.S. passport for foreign travel.  AG ¶ 11(e) partially applies . 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;6; 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 Applicant’s wife and five siblings are Iranian citizens and residents. His other 
brother is an Iranian citizen living in the U.K. Applicant’s wife lives in the United States  
with him and their child. All of Applicant’s siblings except one live in Iran. He has 
traveled to Iran eight times in the past twelve years, and seven trips occurred in the past 
six years. One of the latest trips occurred after Applicant received the SOR expressing 
the Government’s concern about his foreign preferences and foreign influence. These 
frequent trips, coupled with the Iranian government’s anti-American actions and 
statements, give rise to security concerns that if Applicant had access to classified 
information he could be subject to a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion by the Iranian authorities. AG ¶ 7 (a) and (b) apply.  
 
 Applicant’s mother and in-laws are also Iranian citizens and residents. Their 
presence in Iran and Applicant’s work in the U.S. could create a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion by Iranian authorities based on 
their past human rights violations. The Iranian authorities could pressure Applicant’s 
relatives to get Applicant to disclose classified information to keep them safe from 
criminal penalties or harassment by the Iranian authorities. AG ¶ 7(d) applies.  
 
Applicant’s pension benefits from the U.K. are a substantial financial interest in 
the U.K. Applicant could be subject to foreign influence or exploitation to keep access to 
those benefits. AG ¶ 7(e) applies. 
 
After the Government raised a potential disqualification, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to establish any appropriate mitigating condition. AG ¶ 8 provides conditions 
that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
6 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative 
lives in a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor 
alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result 
in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
10 
 
 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
 Iran’s bellicose statements and actions in recent years, and the lack of diplomatic 
relations with the U.S., coupled with Applicant’s close familial relations with his mother 
and siblings, make it more likely than not that Applicant could be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of his family and the theocratic government of 
Iran, and the interests of the United States.  His frequent trips to Iran using his Iranian 
passport make him vulnerable to coercion by that government. AG ¶ 8 (a) does not 
apply.  
 
 Applicant lived in Iran for 18 years until moving to the U.K. for higher education 
degrees. He lived in the U.K. for 20 years and became a citizen while retaining his 
Iranian citizenship. Then, Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1997 for better 
economic and job opportunities. In 2007, he became a U.S. citizen while retaining for 
pension reasons his U.K. citizenship and passport, and his Iranian citizenship and 
passport for his personal travel convenience to Iran. Applicant owns a home in the 
United States and has no foreign financial interests except his U.K. pension benefits. 
His foreign pension and familial interests create a conflict of interest. He does not have 
a long-lasting and deep relationship to the United States. He has spent only the last 13 
years in the United States, the least amount of time that he has lived in any of the three 
countries in which he holds citizenship. Therefore, he cannot be expected to resolve 
any conflict in favor of the U.S.  AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has frequent contacts with his mother in Iran. He also has frequent 
contacts with his siblings there, through telephone and travel over the years. Those 
contacts are not casual or infrequent. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s U.K. pension benefits exist. Applicant did not disclose the amount of 
those present or future benefits. The United Kingdom is a long-standing ally of the 
United States, dating back to before World War I. Those pension benefits are the usual 
 
11 
 
 
and common payments any worker could obtain with 20 years of work in the U.K. It is 
unlikely that they could result in a conflict of interest or be used to influence Applicant by 
the U.K. government, which does not engage in espionage against the United States. 
AG ¶ 8 (f) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. The Appeal Board requires the whole-person 
analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of 
an applicant’s family ties to the U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his 
or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).         
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Six circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole-person analysis.   
 
First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and human rights abuses in Iran. More 
importantly for security purposes, terrorists are hostile to the United States and actively 
seek classified information. Terrorists could attempt to use Applicant’s mother, his 
siblings, and his in-laws to obtain such information.  
 
Second, he had numerous connections to Iran before he immigrated to the U.K. 
and then the United States. Following his birth, he spent his formative years there until 
he was 18 years old.  
 
Third, all of his family members are citizens of Iran. Only one brother lives 
outside of Iran.  
 
 
12 
 
 
Fourth, he visited family in Iran eight times in twelve years between 2002 and 
2009 using his Iranian passport for two of those trips after becoming an American 
citizen. 
 
Fifth, Applicant has lived in the United States for only 13 years, and has been a 
naturalized citizen for three years. These periods are the least amount of time he has 
spent in a country from which he holds a passport, and claims citizenship. The evidence 
shows that Applicant moves around the world for his economic benefit, not from any 
loyalty or love for the United States. 
 
Sixth, and most importantly, he traveled to Iran in spite of being placed on notice 
by the Government that his possession of an Iranian passport and travel there created a 
potential security risk.  
 
Applicant did not mitigate the foreign preference and foreign influence security 
concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against 
Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
