                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00058 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James O. Roberson, Jr., Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 15, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F and Guideline E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 29, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 11, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 19, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
scheduled on June 8, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 14. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through I, which were admitted without objection. Applicant also offered a 
“Memorandum in Support” which was marked as Hearing Exhibit I. The record was held 
open until June 15, 2010, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents, which he 
did, and they were marked as AE J through N. The Government provided a written 
response, which was marking as Hearing Exhibit II. He had no objections to the exhibits 
and the documents were admitted. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 
15, 2010.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 The Government amended the SOR adding ¶ 1.e stating: “You failed to file your 
federal income tax returns for 2006 through 2009 and your state income tax returns for 
2008 and 2009.” Applicant did not object and the motion was granted. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to continue the hearing to permit him proper notice and 
opportunity to prepare his response. He elected to proceed with the hearing.1 
Department Counsel submitted copies of relevant state statutes. I have marked them as 
Hearing Exhibit III and taken administrative notice of them.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d and denied the 
remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 63 years old. He is married and has four grown children. He has 
been divorced three times. He has been married to his current wife since 1996.2 She is 
a nurse and works on a military installation. He served in the Air Force from 1964 to 
1968. Applicant graduated from college with an engineering degree. He also has earned 
a master’s degree. He had a security clearance when he was on active duty and again 
was granted a Secret clearance some time around 1990.3  
 
 Applicant completed his latest security clearance application (SCA) on December 
12, 2006, and swore to its accuracy. In it he disclosed he lived in State A from 
December 1999 to the present and listed a local address. While living in State A he 
worked for the same company from December 1999 to the present. He disclosed he 
1 Tr. 110-113, 150-153. 
 
2 Applicant testified he was married four times. He only lists one marriage ending in divorce on his 
security clearance application dated December 12, 2006. He does not list that he is currently married. In 
addition, he only lists one daughter and none of his three other children.  
 
3 Tr. 12, 27-35, 58, 139-143. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
lived from January 1996 to December 1999, at two different residences, in State B. He 
worked for the same company in State B, from January 1996 until December 1999.4 
 
 Applicant indicated in his response to SCA Question 27(c) that he had a lien 
placed against his property for failing to pay taxes and other debts. In the comment 
section he wrote: 
 
Pending case and previous cases against the fraud of the IRS. Private 
investigation revealed that this private agency was unconstitutionally given 
control of tax collection and assessment through a shady deal over the 
Christmas holiday period in 1913-1914 time era. Those who [challenge] 
the constitutionality of this act have tax liens placed on their property. 
Case histories are contained in my file. Current cases are: U.S. Tax Court, 
Washington D.C. Docket Number [xxxx-05 and xxxxx-04].5  
 
 Applicant lost his tax cases and his wages were garnished. Applicant provided a 
document from the IRS dated May 25, 2004, showing a release of levy against his 
wages.6  
 
 Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (NSP) on 
May 1, 1996, and swore to its accuracy.7 He disclosed that he lived and worked in State 
C from April 1989 to August 1990 and April 1993 to April 1996. He disclosed in the 
questionnaire that he lived in State D from August 1990 to April 1993, and that he lived 
and worked in State B from April 1996 to present, which was May 1, 1996. At his 
hearing, Applicant stated he left State C and moved to State B around 1996. He then 
stated: “[I] moved to [State A] in, I think it was like 2000, 1999, or 2000.”8 
 
 As part of his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided an affidavit and swore to its 
accuracy. In the affidavit he stated he lived in State D prior to 1988. He moved to State 
C in the mid-summer of 1988 and became a resident of State C. He surrendered his 
driver’s license from State D and obtained a driver’s license from State C. He returned 
to State D in February 1989 and packed his belongings and had his mail forwarded. He 
stated: “From that point forward, I never lived or worked in [State D]. From early 
February 1989 to the present, I ceased having any and all nexus with [State D].” At his 
hearing Applicant stated he moved to State C in the beginning of 1989 and became a 
resident. He obtained a driver’s license, a business license, and registered to vote in 
4 GE 1. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Tr. 90-91. 
 
7 GE 2.  
 
8 Tr. 36, 60-61. In GE 2 above the date “8/90”on the application there is a small question mark next to the 
month.  
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
State C.9 He further stated that from 1990 to 1993 he worked in State D on occasion. 
He would periodically go to State D for jobs, but was working under contracts from 
employers located in State C, where he lived. He stated State D was not his residence 
when he listed it in GE 2, but rather this was where he lived when he visited State D. He 
estimated he visited State D four or five times a year for approximately one week each 
time. In a statement provided on September 6, 1996, Applicant stated: “In February 92, I 
lost my job with the [Y] laboratory due to cut back[s] in the project I was involved with. 
From Feb 92 until April 96, I worked as a self employed software engineer in [State 
C].”10 Applicant listed on his NSP questionnaire that [Y] laboratory was located in State 
D and he worked there from August 1990 until April 1993.11 Applicant’s sworn 
statements and testimony are inconsistent. Applicant’s testimony that he had no contact 
with State D after 1988 is not credible.12  
 
 Applicant is indebted to State D for tax liens entered against him in 1998 and 
1994, in the approximate amounts of $8,012 and $6,491, respectively. Applicant 
disputes he owes these debts because he claims he did not live in State D. Applicant 
did not provide evidence to show he has formally disputed the liens with State D, has 
resolved them, or they have been released. He provided a copy of a certified letter he 
sent to State D claiming the liens do not belong to him because he did not live in State 
D in 1991, 1992 or 1993.13 He stated in the letter the following:  
 
 I moved out of [State D] in the 1st quarter of the year 1989 and became a 
resident of another state. I called the telephone number xxx-xxx-xxxx in 
your “notice” and received a phone announcement that the number was 
disconnected or not in service. I contacted my attorney and my 
accountant. They both advised me of scams by Israeli scam artists posing 
as Nigerians trying to steal money from U.S.A. citizens with various tax 
and inherited money scams. I understand that THE STATE OF [D] is 
financially bankrupt and is desperate in trying to raise funds. Please, move 
on to someone else who really owes you money and stop this shakedown 
process. Please update your records to reflect that I am not responsible 
for this debt and that I am not a resident of THE STATE OF [D].  
 
 P.S. Some questions which should be answered in order for [State D] to 
recover and survive the coming crisis. When is THE STATE OF [D] going 
to return the land stolen from Indian [People]. When is THE STATE OF [D] 
going to compensate the Indian Peoples for the years they were denied 
access to all of their land? The Indian Peoples (sic) may accept the 
9 AE B, C. 
 
10 GE 6 at 1. 
 
11 GE 2. 
 
12 Tr. 28, 61-79, 113-122. 
 
13 Tr. 45-57; AE I. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
“improvements” and return of their land as compensation for the years of 
denial of access to their land. Only God knows. 
 
 My understanding is that God does not like lying, stealing, and cheating 
murderers. That the One God is patient and does allow people free will, 
but God is also JUST and destroys those who are unjust. A word to the 
wise is sufficient to get them onto the correct path.14 
 
 In a statement made to a Government investigator on September 6, 1996, 
Applicant stated the following:  
 
State Tax Lien from [county] Recorder Office in Oct 94 for $6,400. I was 
unaware of any [State D] tax lien against me. I do not recall that [State D] 
claimed I owed taxes the details of which I do not recall. I thought that it 
had all had been paid. (sic) I was told that [State D] requires a release and 
a copy of my driver’s license to check [State C] state tax records.15  
 
It is unclear if this is one of the tax liens alleged or a different one. In any event, it 
is clear that Applicant was aware there was a tax issue from State D that was 
unresolved. Applicant’s position is he was unaware until 2009 that there were existing 
tax liens against him from State D. Applicant’s 2006 SCA and 1996 NSP questionnaire 
list the dates he lived in State D and is consistent with State D’s tax liens. Applicant did 
not provide evidence that he has resolved the tax liens.16  
 
 Applicant provided copies of two checks issued from State D to Applicant. In 
2007, he discovered an unclaimed property fund in State D. He learned his name was 
listed and he submitted a claim. He then received the two checks. It appears the 
amounts are distributions from investment funds. The dates of the checks are June 19, 
2007 and August 8, 2007. Applicant’s position was that he would not have received 
these checks if he owed State D money. No evidence was provided to show that the 
fund that issued the checks was aware that State D’s tax board had a lien against 
Applicant. Applicant did not provide evidence to show what the appropriate rules are for 
the tax board to confiscate the checks.17  
 
 Applicant moved to State A in December 1999 as is reflected in his SCA.18 His 
testimony is that he has been living in State A since 2000. He never obtained a driver’s 
license from State A, as is required. He is required to file state income taxes in State A 
14 Id. 
 
15 GE 6 at 4. 
 
16 Tr. 47-57, 94-107. 
 
17 Tr. 47; AE E, F. 
 
18 GE 1. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
because of his continued presence in the state more than 183 days.19 He stated he is in 
State A temporarily. He has lived in State A temporarily for the past 10 years. 
Applicant’s testimony is not believable. Applicant claims he continues to be a resident of 
State C and travels there about three days a year. State C does not have a state 
income tax. He maintains a driver’s license in State C. He is registered to vote in State 
C, and voted by mail in State C’s local election in the past year. When he purchased a 
car, State A required him to register it in the state. The residential address he provided 
to his employer is located in State A. He registers two other vehicles in State C.20   
 
 State A required Applicant to file state income returns due to his presence in the 
state, and his employment in the state. He did not file his 1999 to 2005 state tax returns 
on time. He did not file his state income tax returns for 2006 to 2009. Applicant 
contested in court that he owed State A income taxes. He lost the case and State A 
garnished his wages. Applicant did not provide evidence that he filed his 2006 to 2009 
state income tax returns. Applicant provided a “Notification of Overpayment” letter from 
State A for tax year 2001 in the amount of $1,223.38. In addition, he provided a letters 
showing that $96 in interest was owed to him for tax year 2001. These documents show 
he was due a refund in 2001. He did not provide evidence that his State A tax liens 
have been released.21  
 
 In May 2006, Applicant contacted a Certified Public Accounting firm (CPA) for tax 
and financial advice. He stated: “after I had the consultation with [CPA firm], they 
suggested that I, you know, start paying, paying taxes.”22 They recommended that he 
file the open year’s tax returns (2006) in the future. The CPA firm assisted in the 
preparation of Federal and State A income tax return filings for 2000 through 2005. At 
that time no federal or state income taxes were being withheld from Applicant’s 
paycheck. The CPA firm recommended that Applicant have the current year’s income 
taxes withheld from his paycheck, and that he should implement a budget, if he did not 
already have one. The CPA firm was made aware that Applicant’s wages were being 
garnished for prior tax obligations, but they were not involved in that process.23  
 
 The CPA firm did not advise Applicant or assist him in preparing his income tax 
returns for 2006, 2007, or 2008. In 2009, Applicant contacted the CPA firm regarding a 
tax claim from State D. The firm advised him to handle the matter himself, because their 
involvement would be cost prohibitive. The CPA firm noted it was their understanding 
the matter was resolved in Applicant’s favor. No evidence was provided to support that 
position. The CPA firm also noted that it is not uncommon when a taxpayer moves from 
19 HE III. 
 
20 Tr. 37, 79-84, 122-123, 131-132. 
 
21 Tr. 36-38, 43-45; AE L, M. 
 
22 Tr. 85-86. 
 
23 Tr. 42, 84-89; AE G. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
one state to another that the former state of residence issues a tax bill. There is 
additional confusion if the new state does not have an income tax, which is a way to 
prove there is a new state of residence.24  
 
 Applicant did not timely file his federal income tax returns from 2004 to 2009. His 
wages were garnished in the amount of approximately $40,000. When asked if he filed 
his federal income tax returns for 2006 to 2009, he stated “I just let them take the 
maximum out of my paycheck.”25 Applicant admitted he did not fill out and file the 
appropriate tax return forms.26 Applicant claims he is having income tax withheld from 
his paycheck. He did not provide any evidence of the amount of federal or state income 
tax withheld from his paycheck.  
 
 Applicant provided a statement to an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management on June 30, 2009. He stated:  
 
 Both the [f]ederal and [State A] tax liens have been satisfied and I have 
not had any other past or current tax issues. I now have an 
accountant/attorney [Mr. X of State Y] handling the filing of my taxes to 
help avoid any issues or problems in the future. The only people that know 
about these issues are those involved to include my accountant.27  
 
* * * 
 
 As an added note about my tax lien issues, I was not attempting to be 
dishonest or otherwise avoid paying taxes on these issues. I had let the 
IRS file for me in years prior to this issue. They usually withheld enough 
money and allowed them to calculate what I owed and charge me 
accordingly. I am not sure what happened on these two federal liens and 
can only guess they did not know my correct salary or bonuses I received 
and did not withhold enough during the year.28  
 
Applicant’s statement contradicts information provided in the affidavit by the CPA firm 
and his testimony. The CPA firm stated they did not file Applicant’s federal or state 
income tax returns beyond 2005. They advised him to file his tax returns in 2006. 
Applicant admitted at his hearing he had not filed his 2006 through 2009 state tax 
returns.29 
24 Id. 
 
25 Tr. 87. 
 
26 Tr. 87-90. 
 
27 GE 5 at 3. 
 
28 Id. 
 
29 Tr. 87-90. 
 
8 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 Applicant stated at his hearing that he was unaware that he was required to file 
federal tax return forms through the IRS Collection Agency.30 This statement contradicts 
his statement of June 30, 2009. He also provided a statement in September 6, 1996. In 
it he stated:  
 
 During 1994/1995 time period, the IRS claimed that I owed $18,000 or 
$20,000 in taxes. I did not have much income coming in so [the] IRS took 
the money owed from stocks I that I owned. (sic) To my knowledge the 
IRS received the money they required. I have been current with the filing 
of my taxes. However I did not file for tax years 1993, 1994, and 1995. I 
was not required to file because I did not make enough money for those 
years to file.31 
 
 Applicant was aware as far back as at least 1994, when he made the above 
statement, of his duty to file his income tax returns. Applicant’s position was that he 
understood he had to pay taxes, but did not know he had to file his income tax returns. 
He stated he believed the government could take the maximum money from his pay to 
satisfy his taxes and because he did not care about receiving a refund, he did not have 
to file a form. He believed filing the form was a formality. I find Applicant was not 
credible.32 
 
 I find Applicant’s testimony throughout the hearing was untruthful, intentionally 
misleading, and he repeatedly provided false testimony. I have considered all of the 
documents provided to me by Applicant.33  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are must be 
considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
 
 
30 Tr. 90-93. Applicant protests the constitutionality of the IRS and Federal Reserve. Those matters are 
not pertinent to the issues raised in this hearing and will not be addressed.  
 
31 Tr. 124-131. GE 6 at 3. Applicant confirmed the signature on the document belonged to him, but could 
not recall aspects of his statement.  
 
32 Tr.134-141, 153-154. 
 
33 AE A-N. 
 
9 
 
 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
10 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant has a long history of failing to file his federal and state income tax 
returns. He did not file his federal tax returns in 2004 and 2005 and his wages were 
garnished. He again failed to file his 2006 through 2009 federal tax returns. He failed to 
file his state income tax returns from 1999 to 2007 and his wages were garnished. He 
again failed to file his state income tax returns from 2008 to 2009. Applicant incurred tax 
obligations while living in State D that he has not paid. Tax liens were entered against 
him by State D. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise all of the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
11 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 I find none of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has intentionally and 
deliberately failed to file his federal and state income tax returns. He has contested the 
legitimacy of the IRS and other tax issues in federal and state court and lost. In 2006, 
his CPA firm assisted him in filing his 2000 to 2005 federal and state income tax returns. 
He was advised by the CPA firm that he should file his 2006 federal and state income 
tax returns and he did not. He admitted he did not file his 2006 through 2009 federal 
income tax returns. He admitted he did not file his 1999 through 2009 state income tax 
returns. It appears that sometime around 2006 or 2007 he began to have taxes withheld 
from his income, but claims he did not know he had to actually file the tax forms. He did 
not provide sufficient evidence regarding taxes being withheld from his income. Based 
on all of the evidence, I find Applicant was well aware of his obligation to file his federal 
and state income tax return forms and did not.  
 
 Applicant has been living in State A since 1999 or 2000, and has not willingly 
paid his taxes. State A has had to garnish his wages. Applicant failed to change his 
state of residence to State A after living there for the requisite time period, as is required 
by law. He continues to owe State D taxes. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to 
provide evidence that he filed the federal and state income tax returns in question, and 
he did not. Applicant’s intentional actions cast doubt on his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. His repeated conduct raises serious doubts about his ability to follow 
rules. None of the circumstances that were raised were beyond his control. Factually, 
he created all of the issues by his repeated actions. Paying past taxes through 
garnishment is not a good-faith effort to resolve his problems. There are not clear 
indications the problem is resolved because Applicant continues to fail to file his income 
tax returns. His disputes were resolved against him in court.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:   
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answered during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG ¶ 16 and especially considered the following: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress such as 
 
12 
 
 
(1) engaging in activities which , if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant has a long history of failing to file his income tax returns, both federal 
and state. He claimed residency in a state he had not lived in for over ten years, 
presumably to avoid paying state income taxes in the state where he lives. His actions 
forced State A, where he was living, to garnish his wages to pay his tax liability. His 
failure to file his federal income tax returns forced the federal government to garnish his 
wages to pay his tax liability. He did not provide proof that he has filed his 2006 through 
2009 federal income tax returns. He did not provide proof he has filed his 2006 through 
2009 state income tax returns. His conduct was deliberate and intentional. I find 
Applicant’s actions reflect questionable judgment and untrustworthy behavior. I find his 
personal conduct creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
because it may affect his personal, professional and community standing. Therefore, 
the above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 17. I find three potentially 
applicable. They are:  
  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
  Applicant’s repeated and intentional disregard for filing his federal and state 
income tax returns is not minor. His deliberate actions and failure to show he is current 
in filing his taxes cast serious doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good 
judgment. He has not acknowledged or corrected the behavior. To the contrary, his 
behavior is a continuing course of conduct that has not ceased. The conduct is likely to 
recur and he has not taken steps to reduce his vulnerability. Applicant’s testimony was 
unbelievable. He is aware of his obligation to file and pay his taxes. Instead, he chooses 
to force the federal and state government to garnish his wages or levy a tax lien against 
him. I find none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
13 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served his country in the 
Air Force. He has worked for a federal contractor for many years and held a security 
clearance. Applicant is well aware of his responsibility to file and pay federal and state 
income taxes. He has consistently and intentionally neglected his legal responsibility. 
His response that he was unaware that he actually had to file a form was disingenuous 
and his testimony lacked candor. His CPA firm provided an affidavit that they assisted 
him in filing his 2000 through 2005 Federal and state income tax returns and advised 
him to file his 2006 returns. He did not resolve State D’s tax liens. His actions show that 
he is unwilling to follow rules. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the guidelines for Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
