 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07078 
 SSN:  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 21, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 11, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on May 18, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
June 8, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received 
 
2 
 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A 
through E, which were admitted without objection. The Government called Applicant’s 
wife in rebuttal. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 16, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance. He has an associate’s degree. He married in 1990 and divorced in 
1996. He married again in 2008. He has two children with his first wife, ages 20 and 16. 
He and his current wife have an infant, and he has two stepchildren, ages four and 
three.1 
 
 The SOR alleges two delinquent debts for $11,257 and $7,920. The debts 
became delinquent in about 2003. Applicant traveled extensively for months at a time 
for work. He also had some periods of unemployment. His mother handled his finances 
while he traveled. He submitted documentation showing that both debts were paid. He 
stated that his mother paid the debts on his behalf. The documentation for the $7,920 
debt shows the debt was paid in October 2004. The documentation for the $11,257 debt 
does not show when the debt was paid. Applicant and his wife credibly testified the two 
debts were paid at the same time.2  
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. His current financial situation is 
stable. He is living within his means and not accruing new delinquent debt.3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
June 2, 2009. Section 26 requested Applicant to “answer for the last 7 years, unless 
otherwise specified in the question.” He answered “No” to Questions 26m and 26n, 
which asked “Have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and “Are you 
currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” The answer to Question 26n was 
accurate because Applicant was not then delinquent on any debts. He should have 
answered “Yes” to Question 26m because the two debts became delinquent in 2003 
and were not paid until October 2004, which was within the seven-year window. 
Applicant credibly denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. He stated that he did not 
think about the two debts because they were paid a number of years before the SF 86 
was completed. He also indicated that he misunderstood the question. Applicant 
submitted derogatory information under a different question (Section 22).4 After 
considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant did not intentionally falsify his SF 86.  
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 25-30, 33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-24, 34-36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE B-D. 
 
3 Tr. at 24, 36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5; AE E. 
 
4 Tr. at 18-19, 26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated two delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay 
his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s two delinquent debts were paid in 2004. There is no evidence of any 
current problems. The debts do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment. He has not received financial counseling, but the problem has been 
resolved and is under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are applicable. Financial 
Considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant provided inaccurate information on his SF 86, but, as addressed 
above, it was not intentional. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. Personal Conduct security 
concerns are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
6 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant resolved the two delinquent debts alleged in the SOR in 2004. His finances 
are currently in good order. He did not intentionally falsify his SF 86.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
