 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-04707 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Army from March 1997 to March 
2006. She received a security clearance in January 1998 and was eligible for access to 
sensitive compartmented information (SCI) during her military service.  
 
On December 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to 
revoke her clearance, citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 18, 2009; answered it on January 4, 
2010; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on January 8, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
18, 2010, and the case was assigned to me on March 4, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on March 10, 2010, scheduling the hearing for March 25, 2010. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through H, which were admitted without objection. 
I kept the record open until April 1, 2010, to enable Applicant to submit additional 
documentary evidence. At her request, I extended the deadline until April 9, 2010. She 
timely submitted AX I, J, and K, which were admitted without objection. Department 
Counsel’s comments regarding AX I, J, and K are attached to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 1, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a and 
denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. Her admissions in her answer and at the hearing 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old network engineer employed by a defense contractor. 
She holds an associate’s degree in business and is working toward her bachelor’s 
degree through an on-line university. (Tr. 42.) She married in December 2000 and 
divorced in December 2001. She remarried in August 2007, but she was separated as 
of the date of the hearing. She and her husband were uncertain at the hearing whether 
they would reconcile or seek a divorce. She has two children born from her previous 
marriage and one born during her current marriage. (Tr. 42-43.) 
 
 Applicant purchased a home for $300,000 in October 2005, financed with two 
sub-prime mortgages, while she was still on active duty as a U.S. Army sergeant (pay 
grade E-5). The first mortgage was an adjustable-rate mortgage for $240,000 and the 
second was a fixed-rate mortgage for $60,000. (Tr. 46.) Both mortgages were with the 
same lender, to whom Applicant was referred by the real estate agent who sold her the 
house. Payments on the two mortgages totaled about $2,211 month. (GX 3 at 5; AX G 
at 12-13.) Applicant’s monthly take-home pay was about $ 3,956. (AX G at 12.) 
 
 Applicant testified that she was financially naïve when she negotiated the 
purchase of her home and the related financing. She had never purchased a home 
before. She did not know the terms of her mortgages until closing. She testified she was 
unaware that she could withdraw from the purchase agreement up to the time that 
closing was completed. (Tr. 21-22).  
 
 Applicant started working part time for a defense contractor while she was still on 
active duty. She continued to work for this contractor after leaving active duty, but she 
was laid off for about two weeks, and was late in making a mortgage payment. She 
notified the mortgage lender in June 2006 that she was having difficulty making her 
 
3 
 
 
payments, and she was advised that a hardship assistance program was available. She 
applied for that program in August 2006, and the late payment apparently was resolved. 
(AX K.)  
 
In May 2007, Applicant was laid off and was unemployed for about a month. She 
found a temporary job that lasted until September 2007, and was then unemployed until 
November 2007, when she was hired by her current employer. (Tr. 57-58.). She missed 
her mortgage payments for October, November, and December 2007. She received a 
foreclosure notice in December 2007, and she and her family moved out of the house 
into an apartment in January 2008 to avoid eviction. (GX 3 at 3, 5.) She made no further 
payments. 
 
Applicant tried to refinance the mortgage but was unsuccessful. (Tr. 62-63.) A 
friend offered to buy Applicant’s house for $175,000, but the mortgagor would not agree 
to the short sale. (AX H.) The mortgagor moved forward with the foreclosure and 
scheduled an auction for April 2008, with a starting bid of $109,000. (GX 3 at 5; AX E at 
6.) The action to revoke her clearance was triggered when she self-reported the 
foreclosure to her facility security officer. (Tr. 8.) 
 
 Applicant did not contact the mortgage company after January 2008. She learned 
through an internet search that the house was sold for about $90,000. (Tr. 38-39.) 
 
 Applicant’s credit report dated July 17, 2009, reflected that the two mortgage 
debts were transferred to another creditor, with a zero balance on the first mortgage and 
a balance of $59,545 on the second mortgage, charged off as a bad debt. (GX 4 at 2-3.) 
An August 2009 account statement from the original lender also reflects a zero balance 
on the first mortgage. (GX 2 at 7.)  
 
When Applicant was questioned by a security investigator about the delinquent 
second mortgage in November 2008, she was unaware that a new creditor held the 
second mortgage debt. (GX 3 at 5.) In response to DOHA interrogatories in August 
2009, she acknowledged the delinquent second mortgage, reported the current balance 
as zero, and stated that the account was shown on her credit report as charged off. (GX 
2 at 2.) In her answer to the SOR, she admitted being indebted to the new creditor in 
the amount of $59,546. There is no evidence that she attempted to contact the new 
creditor. She has not disputed the credit report information. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent medical bill was incurred during the birth of her youngest 
child, but she did not know that she owed anything until it was referred for collection, 
because the bill was mailed to the wrong address. (GX 3 at 6; Tr. 65-66.) The medical 
bill was paid in August 2008. (AX J.)  
 
 Applicant has not sought or received financial counseling. Her current monthly 
net income is about $4,260. Her expenses are about $2,511, leaving a remainder of 
about $1,749. (AX B.) She uses some of the remainder to help her mother. (Tr. 70.) 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant and her three children have been living with her brother since November 
2009, and she pays him rent of $1,000 per month. (Tr. 68, 78.)  
 
Applicant’s brother is a federal employee and holds a security clearance. He was 
generally familiar with Applicant’s efforts to avoid foreclosure, but he was not familiar 
with the details. (Tr. 79-80.) Her spouse, who is employed by a federal law enforcement 
agency and holds a clearance, corroborated Applicant’s efforts to avoid foreclosure. (Tr. 
89-91.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor has known her since 2003, when she was on active duty. 
Applicant has continued to work for the same supervisor as a civilian contractor 
employee. Her supervisor strongly endorses continuation of Applicant’s security 
clearance because of her integrity, loyalty, and honesty. (AX A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
5 
 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges a delinquent second mortgage for about $59,549 (¶ 1.a) and a 
delinquent medical bill for $325 (¶ 1.b). Applicant admitted the delinquent second 
mortgage. She denied the delinquent medical bill and submitted proof that it was paid in 
August 2008. She has refuted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b, and it is resolved in her 
favor. 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is “a history 
of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is “consistent 
spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial 
analysis.” Applicant’s payment history on her home mortgages raises AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
(c). AG ¶ 19(e) also is raised by her purchase of a home on terms she could not afford.  
 
6 
 
 
 Because the Government produced substantial evidence to raise the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to 
produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
delinquent mortgage is recent. It was foreclosed after she missed several payments. 
The foolhardy mortgage debt is unlikely to recur, because Applicant is more financially 
savvy than she was when she purchased her house in 2005. When she first fell behind 
on her mortgage, she repeatedly contacted the original lender in an effort to refinance, 
negotiate new terms, or execute a short sale. However, there is no evidence that she 
has attempted to contact the creditor who acquired the delinquent second mortgage, 
even though her security interview in November 2008 and the DOHA interrogatories in 
August 2009 put her on notice that the delinquent second mortgage continued to raise 
security concerns. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established for SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person’s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. 
 
The unfavorable terms of Applicant’s mortgage were not beyond her control, 
because she could have refused to go forward with the purchase and financing. Her 
periods of unemployment that caused her to fall behind on her payments were beyond 
her control. She tried to avoid foreclosure, but she did not act responsibly with regard to 
the delinquent second mortgage after her efforts to avoid foreclosure failed. I conclude 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established for SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith “requires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.” ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
Applicant tried to avoid foreclosure and resolve the delinquent mortgages, but she 
abandoned her efforts after the mortgage was foreclosed and the house was sold. She 
presented no evidence of efforts to resolve the delinquent second mortgage that is still 
reflected on her credit report. The evidence strongly suggests that she was not 
motivated by a sense of obligation to the lender, but rather by her desire to avoid 
foreclosure. After she was unsuccessful in avoiding foreclosure, she made no further 
 
7 
 
 
efforts to contact the new creditor or resolve the delinquent second mortgage. I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is not established for the delinquent second mortgage alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is an intelligent, articulate woman. She has held a clearance for 13 
years. She demonstrated integrity and candor by self-reporting the impending 
foreclosure on her home. Her financial naïveté during her ill-fated home purchase is 
somewhat surprising in light of her age, military experience, and educational level, but I 
found her testimony about her failure to understand the consequences of the 
transaction plausible and credible. Although she initially acted aggressively to prevent 
foreclosure, her lack of initiative to resolve the delinquent second mortgage after the 
foreclosure sale raises concern about her trustworthiness and good judgment. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to decide close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
