 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-02220
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is denied.
On August 26, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his defense
contractor job as a translator. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant a set of interrogatories  to clarify or augment information about1
potentially disqualifying information in his background. After reviewing the results of the
background investigation and Applicant’s response to the interrogatories, DOHA
adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.3
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
 DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on March 9, 2010.4
 Ax. A - H were provided as part of Applicant’s Answer to the SOR on November 25, 2009. At the hearing,5
each document was identified for the record and Department Counsel indicated the Government had no
objection to the documents being included in the record. (Tr. 10 - 15)
2
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified
information. On November 5, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts which, if proven, raise security concerns addressed in the
adjudicative guidelines (AG)  for foreign influence (Guideline B) and financial3
considerations (Guideline F).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on February 5, 2010. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued the same
day, I convened a hearing in this matter on February 25, 2010. The parties appeared as
scheduled.  The Government presented seven exhibits (Gx. 1 - 7). Gx. 1 and Gx. 3 - 74
were admitted without objection. Gx. 2 was admitted over objection of Applicant’s
counsel. (Tr. 20 - 21) Applicant testified on his own behalf, presented two witnesses,
and proffered 14 exhibits (Ax. A - N), which were admitted without objection.5
Department Counsel also asked in a pre-hearing submission that I take
administrative notice of informational documents pertaining to Afghanistan. Those
documents are included in the record as Jx. I - VIII. (Tr. 23 - 25) With one exception,
which I addressed at the hearing, my factual findings about those countries is based
solely on information in those exhibits.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline B, the Government alleged that Applicant’s father-in-law and
mother-in-law (SOR 1.a) and sister-in-law (SOR 1.b) are citizens of Afghanistan residing
in Pakistan; that he has two uncles who are citizens of and reside in Afghanistan (SOR
1.c); that Applicant traveled to Afghanistan between May and December 2006, and in
June and July 2007 (SOR 1.d); and that he traveled to Pakistan each year between
2001 and 2006 (SOR 1.e). In response, Applicant admitted with explanation each of the
Guideline B allegations.
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes approximately
$325,016 for 28 delinquent debts (SOR 2.a - 2.bb). In response, Applicant admitted with
explanation the allegations at SOR 2.b. At hearing, he also admitted the debt listed at
SOR 2.p. He denied with explanation the remaining Guideline F allegations. His general
position regarding the debts he has denied is that they are not his personally, but are
the responsibility of a separate corporate entity through which he did business until
2005. Having reviewed Applicant’s response to the SOR, the transcript, and exhibits, I
make the following findings of relevant fact.
 Despite the SOR 1.a and 1.b allegations that Applicant’s in-laws live in Pakistan, no information was6
submitted about that country. The parties agreed at hearing that the only Foreign Preference concern was
about Afghanistan. (Tr. 23 - 25)
3
Afghanistan  is an independent nation first ruled by indigenous monarchs6
beginning in 1919, when the British Empire relinquished control. However, in 1979, the
Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan and occupied the country until 1989. Thereafter, a
civil war took place which ended when the Taliban took control of the government and
established a regime based on an extreme fundamentalist version of Islamic law.
Human rights were virtually non-existent, especially for women, and dissent was
countered through violent repression. The Taliban regime also created circumstances
that allowed Osama bin Laden and al-Qaida safe haven and resources for international
terrorist actions that culminated in the attacks on the U.S. on September 11, 2001. 
The subsequent U.S. military actions against the Taliban allowed the
establishment of an openly-elected government based on a western democratic model.
However, the country remains unstable. Human rights abuses continue at the hands of
the Taliban in areas they still control. The Afghan government continues to struggle in
its efforts to overcome a legacy of corruption, and U.S.-led coalition forces have been
unable to provide a secure environment either in the countryside or in Afghanistan’s
urban centers. U.S. personnel and anyone aligned with U.S. interests are at constant
risk of attack, kidnapping, and other hostile acts by insurgents.
Applicant is 46 years old and is employed as a translator with the U.S. military in
Afghanistan, his native country, in other parts of Southwest Asia, and in the Middle
East. Applicant was born and raised in Afghanistan. However, he and most of his family
left Afghanistan for Pakistan in 1985 to escape the Soviet invasion and occupation
there. They stayed away because of the ensuing violence of the Afghan civil war and
the rise of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan. Applicant obtained a two-year degree from
a college in Pakistan in 1989 and emigrated to the United States in 1990. He became a
naturalized United States citizen in 1998. (Gx. 1; Jx. I)
Applicant’s parents, a brother, and two sisters are naturalized U.S. citizens living
in the United States. His father graduated from a U.S. university in 1960, and was a
judge in the Afghan appellate courts before he took his family to Pakistan in 1985.
Applicant’s father no longer can work due to heart problems that first arose in 1995. (Tr.
89 - 93) Applicant’s father-in-law worked for the Afghan cultural ministry before retiring
and moving with his wife, a retired school teacher, to the United States. (Tr. 96 - 98)
Applicant’s wife’s parents live with Applicant in the United States. (Tr. 62)
Applicant also has two uncles still living in Afghanistan. One uncle retired from a
career working in the Afghan court system. The other is a government worker, but it is
not known exactly where in the Afghan government he worked. Applicant last saw or
spoke with his uncles when he went to Afghanistan in 2007. Since then, he has had no
contact with them. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 99 - 100)
 According to the Internal Revenue Service, S corporations are corporations that elect to pass corporate7
income, losses, deductions and credit through to their shareholders for federal tax purposes. Shareholders
of S corporations report the flow-through of income and losses on their personal tax returns and are assessed
tax at their individual income tax rates. This allows S corporations to avoid double taxation on the corporate
income. S corporations are responsible for tax on certain built-in gains and passive income. (See
http://www.irs.gov/businesses/small/)
4
Applicant and his wife have been married since August 1998. She was born and
raised in Afghanistan, and she became a U.S. citizen in December 2004. They have
three children, ages 9, 7, and 20 months, all of whom were born in the United States. At
the time he submitted his request for a security clearance, Applicant’s wife’s parents
and a sister were Afghan citizens living in Pakistan. However, her parents are now living
in the United States as permanent resident aliens. Her sister is married to an American
citizen and living in the United Kingdom. As with his uncles in Afghanistan, Applicant
has never had much contact with his in-laws, even after they immigrated to the United
States. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 59,61)
Applicant traveled to Afghanistan from May to December 2006 to try starting his
own business. He wanted to take advantage of the improving economy in Afghanistan
by importing salvaged cars from the United States to sell in Afghanistan. However, the
venture failed and he returned to the U.S. Many Afghan families who did not emigrate to
other countries remained in Pakistan after fleeing the Soviet occupation, and the
instability and outright violence that subsequently has plagued Afghanistan for the past
30 years. In June 2007, he returned to Afghanistan to attend his sister’s engagement
ceremony. She lives in the U.S. with her husband, who is a native Afghani with
permanent resident alien status. Applicant also traveled to Pakistan once each year
between 2001 and 2006 for a wedding or engagement ceremony for either one of his
own siblings or for a member of his wife’s family. (Answer to SOR; Gx. 2; Tr. 100 - 101)
Applicant has no history of official ties to Afghanistan, Pakistan, or any other
foreign government. He does not have any financial or other property interests outside
the United States. He does not send money or any other form of support to family or
associates overseas. (Tr. 61) His performance as a translator for the U.S. military has
been exceptional. He was deployed to Afghanistan for seven months in 2009, when he
worked successfully with headquarters staffs and in a forward deployed status. Before
working overseas, Applicant worked as a “role player” helping train troops prior to their
deployment to Southwest Asia. In every position he held as a translator or role player,
Applicant has received strong praise and recognition for his work. (Ax. G; Ax. H; Ax. K;
Ax. L)
In 1997, Applicant entered into a long-term lease of a gas station and
convenience store which catered to long distance truckers (hereinafter “Truck Stop”).
He leased the business from an oil distribution company. The term of the lease was 15
years. It afforded Applicant the opportunity to make a profit from the sale of the oil
distributor’s gasoline and related products. He also sold food and other convenience
store products. Between 1997 and 2002, Applicant operated this and two other gas
stations / convenience stores as a Subchapter S corporation.  By doing business this7
way, Applicant limited his personal liability and obtained a tax advantage through the
5
way his income was reported. It was also possible for him to limit his debt liability to the
amount he invested in the company. However, to do so, he would have had to properly
structure his finances to comply with IRS requirements. Applicant did not present any
information that showed he had done so.
To incorporate his business, he used the services of a person whose business it
was to file the appropriate paperwork with the state. That person also served as the
company’s agent for purposes of representing the corporation to outside entities, such
as corporate creditors and persons filing suit against the company. Applicant claimed he
thought the agent was also responsible for handling his debts, but he failed to establish
that this was, in fact, part of the agent’s duties. 
In February 2002, he drafted a Management Agreement for Applicant. (Ax. A)
That document was essentially a sublease of Applicant’s position to another company
(Company A). Company A agreed to run the Truck Stop, to maintain inventories as
required by the oil distributor, to make payments to Applicant’s corporation of payments
required of Applicant by the oil distributor, and to pay to Applicant’s corporation $5,000
each month to lease the business. Company A also agreed to make required payments
to third parties such as tax authorities, insurance companies, and so on. 
Applicant claimed that the 2002 Management Agreement was, in fact, a sale of
his interest in the Truck Stop. However, because he himself had leased the business
from an oil distribution company, he had no ownership interest to sell. Further, it is clear
from a plain reading of the Management Agreement that Applicant intended to retain an
interest in the business. Section 1.1 of the agreement states 
The Corporation (Applicant) hereby obtains the services of Manager (other
corporation) and Manager agrees to operate, manage, and run the
Business (Truck Stop). This Agreement does not convey ownership of or
any rights in or to the Business to Manager, greater than those specifically
set forth herein.
In consideration of agreeing to manage Applicant’s business, Company A had the
opportunity to keep any proceeds remaining after paying rent to the Applicant and
making other required payments specified in the agreement. The business was
repossessed by the oil company in May 2005 because either Applicant or Company A
had stopped making the necessary payments on the oil and gas inventories. Applicant
received the rent payments only for about five months after he executed the
Management Agreement. 
When Applicant applied for his security clearance in 2008, he did not list any
adverse information under the questions dealing with his finances. However, when a
credit report was obtained as part of his background investigation, it revealed that he
owed approximately $167,000 in unpaid state taxes (SOR 2.a) for which a lien was filed
against him in 2008. Applicant claimed that the unpaid taxes were related to the Truck
Stop business and were due for periods after he “sold” the business. As such, he
claimed that the unpaid taxes are Company A’s responsibility. In support of his claim, he
presented a letter dated February 2, 2002, from his corporate agent to the IRS stating
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).8
 Directive. 6.3.9
6
that the business was sold and that the other corporation would be liable for future tax
revenues due to federal and state authorities. (Ax. E) Applicant has tried to no avail to
negotiate this debt with the state tax authorities. He recently contacted a tax advisor
regarding this debt and his accountant has addressed this matter unsuccessfully with
the state. (Ax. Ax. D; Ax. M; Ax. N)
The credit reports obtained during his background investigation also revealed 27
other debts attributable to Applicant and totaling approximately $158,016 (SOR 2.b -
2.bb). Of those debts, Applicant claimed that only two debts totaling $520 (SOR 2.b and
2.p) were his personal obligations, which arose and became delinquent while he was
overseas working as a translator in 2008 and 2009. (Gx. 3; Gx. 6) Additionally, the
debts at SOR 2.e and 2.f are duplicates of the debt at SOR 2.d (LFG for $9,772).
The debt at SOR 2.d and the remaining debts alleged in the SOR total
approximately $138,472. Applicant identified them as corporate accounts he opened to
pay expenses of his business. He claimed that those debts should have been paid by
the other corporation after 2002. However, each of the credit reports in evidence lists
those debts as either individual accounts or joint accounts. Additionally, several of the
accounts were opened after he executed the Management Agreement. (Gx. 3 - 7) In
response to the SOR, Applicant also claimed that he had disputed several of the debts
listed in the SOR, but the only documentation of any dispute is a notation in a credit
report he provided (Ax. B) next to a credit card account with a zero balance. Applicant
has made no payments on any of the debts listed in the SOR.
Applicant enjoys a solid reputation in his community and at work. Current and
former associates praise his professionalism and his integrity. The pastor at a local
church, who knows Applicant through both the church and through a business the
pastor runs, characterized Applicant as a “special person” who is generous with his time
and money for those in need. (Tr. 35 - 36; Ax. F; Ax. J)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to8
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies9
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).11
7
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under AG ¶ 6 (Foreign Influence - Guideline B) and AG ¶ 18
(Financial Considerations - Guideline F).
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a
security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  A person who10
has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the
Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.11
Analysis
Foreign Influence. 
The Government presented sufficient information to support the factual
allegations in SOR ¶ 1. Those allegations, all of which Applicant admitted, raise security
concerns about Applicant’s personal relationships and other interests in Afghanistan.
Specifically, as stated in AG ¶ 6, 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
8
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
At the outset, the Government’s information about Applicant’s travel, alleged in
SOR 1.d and 1.e, is not disqualifying in and of itself. However, Applicant traveled to
Afghanistan in 2006 to pursue business opportunities that did not work out. His
repeated travel to Pakistan to attend family engagement and wedding events is
evidence of close ties to family members who are citizens of and reside in a foreign
country. The Government also presented information that supported the allegations
(SOR 1.a - 1.c) that Applicant’s wife’s parents and sister are citizens of Afghanistan
residing (at the time the SOR was issued) in Pakistan. However, available information
also showed that Applicant’s mother- and father-in-law, both retired, now live with
Applicant in the United States as permanent resident aliens. Further, his sister-in-law
lives in England with her husband, a U.S. citizen. These facts require application of the
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 7(a) (contact with a foreign family member, business or
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion). However, the security concerns about Applicant’s
in-laws, when evaluated in the context of his long-term personal and professional ties in
the U.S., are resolved by application of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 8(a) (the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign  individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.) and 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of
the U.S. interest) 
The Government also supported its allegation (SOR 1.c) that Applicant has two
uncles who are citizen residents in Afghanistan. The disqualifying condition at AG 7(a)
applies here; however, Applicant’s relationship with his uncles is distant at best. He has
little or no contact with them, and he is unlikely to contact them in the future. Thus, in
addition to the mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b), the security concerns about
his uncles are resolved by application of the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 8(c) (contact or
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation). On balance,
available information about Applicant’s ties to foreign citizens is sufficient to mitigate the
security concerns about possible foreign influence.
9
Financial Considerations
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that:
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The Government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in
SOR ¶¶ 2.a - 1.bb. Applicant owes $325,016 for 28 delinquent debts. Available
information showed that those debts were past due since at least 2005 and that none of
them have been resolved or acted on in any meaningful way. Accordingly, the record
requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations).
In response to the SOR and at hearing, Applicant claimed that all but two of the
debts should not be attributed to him because they are related to his business. Further,
he claimed that his status as a subchapter S corporation protected him from liability for
the debts alleged. However, he did not present sufficient information to support his
claim. Additionally, a review of the credit reports in evidence (Gx. 3 - 7; Ax. B) shows
the debts alleged are individual or joint accounts, not corporate accounts, and that many
of them were opened after Applicant claimed he had sold his business. As to the sale of
his business, available information shows that he did not and could not sell the
business. Instead, he subleased the business and tried to retain a level of income from
it. The fact that the business ultimately failed did not relieve him of his responsibilities as
the primary lessor from the oil distribution company. 
Applicant also claimed that he was disputing several of the debts alleged. Aside
from information related to the tax debt alleged in SOR 2.a, he has not presented
sufficient documentation of any disputes with his creditors. As to SOR 2.a, Applicant
and his accountant have been trying to resolve this matter based on Applicant’s claim
that the taxes owed were the responsibility of Company A. Indeed, the Management
Agreement contemplated that Company A’s payments to third parties may include taxes
due from the business. However, Applicant did not establish the nature of the taxes
owed or provide any support for his claims that Company A should have paid them. 
Applicant has not established that he has paid or otherwise resolved any of his
debts. Aside from preliminary consultations with tax advisors and bankruptcy attorneys,
he has not entered into any financial counseling or employed other professional means
to resolve his debts and improve his financial condition. Applicant did not present any
information that would show his finances will not continue to be a security concern in the
future. In light of the foregoing, none of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20 apply.
On balance, he has failed to carry his burden of persuasion to mitigate, refute, or
extenuate the security concerns raised by his financial problems.
 See footnote 9, supra.12
 See footnote 11, supra. 13
10
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines B and F. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Available information
shows that Applicant, 40 years old, is a mature, responsible, hard-working father and
husband. He has a record of excellent work in support of the military’s operations
overseas, and he enjoys a solid professional and personal reputation. While the security
concerns about possible foreign preference have been satisfactorily addressed,  the
favorable personal and professional information in his background does not outweigh
the unresolved adverse information about his finances. A commonsense assessment12
of all available information bearing on Applicant’s past and current circumstances shows
he has not addressed satisfactorily the doubts about his suitability for access to
classified information raised by the significant unpaid debt he owes. Because protection
of the national interest is paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be
resolved for the Government.13
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.bb: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance
is denied.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
