                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-03115
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 22, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QUIP) on December 16, 2009.  On January 31, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guideline H for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 4, 2011, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on April 4, 2011.  A notice of hearing was issued on April 19,
2011, scheduling the hearing for May 5, 2011.  The Government offered two exhibits,
referred to as Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were received without objection.
Applicant presented one exhibit, referred to Applicant’s Exhibits A, which was admitted
without objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until
close of business on May 20, 2011, for receipt of additional documentation.  The
Applicant did not submit any Post-Hearing Exhibits.  The transcript of the hearing (Tr.)
2
was received on May 16, 2011.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 23 years old and single.  He has a Bachelor’s Degree in
Business Finance and Marketing.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a
Financial Analyst, and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his
employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant admits the factual allegations set forth under this guideline.  He
grew up in a small city where he lived until the age of eighteen.  He graduated from high
school in 2005, and then attended college on an athletic scholarship for four years.
While in college, he used marijuana for the first time, at the end of his senior year, in
April or March 2009.  He explained that while on an athletic scholarship, he was subject
to drug testing and he did not want to jeopardize his scholarship by using illegal drugs.
During his last year of college and after the season was finished, marijuana was offered
to him, and he decided to experiment with it while at a friend’s house.  (Tr. p. 19.)  He
continued to use marijuana an additional 10 to 15 times in total.  On one occasion, he
purchased it for his own use from a friend of a friend.  (Tr. p. 34.)  His marijuana use
ended in May 2009, about the time he graduated from college.  He knew that the use of
marijuana was illegal.  (Tr. p. 26.)  
The Applicant also used Adderall, a prescription drug, which he obtained without
a prescription, during college for several months, from March 2009 to May 2009.  The
Applicant testified that it was fairly common for students in college to take Adderall to
help them concentrate while studying.  The Applicant stated that he used it to study for
a test.  (Tr. p. 33.)
  
In November 2009, the Applicant started working for a defense contractor.  His
employer  administered a drug test and he passed.  Two or three weeks later, he used
marijuana on one occasion in November 2009, even though he realized that it was
against company policy to use illegal drugs.  He admits that his use of marijuana was a
huge lapse in judgment.   (Tr. p. 25.)  In December 2009, he completed a security
clearance application and in response to question 23(a), revealed that he had used
marijuana in November 2009.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  Realizing that mistakes of the
past have consequences, the Applicant testified that he has no intention to ever use
illegal drugs again.  (Tr. p. 48.)             
  A Statement of Intent was submitted by the Applicant that indicates that he will
never use any marijuana or any other illegal drug again.  He will also not associate with
anyone who used illegal drugs.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, and Tr. p. 40-42.)  
  
The Applicant stated that when he used marijuana in November 2009 he was
under stress and going through some personal struggles.   A friend of his passed away,
3
and the Applicant had just started his new job that he was not entirely acclimated to,
and that caused additional stress.  He states that he has matured over the past two
years.  He now exercises, plays golf and associates with different people now.  He has
two roommates and neither of them uses illegal drugs.  He has learned from his
mistakes of the past and plans to avoid mistakes in the future at all costs.  (Tr. p. 48.)
He understands the importance and the responsibilities associated with holding a
security clearance and is prepared to uphold those responsibilities.
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse.
25.(b) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, procession, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as;
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
4
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
5
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has  engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus
or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline H.  The evidence shows that the Applicant made a
conscious decision to use marijuana, and Adderall without a prescription, while in
college, and marijuana on one occasion after being hired by a defense contractor,
knowing that it was illegal and against company policy.  This conduct demonstrates
poor judgment, untrustworthiness and unreliability.  The Applicant acknowledges his
serious lapse in judgment and promises never to use illegal drugs again.  Since
November 2009, he has remained drug free.  He states that he has not used any illegal
drugs for over a year and a half, and has signed a Letter of Intent indicating that he has
no intent to ever use any illegal drugs in the future.  His use of illegal drugs was clearly
experimental in nature.  Furthermore, he was candid and open when he revealed his
illegal drug use on his security clearance application in December 2009 that ultimately
brought this matter to the Government’s attention.  Under Guideline H, Drug
Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions, 25.(a) any drug abuse, and 25.(b) illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, procession, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions
26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 26.(b) a demonstrated intent
not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (4) a signed statement of intent with
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation also apply.  I find that the Applicant’s
past use of illegal drugs was experimental, not recent and has no current security
significance.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. 
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Although the Applicant made some
serious mistakes by using illegal drugs in his past, he has significantly matured since
then.  His lifestyle has changed from a college student to a career professional.  He is
now a productive member of the DoD work force, and no longer associates with drug
users.  He resides with other professionals and has more responsibility.  In the event
that the Applicant uses any illegal drugs in the future, his security clearance will be
revoked.  Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth
under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole person assessment of
good judgement, trustworthiness, reliability, and a willingness to comply with rules and
regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may properly
safeguard classified information.  
6
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and does meet the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information at this time.  Accordingly, I
find for the Applicant under Guideline H (Drug Involvement).   
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.        
                                               
  FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required
by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.                                                                                                                       
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
