1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:    )
   )
           )       ISCR Case No. 10-08493
   )
Applicant for Security Clearance    )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on February 24, 2010. The Department of Defense (DoD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 13, 2012, detailing security concerns
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
AE L is a copy of emails from Applicant; AE M is a copy of earnings statements for October and November1
2012; AE N is a budget; AE O is a copy of debt disputes; AE P is letters of recommendation; AE Q is a copy
of Applicant’s performance reviews for 2009 through 2011; AE R is a letter from Applicant’s father-in-law; AE
S is a copy of a debt payment; AE T is a statement of account on a school loan; AE U is a payment history
statement on a second school loan; AE V through AE X are court documents related to modification of his
child custody and child support issues. 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient2
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
2
Applicant received the SOR on June 22, 2012, and he answered it on July 9,
2012. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge with the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on October 4, 2012, and I received the case assignment on October 15, 2012. DOHA
issued a Notice of Hearing on October 31, 2012, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on November 14, 2012. The Government offered exhibits (GE) marked as
GE 1 through GE 6, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant and his wife testified. He submitted exhibits (AE) marked as AE A through AE
K, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 26, 2012. I held the record open until
December 14, 2012, for Applicant to submit additional matters. Applicant timely
submitted AE L - AE W, which were received and admitted without objection.  The1
record closed on December 14, 2012. AE X was submitted after the close of the record
without objection from the Government. This document finalizes information provided in
AE V and is relevant to a resolution of this case. It is admitted into evidence.
Procedural Ruling
Notice
Applicant received the hearing notice on November 12, 2012, less than 15 days
before the hearing. I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to
receive the notice 15 days before the hearing.  Applicant affirmatively waived his right to
the 15-day notice. (Tr. 8.)       
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.i,
1.k, 1.o, 1.r, and 1.s of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of
fact. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.j, 1.l-1.n, 1.p, and 1.q of the SOR.  He2
also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
GE 1; Tr. 29-30, 43.3
AE P; AE Q.4
GE 1; Tr. 9.5
GE 1: AE K; AE V - AE X; Tr. 30, 33-34, 51.6
3
clearance. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the
following additional findings of fact.  
 Applicant, who is 32 years old, works in information technology (IT) and resource
management for a DoD contractor (Company D). He began his current position in
October 2011. Applicant has worked as a DoD contractor since August 2007, when he
began working for Company A as a deployment technician. He left his job with
Company A in December 2007 because of issues with payment of his travel expenses
and salary. He worked for Company B, another DoD contractor, as a computer
technician from January 2008 until September 2009. He accepted a position with
Company C, another DoD contractor in September 2009. Company D purchased
Company C in October 2009, and Applicant continues to work for Company D. From
2007 until October 2011, Applicant’s work duties required him to travel to various
company work sites inside and outside the United States most of the year.3
Applicant provided four letters of recommendation from co-workers and his team
lead. They describe him as responsible, knowledgeable, independent, dedicated, and
pleasant. They rely on him and his knowledge on a daily basis. His two performance
reviews reflect that he completed all his goals and received an “achieves expectations”
rating.4
Applicant graduated from high school in 1998 and enlisted in the military
immediately. Five months later, the military gave him an entry level separation.
Applicant has attended college, but he has not completed a degree program.5
Applicant married his first wife in November 2002, and they divorced in July
2005. They have a 10-year-old son, who began living with Applicant in July 2012.
Applicant has paid child support for his son for many years and continued to make
payments after his son began living with him. Applicant hired an attorney, at the cost of
$2,500, to file court papers to modify the custody arrangement and child support
payments for his son. His first wife agreed to the changes and signed the appropriate
papers. His attorney submitted these papers to the court, and on January 3, 2013, the
court signed an order, which acknowledged that Applicant’s 10-year-old son lived with
him, eliminated his monthly child support payments of $532, and directed his former
wife to reimburse Applicant $2,412 in child support overpayments at the rate of $135 a
month. His former wife is not required to pay him child support.6
Applicant married his second wife in November 2005; they separated a year
later; and they divorced in October 2008. They did not have children. Applicant married
The father of Applicant’s stepdaughters is required to pay $440 a month in child support. He sends a payment7
every few months. Tr. 36.
GE1; Tr. 30-31, 33.8
AE H; AE M; AE N; AE R.9
GE 3; AE D; Tr. 36-38.10
GE 3; GE 5; Tr. 45-46.11
4
his current wife in December 2011. They have a six-month-old son. He also has three
step-daughters, six-year-old twins and a four-year-old. His wife receives sporadic child
support from the father of her daughters.  Applicant coaches fifth grade basketball.7 8
Applicant’s wife does not work. He earns $5,373 a month in gross income. His
net monthly income totals $2,438 after deductions, which include his $532 monthly child
support payments and $650 monthly school loan payments. He and his family live with
his wife’s father. His father-in-law receives $1,300 a month in social security income,
making a total household income of $3,738. The total monthly household expenses
amount to $3,535, including $320 towards debt payment. The monthly remainder totals
$198 for miscellaneous expenses, such as haircuts, car repairs, postage, and clothes.
The payments from his first wife are not included in his budget. There is no evidence the
payments have begun, although Applicant indicated he would use this money towards
bill payment.9
In 2001, Applicant and a friend rented an apartment and worked together at a
distribution company (Company E). In December 2001, Company E laid off both
Applicant and his friend. Applicant did not collect unemployment. When he and his
friend exhausted their funds, they were unable to pay their rent and other bills. Their
apartment complex evicted them. Applicant obtained employment by April 2002. The
debts alleged in SOR allegations 1.q ($163), 1.r ($185), and 1.s ($2,045) relate to this
period of unemployment. The September 2007 credit report reflects that these debts
became past-due around March 2002. Applicant has paid the debt in SOR allegation
1.q. He and his roommate are still friends, and Applicant has spoken to his roommate
about paying his share of these debts. No agreement has been reached between them
about payment.10
After he and his first wife divorced, Applicant could no longer pay the rent on their
apartment and moved out. He relates the debts in SOR allegations 1.c ($1,426) and 1.k
($3,940) to his divorce. The September 2007 credit report indicates that the debt in
allegation 1.k became past-due in December 2005 and the January 2012 credit report
indicates the debt in allegation 1.c became past-due in April 2008. These debts are not
resolved.11
Applicant traveled continuously when he started working for Company A in
August 2007. This company gave him a business credit card to pay his travel expenses.
Applicant is now keeping copies of his earnings statements and expense sheets as he understands he must12
do so. Tr. 52.
GE 4; AE L; Tr. 43, 47-53, 74-77, 94-97.13
Tr. 75-76, 99.14
Applicant testified that he and his wife received a substantial tax refund for the tax year 2011. He anticipates15
a similar refund for the tax year 2012. He stated he would use this money to pay debt. Tr. 60.
GE 2 - GE 6; AE M; AE T; AE U; Tr. 40-43, 60.16
5
Within a few months, Applicant encountered problems with his travel pay and his
income. His monthly checks provided enough income to pay his business credit card bill
and no other bills. He fell behind in his other bills, including school loans and his car
payment, and eventually incurred a $16,000 debt on his company business credit card,
which he denies owing. He left this company because of these payment problems. He
does not have a copy of his earnings statement or travel expense sheets from this
employment. Company A has refused to provide him with copies of his earnings
statements and travel expense sheets when he requested it.  His wife contacted the12
credit card company, which told her that it did not have any information on this debt.
After the hearing, Applicant sought a copy of his bank statements from July 2007
through December 2007, but since his bank no longer exists, and he no longer has the
account number, the successor bank could not provide him with any information.
Applicant has held business credit cards for travel expenses from subsequent
employers without a problem. He continues to dispute this debt.13
Applicant acknowledges that when he traveled continuously, he lost track of his
bills and debts. He used his mother’s home as his mailing address. Most mail was not
forwarded to him because he regularly changed hotels and had trouble getting mail. He
knows that mail was lost.  14
SOR allegations 1.e through 1.h concern four school loans and total
approximately $8,000. Initially, these loans were deferred, but by 2010, the loans had
been assigned to the Government for payment. The new creditor, identified in the SOR,
contacted Applicant. Applicant agreed to a monthly payment and agreed to have the
payments made directly to the creditor from his pay check, which is shown as a
garnishment on his pay stubs The creditor verified that Applicant has paid $14,600 on
his debt as of November 19, 2012. The creditor indicated that Applicant still owed
$3,500 on his debt and that the debt would be paid in full on December 28, 2012. Given
his payment in December 2012 would amount to $650, there is an inconsistency in the
information provided by the creditor. Applicant stated that he would pay the balance on
this debt with his tax refund in 2013.  Based on Applicant’s testimony and the15
information provided by the creditor, this debt will be paid shortly. Once this debt is
resolved, Applicant will have $650 a month available to pay other debt.16
GE 2; AE C; AE E; AE N; Tr. 39-41.17
AE I; AE J; AE S.18
AE A; AE B; AE F; AE G; AE L; AE O. 19
6
Applicant has a second school loan debt. He fell behind on paying this debt in the
past. He reached an agreement to make monthly payments of approximately $150 to
rehabilitate the loan. He began rehabilitation payments on this loan in April 2009. By
July 28, 2011, Applicant had paid $4,717. The creditor found the loan rehabilitated on
August 14, 2011.  In March 2012, Applicant made two payments, totaling $552 and has
paid $92 a month on this loan since then. This debt is not listed in the SOR, although an
unpaid fee of $75, which relates to this school admission, is identified in SOR allegation
1.p. Applicant paid this debt.  17
The creditor in SOR allegation 1.o ($17,853 car loan default) sold this debt to
another creditor. The new creditor filed a collection action against Applicant. Applicant
reached an agreement with the creditor through its attorney. Applicant agreed to an
entry of consent judgment against him. Under the terms of the agreement, the court
found that Applicant owed the creditor $13,078, plus attorney fees of $3,361 for a total
of $16,439 plus an annual interest of 20.24% from July 7, 2011 until the judgment is
paid in full. The creditor agreed to a stay of execution on the judgment as long as
Applicant paid $8,500 at the rate of $125 a month beginning June 15, 2012 until paid.
Applicant has made the payments as required. He stated that if he is late on the
payments, the full debt will become due and payable. He intends to make each payment
timely, and the payments are part of his monthly budget.18
Applicant and his wife indicate that they have worked with creditor counselors to
develop a plan to resolve their debts, but they have not provided the name of the
counselors. They have developed a payment plan for their debts (Applicant’s and his
wife’s). They have paid 11 small debts in addition to the school loans and judgment debt
payments. Along with the paid debts already discussed, Applicant paid the debts in
SOR allegations 1.l ($63) and 1.n ($27). He also disputed several debts listed on his
credit report. Most of the disputes have not been resolved in his favor. He did not
believe he owed the debt in SOR allegation 1.i ($507); however, after the hearing, he
investigated this debt and determined that he did owe it. The debt is on his list of debts
to pay. He continues to seek information from the original creditor about the $81 debt in
SOR allegation 1.m, as he believes this debt is paid.19
The credit reports of record reflect that Applicant fell behind in his child support
payments and that he resolved this arrearage sometime ago. The credit reports also
show that he resolved at least one other overdue debt. Based on the credit reports,
most of Applicant’s SOR past-due debts occurred between the summer of 2007 and the
end of 2009. Applicant has not incurred any additional past-due debts in the last three
years. Instead, he has paid approximately $21,000 towards old debt. When Applicant
worked at Company A, he experienced a serious medical event, which required
GE 3- GE 6; Tr. 43.20
7
treatment. Company A provided no health insurance, leaving him with $5,000 in medical
bills. Most of the SOR debts are not listed on his 2012 credit reports.20
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
8
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Appellant developed significant financial problems after he started working for
Company A. He also incurred debts when he lost a job in 2001, and when he and his
first wife divorced. He did not keep an account of his debts, which have not been timely
resolved. These two disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
9
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant lost his job in 2001, which started his debt problems. He married a year
later and divorced in 2005, which created more unpaid debts. He incurred additional
debt after his second divorce in 2008. Issues arose with Company A over the payment
of his salary and travel expenses, which resulted in issues with his business credit card
and payment of his other bills. He had $5,000 in unreimbursed medical expenses.
These events were beyond his control. During this time frame, he paid his child support
and child support arrearage. He developed payment plans for his school debt and
complied with these plans for more than two years. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies because
he ignored many of his other debts for a long time.
Applicant and his wife have worked with credit counselors. With their assistance,
Applicant and his wife have a plan to resolve all their unpaid debts. They have paid 11
small debts belonging to both of them. They have a budget, which includes more than
$300 a month in past-due debt payment. Applicant has not incurred any new past-due
debt in over three years. He has resolved several small SOR debts and made a good-
faith effort to resolve his school loans. AG ¶ 20(c) applies and AG ¶20(d) partially
applies.
Applicant challenged several debts with the credit reporting companies because
he did not believe he owed the debts. He continues to challenge two debts listed in the
SOR. Some of his disputes were not resolved in his favor. His decision to challenge
these debts was legitimate. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the two debts he has continued
to challenge.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
10
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In assessing whether an Applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. After he lost
his job in 2001, Applicant incurred about $2,500 in unpaid debts, which he ignored. After
his first marriage ended in 2005, he incurred another $5,500 in unpaid debts, although
he regularly paid his child support. After he started working for Company A, he
encountered significant problems with payment of his travel expenses and salary, which
11
created significant debt problems for him. He left this company in late 2007 to work for
another company in a job which required him to continuously travel. About this time, his
second marriage ended. He decided to use his mother’s house as his mailing address,
which resulted in major problems with his mail. He lost track of his mail, including his
bills and other financial statements, because he was careless about keeping a close
watch on his mail and bills. He acknowledges that he did not give priority to paying his
debts, except his child support and school loans. By 2009, he had regular payments in
place for two large school loans. 
Applicant has almost fully paid his $17,000 school loan and is regularly paying
his other school loan after complying with the requirements for rehabilitating the loan.
More recently, Applicant has undergone significant behavioral changes. He has taken
responsibility for his debts, and with the help of his wife, he has a plan of action to pay
his debts. Applicant and his wife developed a budget, which includes more than $300 a
month to pay past-due debts. He negotiated an agreement to pay the $17,000 car
repossession debt and complies with the terms of this agreement. They have paid 11
small bills. His oldest son came to live with him recently, causing a change in his child
support obligations. He is no longer paying $532 a month in child support and will use
this money towards debt reduction. He anticipates that his $650 a month school loan
payments will end shortly, which will provide him with additional funds to reduce his
debts. His largest unresolved debt is in dispute. He has been unable to obtain relevant
information from Company A or the credit card company on this debt. He has taken
control of his finances and lives within his monthly income. He and his family live with
his father-in-law to help reduce expenses. He has sufficient income each month to meet
his normal living expenses and to pay some of his debts. While he did not act
responsibly towards all his debts in the past, he has taken responsibility for the old
debts he knows he owes. With the increase in funds available each month for debt
payment, Applicant will be able to resolve his debts faster. His employer and co-workers
recognize his dedication, integrity, and knowledge in the performance of his job and
highly respect him. He has a good record of work performance and is an asset to his
company. He is married and raising five children. He stopped traveling to focus his
attention on providing a stable domestic environment for his family. Most significantly,
he has taken affirmative action to pay or resolve his delinquent debts, one at a time.
(See AG & 2(a)(6).) He has not been able to pay all his debt, as he must support his
family. The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid: it is whether his financial
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. While some
debts remain unpaid, they are insufficient to raise security concerns as he has a plan of
action to pay his debts and an established track record of debt payment.  He will
continue to do so. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances under
Guideline F.
12
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.s: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
