 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06437 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 24, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, 
drug involvement and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was undated, and he elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On August 29, 2012, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
it was received on September 24, 2012. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
provide additional information. The case was assigned to me on November 29, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c(2), 
1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c.(1). After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He is married and has two adult children. He has 
worked for the same federal contractor since 1994. He has held a security clearance 
since May 2007.  
 
 During Applicant’s April 2010 security interview he admitted he began using 
marijuana in 1979 while in high school. From 1979 to 1981, he used marijuana about 
once a week at parties. After high school he used it three to four times a year at social 
gatherings. He never purchased it. He used it until sometime after he had children 
(between 1983 and 1986).  
 
Applicant failed a drug test, administered by his employer, sometime in the 
1990s. Applicant could not recall the exact circumstances of his use, but surmised it 
likely occurred at a social gathering in his neighborhood. There is a land easement area 
that is used for summertime neighborhood parties. The land is located near his home 
and it is mutually used by him and his neighbors. During the summer months, his 
neighbors set up tents and bring food and beverages to the area. There are two to three 
dozen people who participate in these gatherings. He knows some of the people who 
attend, but not all of them. The gatherings start around 6:00 p.m., and they have food 
and consume alcoholic beverages. It was at one of these gatherings when a marijuana 
cigarette was offered to him, and he accepted. He likely was drinking alcohol at the 
time. His employer conducted a random drug test shortly after his use, and he tested 
positive for marijuana. He was told by his employer’s human resource department to 
attend drug counseling, which he did. The counseling consisted of weekly meetings. He 
completed the requirements of the counseling. Applicant did not hold a security 
clearance during this period.1  
 
On his March 2010 security clearance application, Applicant admitted that in 
August 2009, he had “casual infrequent use a couple of times” of marijuana. During his 
security interview, he explained that his August 2009 marijuana use occurred at two 
social gatherings over two weekends at the land easement area where he and his 
                                                          
1
 Item 6. 
 
3 
 
 
neighbors gather each summer. During the occasions that Applicant used marijuana, 
his wife would leave around 11:00 p.m. and he remained. Someone offered Applicant a 
marijuana cigarette, and he went into one of the tents, where the cigarette was passed 
around, and he smoked it. He believed he had about three to four beers before he used 
marijuana and admitted his judgment was impaired. Sometime within one or two weeks 
of this incident, Applicant repeated his actions under the same scenario. Subsequently 
Applicant failed an employer administered drug test. Applicant held a Secret security 
clearance during this period.2 
 
 Applicant’s employer’s human resource department requested that he attend 
drug counseling. He attended group sessions once a week from September 2009 to 
November 2009. He completed the program. A prognosis or diagnosis from the 
counseling center was not provided. He was given three to four drug tests during this 
time period. He passed them. Applicant’s supervisor at the time was not made aware of 
his failed drug test or counseling.3  
 
 During his security interview Applicant indicated that the only time he used 
marijuana after his high school years was at the neighborhood social gathering in the 
late 1990s, as referenced above, and on the two occasions in August 2009. It was after 
both of these times that he failed his employer’s drug test. He indicated in his security 
interview that he has not used marijuana since August 2009, and he does not intend to 
use marijuana in the future.  
 
 Applicant disputed that he was charged on June 3, 1979, for possession of 
marijuana. He stated he was at a party on this date and marijuana was found in the 
house. He explained he was not in possession and was not guilty. His arrest record 
shows the charge was dismissed.4 
 
In his security interview Applicant indicated he was arrested on June 3, 1979, for 
driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). He stated he subsequently pled guilty to the 
charge. He was required to perform community service and pay a fine, which he did. He 
also had his license suspended, which was eventually restored.5  
 
 Applicant stated during his security interview that in September 1981 he was 
charged with possession of a controlled substance and operating a motor vehicle under 
the influence of alcohol. He indicated the marijuana found in his car did not belong to 
him and was not over 25 grams. He pled guilty to the charges and was sentenced to 
                                                          
2
 Item 6. 
 
3
 Item 6. 
 
4
 Item 6, 7. 
 
5
 Item 6. Applicant’s Federal Bureau of Investigation record does not indicate a DUI conviction. 
 
4 
 
 
pay a fine and court costs, complete community service, and his license was 
suspended.6  
 
 Applicant continues to consume alcohol. He estimated he has about one to two 
drinks a week during dinner or at social gatherings.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
6
 Item 6. Applicant’s Federal Bureau of Investigation record does not include this conviction. I find the 
date discrepancy with SOR ¶ 1.c is minor. 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and conclude the 
following have been raised: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
Applicant used marijuana while employed by a federal contractor in the 1990s 
and had a positive test result. He again used marijuana on two occasions while holding 
a Secret security clearance in August 2009 and had a positive test result. I find all of the 
above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following 
three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana in the 1990s while working for a federal contractor. He 
used it again on two occasions while holding a security clearance. On each occasion he 
used the drug while attending neighborhood parties. No evidence was provided to 
determine if he continued to attend the parties regularly between the 1990s and 2009. 
There is insufficient evidence to determine if he continued to attend these social 
gatherings after he used marijuana in 2009. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
Applicant’s actions are unlikely to recur. There is no evidence to conclude he has 
disassociated himself from the people and the place where he used illegal drugs in the 
past. Applicant attended drug counseling after he tested positive for illegal drugs in the 
1990s. There is evidence of recurrence of illegal drug use when he smoked marijuana 
twice in 2009. There is no evidence that Applicant received a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional after either of his drug counseling programs. 
Applicant used marijuana on two occasions after he held a Secret security clearance. 
His actions cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. I find AG ¶¶ 
26(a) and 26(d) do not apply. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant has 
demonstrated his intention not to abuse drugs in the future. I find there is insufficient 
evidence to apply AG ¶ 26(b).  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
7 
 
 
I considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 that could raise a security 
concern and conclude the following has been raised: 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant’s used marijuana while holding a security clearance. This is the type of 
personal conduct that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress and 
could affect his personal, professional or community standing. The above disqualifying 
condition applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 The same analysis for Applicant’s drug use involvement as discussed above 
applies to his personal conduct. His actions were not minor, and there is no evidence 
that his actions happened under unique circumstances or that they are unlikely to recur. 
Applicant attended drug counseling after he tested positive in the 1990s, yet he used 
illegal drugs again in 2009. There is insufficient evidence to conclude he has taken 
positive steps to change his behavior or to reduce his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation or duress. His actions cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and 
good judgment. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant used marijuana while in high school and continued until after his 
children were born. He has worked for a federal contractor since 1994. He tested 
positive for marijuana use twice while working for his employer. He attended drug 
counseling. He was granted a Secret security clearance in 2007, and in 2009 at the age 
of 49, on two occasions he used marijuana. His actions cannot be dismissed as youthful 
indiscretions. He was aware that drugs were available at the neighborhood summer 
social gathering because that is where he used them in the 1990s. It was during the 
same neighborhood social gathering and under the same circumstances that he again 
used marijuana. No evidence was provided to conclude that he no longer attends the 
neighborhood social gatherings. No evidence was provided to show he no longer 
associates with those who use drugs. He failed to provide evidence to show his actions 
are unlikely to recur. Applicant was a mature man when he was granted a security 
clearance. He failed to act responsibly. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline H, drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
  Subparagraph   1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g   Against Applicant  
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:   Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
