1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-03810
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On May 30, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to the above-
referenced Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR). The SOR enumerated security
concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). DOD took action under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.   
In a response dated July 27, 2012, Applicant admitted all eight allegations and
requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on September 20, 2012. The
parties initially agreed to a hearing date of October 25, 2012, and a notice setting the
hearing for that date was issued on September 28, 2012. Upon request and absent
objection, the hearing date was ultimately moved to November 13, 2012. The hearing
was convened as scheduled. Applicant gave testimony and offered no documents. The
Government offered 12 documents, which were accepted into the record without
objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-12. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on
November 20, 2012, and the record was closed. Based on a review of the testimony,
official case file, and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden of mitigating
security concerns related to financial considerations. Clearance is denied.
 Tr. 30. During this period, Applicant experienced no period(s) of unemployment.      1
 There was some indication that the total might be reduced to about $1,200 in the past year, but despite      2
Applicant’s requests for a reduction, none was implemented.
 The delinquent debts, cited in the SOR in allegations ¶¶ 1.b-1.h, range from $17,418 to $446.      3
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old engineer who has worked for the same defense
contractor for the past year. He has a high school diploma. He served in the U.S. Navy
for eight years, during which time he received considerable Naval training and earned
multiple certifications. Although he has worked on multiple contracts over the years as a
civilian, he has been continuously employed for the past 15 years.  He has three1
children from an earlier marriage. He is responsible for paying the same amount of child
support to his ex-wife until their youngest child reaches the age of 18. That child is
currently 14.  Applicant married his current spouse in 2010.
Applicant and his first wife experienced marital difficulties that led to their
separation between 2007 and 2008. At the time, the couple was financially stable, and
Applicant’s estranged wife assumed custody of their children. Their state required
Applicant to pay $1,700 a month for child support to his spouse, based on his then-
current annual salary of $50,000. Applicant’s estranged wife moved to another state
with their children before their 2009 divorce. That state required Applicant pay a lump
sum of $2,200 in monthly child support to the children’s mother.  Applicant found the2
sum difficult to budget. He contemplated looking for a second job to meet his child
support and other obligations. Instead, he found a position paying $80,000 a year in
another city. He then moved in order to accept the position. Despite the raise, the new
city was a costlier place in which to live. He had difficulty paying his increased rent and
utilities ($1,200), and debts were acquired. In completing his security clearance
application (SCA) in April 2009, he attributed his delinquent debts to his divorce. He
further noted that he was currently working on getting all of his delinquent debt satisfied.
Applicant remarried in 2010. When he first began co-habitating with his present
wife, he started paying half of her monthly mortgage payment ($1,600), thus increasing
his monthly financial expenses by $400. During questioning in both December 2011
and February 2012, he noted that he was trying to work on his delinquent debts. 
Applicant’s salary recently rose to $100,000 per year. At his present salary, he is
able to live within his means. Consequently, he feels can now “slowly dig [himself]
outside of [his distressed financial] situation,” although he has not received financial
counseling or thus far articulated a strategy to address the approximately $38,000 in
delinquent debt currently at issue.  In his July 2012 response to the May 2012 SOR,3
Applicant noted that he acknowledged the eight debts referenced and wrote that he
 At Tr. 41, Applicant noted that he tried to contact the creditors noted at SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b-1.c “in the      4
last couple a days,” but that he was unable to make progress on resolving the debts. He stated that he was
unaware of those two debts until he received the May 2012 SOR. He provided no evidence of any effort to
address these two debts or otherwise initiate contact with these two creditors in the “next 30 days,” as
indicated in his response to the SOR, or at anytime between June 2012 and November 2012.
 Tr. 19-20. Applicant stated that he made a $25 payment on the debt noted at SOR allegation ¶ 1.f  as part      5
of a settlement, but he provided no corroborating evidence. Tr. 44. He also testified, without supporting
evidence, that he had attempted to return the automobile noted at SOR allegation ¶ 1.g.  Tr. 45-47. Otherwise,
Applicant maintains that he has been satisfying other debts not reflected in the SOR, but no evidence of such
effort was offered. Tr. 20.
 Tr. 36-39.      6
3
would specifically work with five of those accounts within the “next 30 days.”  Applicant,4
however, provided no documentary evidence showing any attempt to address any of
these delinquent debts.  5
One of the delinquent accounts at issue is related to a $7,536 credit card
balance (SOR allegation ¶ 1.g). The balance involves a corporate credit card Applicant
used for personal use (SOR allegation ¶ 1.a). Although Applicant and a former
employer discussed his outstanding balance when he left that employer for a new job,
the debt is owed by Applicant directly to the lender. The former employer is not left
liable for the sum.  Applicant admits he is solely liable for the balance shown.  6
As previously noted, Applicant is presently living within his means. After all his
current obligations are met, he retains a monthly remainder of about $1,300. He turns
this sum over to his wife, who manages their financial affairs. She is aware of the
delinquent debts at issue. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      8
 Id.      9
 Id.      10
 AG ¶ 18.      11
4
 The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a7
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  8
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in those to whom it grants
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 states that decisions shall be “in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for
access to classified/sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard indicates
that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”9
Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to
sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.10
Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) is  the most pertinent to this case. Conditions pertaining to this AG that
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would
mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
Under Guideline F, failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  It11
also states that an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
 Id.      12
5
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant admits that he acquired12
approximately $38,000 in delinquent debt. This is sufficient to raise Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
security concerns. 
Applicant admits liability for the delinquent debts at issue. Since 2009, he has
maintained that he is working on his debts, but no evidence of such efforts was shown
at the 2012 hearing. He continues to attribute his neglect of those debts to the financial
strains caused by his separation and divorce (circa 2007-2009), and the financial
burden associated with his child support payments. However, with an income that has
doubled from $50,000 to $100,000 since 2009 and a present net monthly remainder of
about $1,300, citing to the financial drains of a 2009 divorce and child support formula
carries significantly diminished weight. He similarly failed to provide documentary
evidence that he has developed a rapport with his creditors concerning his debts or
received financial counseling that might help him manage his debt.
Despite his present net monthly remainder, Applicant provided no information
indicating that he has a plan. At first blush, financial distress caused by a divorce could
be cited to invoke application of Financial Consideration Mitigating Condition AG ¶
20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances). However, Applicant failed to document actions showing that
he acted responsibly in the face of meeting related obligations. Given the facts and
evidence and presented, none of the other mitigating conditions apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. In addition, what constitutes reasonable behavor in such cases,
as contemplated by FC MC ¶ 20(b), depends on the specific facts in a given case. 
I considered the specific facts and circumstances in this case. Applicant is a
mature and direct man who served his country for eight years in the U.S. military, and
worked for the U.S. government as a civilian for many years. He has succeeded
professionally and doubled his salary over the past few years. He always has made his
child support a priority. However, despite affirmations in his 2009 SCA, his May 2012
6
SOR response, and in intervening interrogatories stating that he would take immediate
action to address his delinquent debts, no discernable progress has been made to that
end. Further, no evidence was introduced showing that a comprehensive, reasonable,
and workable plan to repay such debts with Applicant’s net monthly remainder has
been successfully formulated or implemented.
Based upon his presentation, Applicant failed to meet his burden under the AG.
Consequently, financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated. As
previously noted, the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials. Applicant failed to
mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied.   
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
