 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-07447 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concern. He has 
satisfied a number of nontax-related debts and has started putting his financial house in 
order. However, over the course of several years, he failed to file his tax returns on time 
and then failed to pay his taxes, which resulted in significant federal and state tax liens. 
He only recently started to address his longstanding tax debts. His recent actions are 
insufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by his long history of failing to timely 
file and pay his taxes. Clearance is denied.  
 
Procedural History 
 
On August 10, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). On 
September 28, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing (Answer). 
 
 On October 23, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready 
to proceed with a hearing. I was assigned the case on October 31, 2012. After 
coordinating with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for December 17, 2012.  
 
2 
 
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 4, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant appeared at the hearing with counsel. He 
testified and called his co-worker and supervisor as witnesses. He also offered 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A – W, which were admitted without objection. I granted 
Applicant’s request to keep the record open to submit additional documents for my 
consideration. He timely submitted AE X – Z, which were also admitted.1 The transcript 
(Tr.) was received on December 28, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his forties. He received an associate’s degree in 1999, a 
bachelor’s degree in 2004, and a master’s degree in network security in 2006. He is 
scheduled to complete his M.B.A. in 2014. He recently married. He has five children, 
three of whom are eighteen years of age or older. He raised his teenage son on his 
own, after his son’s mother abandoned their child. He financially supports his two minor 
children and stepson. (Tr. at 33-34, 48-50, GE 1) 
 
 Applicant has been working two full-time jobs since 2000. His income has 
increased by approximately $100,000 from five years ago. He currently earns 
approximately $250,000 a year. He attributes his financial issues to his divorce from his 
former spouse in 1998, which left him with considerable debt. He also attributes his 
financial problems to medical issues in 2004 and 2006, which left him unemployed or 
underemployed for significant periods of time and resulted in a decrease in his 
household income. Applicant’s medical issues motivated him to return to school and led 
to his current employment in the information technology field. He secured a second 
well-paying job in April 2012, which allowed him to satisfy almost all of his nontax-
related debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d). The only nontax-related debt that is still outstanding is 
a car loan that he has brought current and is in good standing (SOR ¶ 1.e). (Tr. at 34-
42, 50-52, 62-63, 69-72; GE 2; AE S, AE Z) 
 
Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns on time for tax years 1998 to 
2006. His gross income over that eight-year period steadily increased from around 
$24,000 to over $101,000. He failed to deduct enough taxes from his wages and owed 
federal taxes for each year, except for 2001. In 2009, a federal tax lien was issued 
against Applicant for unpaid federal taxes for tax years 1998 to 2000 and 2002 to 2006. 
The total amount owed was over $21,000 (SOR ¶ 1.g). A state tax lien had previously 
been entered against Applicant in 2006 for over $20,000 (SOR ¶1.g). (GE 2 at 291-307, 
IRS Account Transcripts; AE K; AE W, Personal Financial Statement; Answer)2  
                                                          
1
 AE O – W were documents attached to the Answer. Applicant’s post-hearing documents were 
remarked with the above exhibit letters. 
 
2
 According to the IRS Account Transcripts, Applicant filed his 1998 through 2001 tax returns in 
April 2003. He filed his 2002 tax return in August 2003; his 2004 return in May 2005; his 2005 return in 
July 2007; and his 2006 return in May 2007. His returns were due on April 15
th
. He only requested an 
extension to file his 2005 tax returns late, but filed it nine months after the deadline granted by the IRS. 
He testified that his returns were filed on time, but did not submit evidence to corroborate his testimony, 
which is contradicted by the evidence. (Tr. at 54) 
 
3 
 
 
 During a security clearance background interview, Applicant told an investigator 
that his federal tax debt was due to an error committed by his tax advisor. He also told 
the investigator that he received a notice from the IRS regarding his tax delinquency in 
about 2007 or 2008. He went on to claim that he had been paying $225 per month since 
2007 or 2008 per an agreement he had entered into with the IRS. (GE 2 at 252, Subject 
Interview from February 2011) He did not submit documentation regarding said 
payments or agreement with the IRS. 
 
 At hearing, Applicant testified that he first became aware of his federal tax 
delinquency in 2010, after the IRS conducted an audit. He contacted the IRS and 
started to repay his federal tax debt in 2011. (Tr. at 42-45, 53-58) His wages were 
garnished in 2011 as a result of a tax levy. (GE 2 at 308-313; AE W) He did not address 
the inconsistency between his statement to the investigator and at hearing as to when 
he found out about and started to repay his federal tax debt. 
 
In May 2012, Applicant entered into a repayment agreement with the IRS. He 
agreed to make monthly payments to satisfy the federal taxes he owed for the tax years 
covered by the 2009 federal tax lien (1998 to 2000 and 2002 to 2006). This repayment 
agreement also covered tax years 2008 and 2009. (GE 2 at 286, IRS Letter, dated May 
22, 2012) Applicant submitted proof of having made the required monthly payments 
from July to November 2012. (AE U, AE V, AE X) He did not submit evidence of having 
timely filed and paid his federal taxes for tax years 2010 and 2011. 
 
 In September 2012, Applicant entered into a repayment agreement with State A. 
He is required to pay nearly $300 a month for 43 months to resolve his outstanding 
state tax liability. (AE T) He submitted proof of having made the required monthly 
payments in October and November 2012. (AE X) During his background interview, 
Applicant stated that after receiving notice of his state tax delinquency he had been 
paying approximately $254 per month to State A, and “the account will be satisfied in 
2012.” (GE 2 at 252-253) At hearing, he testified that he had been making payments to 
State A to satisfy the 2006 state tax lien prior to entering into the recent repayment 
agreement. (Tr. at 47, 58-59) He did not submit evidence of said earlier payments.  
 
 Applicant testified that his tax delinquency was caused by his ex-wife claiming 
their children on her tax return every year instead of every other year, as required by 
their agreement. (Tr. at 53-58, 66-69) Applicant submitted his divorce decree, which is 
silent on the issue as to which parent will be allowed to deduct the children on their tax 
returns. The decree notes that Applicant’s ex-wife was granted custody of the children. 
(AE Y)  
 
 Applicant has taken a number of financial counseling courses and engaged the 
services of a credit counseling service. (AE L – N; Tr. at 46-47, 59-60) Applicant’s 
personal financial statement from May 2012 indicates that, after paying his monthly 
expenses and debts, he had a monthly net remainder of over $4,800. (GE 2 at 242-243) 
The budget Applicant submitted in September 2012 shows that his monthly net 
remainder had increased to over $5,000. (AE W) At hearing, Applicant testified that he 
 
4 
 
 
was saving this entire monthly remainder for the purchase of a home. He estimated that 
he had saved about $10,000. He opened a savings account about two weeks prior to 
the hearing, but had not deposited any money into the account. (Tr. at 60-62)   
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance since 1997. He has never mishandled or 
otherwise compromised classified information. He is considered a trusted and reliable 
employee, whose work performance is outstanding. (Tr. at 19-30, 45; AE A – J) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
“This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money in satisfaction of his or her 
debts.”3 The concern also encompasses financial irresponsibility, which may indicate 
that an applicant would also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in 
handling and safeguarding classified information.  
 
Applicant’s long history of not meeting his financial obligations, most notably his 
failure to timely file and pay his taxes over the course of several years that led to the 
imposition of federal and state liens, directly implicates the above concern. It also 
establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”4 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
                                                          
3
 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). See also ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 
(App. Bd. June 26, 2012). 
 
4
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
6 
 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s nontax-related debts were, in part, attributable to matters outside his 
control. He has resolved these debts and has not accumulated any additional nontax-
related bad debt. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply to the nontax-related debts listed 
in the SOR.  
 
 On the other hand, Applicant’s recent efforts to resolve his longstanding tax 
debts are insufficient to mitigate the significant concerns raised by his persistent failure 
over the course of several years to timely file and pay his taxes. His divorce and 
medical issues did not prevent him from meeting the obligation of all citizens to file and 
pay their taxes. Even if his tax liability was a result of confusion regarding who was 
entitled to deduct the children on their tax returns, Applicant was alerted to his 
substantial tax debts years ago and made no effort to resolve them until recently. His 
federal tax debt, some which dates back to 1998, and state tax lien from 2006 have still 
not been resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) do not apply to Applicant’s tax-related debts. 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant submitted no evidence that he voluntarily started to repay 
his substantial tax debts prior to entering into his recent repayment agreements with 
federal and state taxing authorities. His recent repayment agreements were entered into 
after federal and state tax authorities secured liens against him and his wages were 
garnished. Under such circumstances, Applicant’s belated efforts to resolve his tax 
debts were not initiated in good-faith. Moreover, Applicant’s failure to submit evidence 
that he timely filed his recent tax returns and has paid his taxes on time, as well as his 
inconsistent statements regarding when he became aware of his tax debts and their 
status, leaves me to question the extent to which his current finances are under 
control.5 AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) also do not apply to Applicant’s tax-related debts.  
 
                                                          
5
 ISCR Case No. 10-08650 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 5, 2011) (An administrative judge may consider 
an individual’s prior statements regarding his or her debts in assessing the individual’s credibility and 
whether they met their burden of persuasion as to mitigation). 
 
7 
 
 
 Consequently, although Applicant has recently made some headway in resolving 
his longstanding tax debts and has resolved his nontax-related debts, his financial 
issues remain a concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).6 I have considered all the favorable and extenuating 
factors in this case. Applicant has held a security clearance without issue for over 15 
years, raised his teenage son on his own, and is a good worker who is thought of highly 
by his co-workers and employer. These favorable whole-person factors are significant 
mitigating factors. However, an individual who has a history of failing to meet his 
financial obligations, especially the obligation of all citizens to file and pay their taxes, 
may similarly fail to discharge his security obligations. The significant security concerns 
raised by Applicant’s history of financial irresponsibility and malfeasance must be 
resolved in favor of national security.7 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s continued eligibility and suitability for access to 
classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:         For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f  – 1.g:         Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
6
 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7
 AG ¶ 2(b). See also Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“security-
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials”); ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 3 
(App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012) (“Even years of safeguarding national security information may not be sufficient 
to mitigate a history of ongoing, significant delinquent debt”). 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
