 
1 
 
 
                                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                                        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
            )  ISCR Case No. 11-08714 
                                                                      )                                            
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the record, I conclude that Applicant mitigated security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, but she failed to mitigate security 
concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
                                     Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on August 27, 2007. On October 15, 2012, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within DOD for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant’s notarized answer to the SOR was dated November 9, 2012. In her 
answer, she provided additional information, and she elected to have a hearing before 
 
2 
 
 
an administrative judge at the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The 
case was assigned to me on November 26, 2012. I convened a hearing on December 
19, 2012, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and 
introduced seven exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 7 and entered in the record 
without objection. Applicant testified and called no other witnesses. She introduced four 
exhibits, which were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through Ex. D and 
entered in the record without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
January 2, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains two allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.), and eight allegations of disqualifying conduct 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.a., 2.b(i), 2b(ii), and 2c. through 2.g.). 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations under both guidelines. 
Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact. (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
  
 Applicant, who is 36 years old, married in 2003 and divorced in 2005. She is the 
mother of two young children, born to her and her fiancé, with whom she lives in a 
spouse-like relationship. Since 2006, she has been employed as a government 
contractor. Her current job title is information assurance analyst. (Ex.1; Tr. 26-30, 34-
35.) 
 
 Applicant enlisted in a branch of the U.S. military reserve in 1998, when she was 
about 22 years old. In May 2006, after eight years of active reserve service, she 
received an honorable discharge. (Ex. 1; Tr. 31-34.) 
 
 Applicant was first awarded a security clearance in 2002, while serving in the 
active reserve. From that time until about 2010, she held secret and top secret level 
clearances, and she was also granted eligibility for access, when necessary, to 
sensitive compartmented information (SCI). (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 33-35.) 
 
 Applicant began using marijuana while in high school. She estimated that her 
earliest use could have been in 1991. She used marijuana with her husband and when 
she was alone. From about 1994 until at least 2007, Applicant used marijuana about 
three times a week even though, from 2002 on, she held secret and top secret security 
clearances, with eligibility, on occasion, for access to SCI. Additionally, Applicant’s 
marijuana use from 1998 to 2006 occurred while she served on active reserve duty in 
the military. She knew that illegal drug use by military personnel and government 
contractors holding security clearances was not permitted. The SOR alleges Applicant’s 
illegal drug use while on active military duty and as a government contractor holding 
 
3 
 
 
security clearances with access to SCI at ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b. and ¶¶ 2.f. and 2.g.1 (Tr. 42-
22.) 
 
 In 2002, Applicant completed a security clearance application. She failed to list 
her marijuana use from about 1994 through the date of her 2002 application.  In 2002, 
during her military service, she was awarded a security clearance with eligibility for   
access to SCI. The SOR alleges at ¶ 2.e. that Applicant’s failure to disclose her 
marijuana use was a deliberate falsification. Applicant admitted that her falsification was 
deliberate; she stated that she feared she would lose her job if she revealed her drug 
use (Ex. 2; Ex. 3; Tr. 50-51.) 
 
 Applicant used the illegal drug Ecstasy twice in 2002 or 2003.2 In a July 2010 
interview with an investigator from another federal government agency, Applicant stated 
that her Ecstasy use occurred in 2005 or 2006. At her hearing, Applicant was unable to 
recall precisely when she used Ecstasy, but stated she thought she used it before 2006, 
while she was still in the military. (Ex. 4; Ex. 5; Tr. 40-41.) 
 
 In 2004, Applicant completed a security clearance application. She failed to list 
her marijuana use from 1994 until the date of the 2004 application. She also failed to 
disclose her use of Ecstasy, which she told an authorized investigator occurred in 2002 
or 2003. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.d. that Applicant’s failure to disclose her marijuana use 
and her Ecstasy use was a deliberate falsification. Applicant admitted that her 
falsification was deliberate. She said she feared she would lose her job if she revealed 
her illegal drug use. In 2004, during her military service, she was again granted a 
security clearance. (Ex. 2; Ex. 4; Tr. 50-51.) 
 
 In August 2007, as a government contractor, Applicant again completed a 
security clearance application. Section 24 on the security clearance application is 
identified as Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity. The applicant is instructed 
as follows:  
 
The following questions pertain to the illegal use of drugs or drug activity. 
You are required to answer the questions fully and truthfully, and your 
failure to do so could be grounds for an adverse employment decision or 
action against you, but neither your truthful responses nor information 
derived from your responses will be used as evidence against you in any 
subsequent criminal proceeding. 
  
                                            
1 The record establishes that Applicant was a member of the active reserve of one of the U.S. military 
services. In this capacity, she worked part-time, for one weekend a month, and for two weeks a year, she 
worked full-time. She was first granted a security clearance in 2002, while serving in the military reserve. 
After leaving military service in 2006, Applicant was employed by several defense contractors in positions 
requiring security clearances. (Ex. 1; Ex. 4; Ex. 5.) 
 
2
 She admitted her use of Ecstasy in a February 2011 interview with an authorized investigator.  
 
4 
 
 
 On August 27, 2007, Applicant completed Section 24a on the e-QIP, which reads 
as follows: 
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), 
amphetamines, depressants  (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs? 
 
Applicant responded “No” to question 24a. The SOR alleges at ¶ 2.b(i) that Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose that she used marijuana from about 1994 through at least 
February 2007. The SOR alleges at ¶ 2.b(ii) that Applicant failed to disclose that she 
used Ecstasy on two occasions in about 2003. (Ex. 1.) 
 
 Section 24b on the security clearance application that Applicant completed on 
August 27, 2007, asks: “Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance while 
employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official, while 
possessing a security clearance, or while in a position directly and immediately affecting 
the public safety?” Applicant responded “No” to Section 24b. The SOR alleges at ¶ 2.c. 
that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose that she used marijuana regularly after 
being granted a security clearance in 2002 and after being granted a security clearance 
with eligibility for access to SCI in 2004. (Ex. 1.) 
 
 Applicant admitted that in her answers to Section 24a and 24b, she deliberately 
failed to disclose her marijuana use and her use of Ecstasy while holding security 
clearances. Again, she attributed her deceptive answers to her fear of losing her job. 
(Tr. 50-51.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed several times by investigators from another federal 
government agency about her use of illegal drugs while holding a security clearance.3 In 
her first examination, in March 2010, she did not acknowledge her drug involvement. In 
a subsequent examination, she told the investigator that she had used marijuana from 
1993 until 2003. She further stated that marijuana was the only illegal drug she had ever 
used. Under subsequent questioning, she admitted using Ecstasy one time in 2005. 
After still further questioning, she revealed she had used marijuana until 2007, and she 
had used Ecstasy twice in 2005 or 2006. (Ex. 5; Ex. 7; Tr. 37-42.) 
 
 Applicant expressed remorse for her drug involvement and her deception about 
her drug involvement. She stated that she had a miscarriage in 2007, which she 
attributed to her use of marijuana. Thereafter, she ceased using illegal drugs because 
                                            
3
 Applicant and Department Counsel stipulated that a Report of Investigation, summarizing Applicant’s 
interviews by another federal government agency on March 23, 2010, May 3, 2010, July 12, 2010, and 
August 16, 2010, would be admissible as evidence at her hearing, pursuant to Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20, of 
the Directive. The Record of Investigation is marked as Ex. 5. Correspondence relating to the stipulation 
is marked as Ex. 6. The signed and dated stipulations of Applicant and Department Counsel are enclosed 
in the record and are marked as Ex. 7.  
 
5 
 
 
she wanted to become pregnant and bear healthy children. She has a four-year-old 
child and a ten-month-old child. She asserted that she no longer associates with 
individuals who use illegal drugs, and she stated she has no intent to use illegal drugs in 
the future. (Tr. 25-29, 45.)   
 
 Applicant underwent a voluntary substance abuse evaluation at a substance 
abuse counseling facility in July 2012. A counselor at the facility concluded: “Due to the 
results of [Applicant’s] formal tests, and self-report, it does not appear that [she] has a 
substance abuse problem at this time.” (Ex. A; Ex. B.) 
 
 Applicant also began weekly psychotherapy sessions in July 2012. Her counselor 
provided two summary statements based upon interviews with Applicant. Applicant 
stated that she initiated counseling “to show [a] good faith effort that I’m doing 
everything that I could possibly do.” (Ex. C; Ex. D; Tr. 46-47.) 
 
                                                  Burden of Proof 
 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the 
applicant then bears the burden of persuasion. The "clearly consistent with the national 
interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant's 
suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national security. 
  
                                                        Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
6 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.” The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
 
7 
 
 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.”  
 
 Through Applicant’s admissions, the record establishes that she used marijuana, 
about three times a week for at least 13 years, from approximately 1994 until 2007. She 
also used Ecstasy twice in about 2005 and 2006. Applicant used illegal drugs while 
holding high-level security clearances as an active reservist in the military and as a 
government contractor.  
 
 Applicant’s 13 years of illegal drug involvement casts doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. It also raises security concerns about her ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. I conclude that Applicant’s illegal 
drug use and her use of marijuana and Ecstasy after being granted at least three 
security clearances raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(g). AG ¶ 25(a) 
reads: “any drug abuse [as defined at AG ¶ 24(b)].” AG ¶ 25(g) reads: “any illegal drug 
use after being granted a security clearance.” 
 
Two Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. If Applicant’s drug use happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation. If Applicant demonstrated an intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used, (3) abstaining from drug use for 
an appropriate period, or (4) signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation 
of her security clearance for any violation, then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable. 
 
Applicant’s last use of marijuana was in 2007, more than five years ago. Her last 
use of Ecstasy was in 2006, more than six years ago. However, her marijuana use 
dated to at least 1994, and her use was frequent and ongoing until 2007. Since that 
time, Applicant has become a parent and is committed to a healthy family life. At 
present, she appears to possess good judgment about avoiding any future drug use. 
Moreover, she provided an assessment showing no current drug involvement and 
asserted her intent not to abuse drugs in the future. She testified credibly that she had 
abstained from drug use for an appropriate period, had disassociated from those with 
whom she had used drugs in the past, and had changed her conduct to avoid 
environments where drugs are used. She did not provide a signed statement of her 
intent not to abuse drugs in the future, with automatic revocation of her security 
clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use occurred periodically over a period of 13 years, 
suggesting a lifestyle choice that went beyond curiosity and experimentation. From 
2002 until 2007, she used illegal drugs while holding multiple security clearances, 
thereby consciously jeopardizing her ability to protect classified information and 
deceiving military and civilian colleagues who relied upon her to perform her duties 
responsibly and with good judgment.  
 
8 
 
 
Because she seeks to avoid any future drug use, Applicant has enrolled in 
weekly counseling in order to understand her past drug use and the circumstances that 
caused it. She is serious about her duties as a parent, and she testified credibly that 
she has the incentive and will to avoid illegal drug use in the future. I conclude that AG 
¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant’s personal conduct raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(b), 
and 16 (e)(1). AG ¶ 16(a) reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(b) reads: “deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative.” AG ¶ 16(e)(1) 
reads: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in 
activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community 
standing. . .  .”  
 
Applicant used illegal drugs while holding multiple security clearances over a 
period of five years. She admitted deliberately falsifying her answers to Sections 24a 
and 24b on three separate security clearance applications that she executed in 2002, 
2004, and 2007. Moreover, she provided false and misleading information in multiple 
interviews with investigators from another federal government agency in 2010. 
Applicant’s deceptions continued for over eight years, and had she not been questioned 
so many times by skilled interrogators, she might never have revealed her deliberate 
falsifications. 
 
 Applicant stated that she falsified her security clearance applications because 
she feared she would lose her job if she told the truth about her drug involvement and 
her drug use while holding security clearances. However, her deceptions caused the 
Government to trust her with important classified information that would not have been 
permitted had her ongoing drug use been known. Her multiple deceptions and her 
failure to disclose her drug use while holding security clearances made her vulnerable 
 
9 
 
 
to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. Her conduct reflects a pattern of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, and unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations.   
 
Applicant showed remorse for her personal conduct. However, the serious nature 
of her protracted deceptive conduct leads me to conclude that insufficient time has 
elapsed to demonstrate that she now is a trustworthy and reliable person whose 
judgment can be trusted to carry out the responsibilities attendant to holding a security 
clearance. I conclude that none of the Guideline E mitigating conditions applies to the 
facts of Applicant’s case. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances in this case.  When Applicant suffered a miscarriage in 
2007, she realized that drug use was not compatible with parenthood. Because she 
wanted to become a mother and raise healthy children, she stopped using illegal drugs, 
and she testified credibly that she has not used them since 2007. She now has two 
healthy children. 
 
When she executed three separate security clearances during her military 
service and as a government contractor, Applicant was a mature adult. On each of 
those applications, Applicant was not candid about her illegal drug use. Additionally, she 
used illegal drugs while entrusted with security clearances. Moreover, she was not 
candid about her drug involvement while holding security clearances when she was 
interviewed by investigators at another federal government agency. 
 
 Applicant’s protracted and long-standing lack of candor raises serious concerns 
about her current security worthiness. While Applicant demonstrated that she no longer 
 
10 
 
 
used illegal drugs, she failed to meet her burden of persuasion in mitigating the 
Government’s allegations under the personal conduct adjudicative guideline. Overall, 
the evidence in this case leaves me with questions and doubts at this time about 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. 
  
                                                     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.g.:   Against Applicant 
 
                                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                            ________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
