1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-02526
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
January15, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On March 14, 2012, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive
5220.6, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On May 31, 2012, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing including four
attachments, and he requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on September 10, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October
12, 2012, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on November 6, 2012. The
Government offered Exhibits 1 through 12, which were received without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through F, which were
also admitted without objection. The record was kept open until November 20, 2012, to
allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. The documents that were timely received
have been identified and entered into evidence without objection as Exhibits G through
2
J. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on November 14, 2012. Based upon
a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access
to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 57 years old. He is married, and he has one daughter. Applicant has
been employed by his current employer, a defense contractor, for 21 years, and he
seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense
sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 14 allegations (1.a. through n.) regarding overdue debts under
Adjudicative Guideline F. The allegations will be discussed below in the same order as
they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $10,714. At the
hearing, Applicant testified that this debt for a repossessed vehicle has not been paid,
although he indicated that he intends to eventually resolve this debt. (Tr at 37-39.)
Applicant submitted a post-hearing exhibit, establishing that he has engaged the
services of a credit consolidation counseling service (CCCS), to help him resolve the
unpaid debts listed on the SOR. Applicant represented that by following their plan all of
his overdue debts will be satisfied in 24 months. (Exhibit G.) This debt was listed on the
CCCS documentation. I find that at this time the full debt is still due and owing, but
Applicant has a plan to resolve this debt within 24 months. 
 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $173. Applicant
testified that this debt for a medical bill has been paid. (Tr at 39-41.) Exhibit E shows
that this debt was paid in full on March 29, 2012. I find that this debt has been resolved.
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $53. Applicant
testified that this debt has been paid. (Tr at 41.) Exhibit E shows that this debt was paid
in full. I find that this debt has been resolved.
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,081. Applicant
testified that he was not certain whether or not this debt had been paid. (Tr at 41-43.)
The record was kept open to offer any evidence to update the current status of this
debt. This debt was listed on the CCCS documentation. (Exhibit G.) I find that at this
time the full debt is still due and owing, but Applicant has a plan to resolve this debt
within 24 months. 
 
3
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,052. Applicant
testified that this debt has been paid. (Tr at 43-44.) Exhibit E shows that this debt was
paid in full on October 3, 2012. I find that this debt has been resolved.
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $476. Applicant
testified that this debt has been paid. (Tr at 44-45.) Exhibit E shows that this debt was
paid in full on May 9, 2012. I find that this debt has been resolved.
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,540. Applicant
testified that this debt for a medical bill has not been paid. He believed that his medical
insurance should have paid for this bill, but he has not confirmed this. (Tr at 45-47.) The
record was kept open to offer any evidence to update the current status of this debt.
This debt was listed on the CCCS documentation. (Exhibit G.) I find that at this time the
full debt is still due and owing, but Applicant has a plan to resolve this debt within 24
months. 
 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,165. Applicant
testified that this debt has been paid. (Tr at 48-49.) Applicant’s RSOR attachment 4
shows that this debt was paid in full. I find that this debt has been resolved.
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $811. Applicant
testified that he had sent a check to this creditor to settle this debt, but he came to
realize that the check had never been cashed. He planned to contact the creditor to
attempt to resolve this debt and to submit post-hearing evidence to update the current
status of this debt. (Tr at 49-50.) This debt was listed on the CCCS documentation.
(Exhibit G.) I find that at this time the full debt is still due and owing, but Applicant has a
plan to resolve this debt within 24 months. 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $6,518. Applicant
testified that he has been making payments of $604 every two weeks for what he
believed to be three months on this medical debt. At the time of the hearing, he owed
one additional payment of $385, and the debt would be paid off. (Tr at 50-51.) The
record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit evidence to establish the current
status of this debt. This debt was not listed on the CCCS documentation, and it appears
to be resolved. 
1.k. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $6,628. Applicant
testified that this debt for a repossessed vehicle has not been paid, although he
indicated that he intends to eventually resolve this debt. (Tr at 52.) This debt was listed
on the CCCS documentation. (Exhibit G.) I find that at this time the full debt is still due
and owing, but Applicant has a plan to resolve this debt within 24 months. 
 
1.l. Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy on or about March 2002. The debts
were discharged in December 2002. Applicant testified that he got into financial
problems during the 2002 time frame because his wife’s son and daughter from a
previous marriage came to live with Applicant and his wife, and not only was he then
4
supporting her two children, but he was also helping to support other members of his
wife’s family, who lived in another country. (Tr at 55-58.) 
1.m. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $202. Applicant
testified that this bill is for a television service that he still has, and he believed that he
was current with this creditor. (Tr at 52-53.) Only one of the credit reports submitted,
(Exhibit 5), shows that this debt was overdue.  The record was kept open to allow
Applicant to submit evidence to establish the current status of this debt. Applicant
submitted post-hearing Exhibit H, which shows that he has current service from this
creditor and is not overdue. I find that this debt is resolved.
1.n. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,174. Applicant
testified that this debt for a credit card has not been paid, but the record was kept open
to allow Applicant to submit evidence to establish the current status of this debt. (Tr at
54-55.) This debt was listed on the CCCS documentation. (Exhibit G.) I find that at this
time the full debt is still due and owing, but Applicant has a plan to resolve this debt
within 24 months. 
Applicant testified that his current financial difficulties occurred as a result of his
sustaining two injures, a  torn ligament in his arm in 2007, and a sprained ankle in 2008,
that made him miss work. For his arm he missed three or four weeks, and for his ankle
he was off of work for six weeks. His wife was not bringing in any income during this
period. (Tr at 58-60.) Finally, his wife’s daughter was going to come live with them again
with her baby, and one of the vehicles he purchased was to go to her. She was to make
the payments, but when she only stayed with them a month, he was stuck making the
payments for two vehicles by himself, resulting in the vehicle repossession. (Tr at 60-
61.) 
Mitigation
Applicant testified that he does not currently have any credit cards, and it is his
intention to not have any credit cards in the future. (Tr at 68-69.) 
Applicant also submitted evidence showing that he is current on a title loan, and
he had paid off other overdue debs that had not been listed on his SOR. (Exhibits I and
J.) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
5
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
6
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19 (a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19 (c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant has accumulated significant delinquent debt. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties: Under AG ¶  20 (b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As noted
above, Applicant testified that his financial problems resulted from his two infirmities that
resulted in him missing between nine and ten weeks of work. I find that he has acted
responsibly by paying off six of the debts listed on the SOR, and then engaging the
services of a CCCS to help him pay off the rest of his debts. Applicant also resolved
additional debts that were not listed on the SOR, and he no longer uses credit cards.
Therefore, I find that this mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in this case. 
AG ¶  20(d) is also applicable since I find that Applicant has “initiated a good-faith
effort” to “resolve debts.” As reviewed above, Applicant has paid six debts, and I find
that he has acted reasonably and has a realistic plan to pay off the other additional
debts. I find that this mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in this case.
Since Applicant has taken responsible steps to resolve his significant overdue
debts, I conclude that he has mitigated the financial concerns of the Government.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
7
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the mitigating conditions  apply, I find that the record evidence leaves
me with no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a
security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. through 1.n.:     For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
