KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant contends that he was not advised of the full extent of the information the
Judge wanted at hearing.  He states that he was not advised in advance that he may need to
provide evidence of current income, expenses, and the net remainder of his income after
expenses.  In a DOHA hearing, the applicant bears the burden of persuasion concerning
mitigation of the security concerns raised by his conduct.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  There is no basis
in the record to conclude that Applicant was not apprised of his obligation to present evidence in
mitigation or that he was somehow misled regarding the appropriate content of his presentation.   
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 11-04088.a1
DATE: 01/29/2013
DATE: January 29, 2013
In Re:
------------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-04088
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 25, 2012, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(b): “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances[.]”  
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On November 2, 2012, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Elizabeth M.
Matchinski denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues: whether he was deprived of due process and whether
the Judge’s decision was arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  Consistent with the following,
we affirm.
Facts  
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
operated a business out of his house.  However, the business developed financial problems in about
2007, so Applicant turned the operation over to his son.  In addition, Applicant’s wife lost her job
as an aid in the local school system.  
Prior to this, Applicant and his wife had decided to construct two buildings on an 11.37 acre
property.  They completed the smaller of the two and then took out a $362,000 home equity loan to
build a 3,600 square foot home.  After exhausting their line of credit, they took out a $535,000 loan
to finance completion of the home and to repay the home equity loan.  They also accrued substantial
credit card debts for the purchase of construction materials and for other expenses.  
The bank withheld the fifth disbursement of loan funds, placing the money in an escrow
account until Applicant obtained a certificate of occupancy for the house.  Applicant became unable
to pay both his mortgage and the future construction costs, so he and his wife filed for Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection.  This was dismissed because they failed to make payments.  A second
Chapter 13 filing was dismissed when the Judge refused to grant a stay of the mortgage obligation.
Applicant attempted a short sale, but the prospective buyer was not willing to pay a non-refundable
deposit of $67,500.  The bank foreclosed and charged off a $71,500 deficiency.  
In the Analysis, the Judge concluded that the Government had not presented substantial
evidence regarding four of the eighteen debts alleged in the SOR.  However, regarding the balance,
she concluded that the debts raised Guideline F security concerns.  
The Judge noted that most of these debts were unresolved.  Although Applicant claimed that
some had been paid by the foreclosure process, he provided no corroboration.  The Judge stated that
Applicant’s business difficulties and his wife’s job loss were circumstances outside their control.
However, she also concluded that Applicant had not exhibited responsible action in regard to his
financial condition, for example by having taken on more debt than he could reasonably repay in the
construction of his new home.1  
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(c): “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control[.]”  
3Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(d): “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts[.]”  
Although Applicant contended that the bank had violated the terms of his loan agreement
by placing funds in escrow, the Judge stated that there was not sufficient evidence in the record to
support that claim.  The Judge also concluded that Applicant had not provided sufficient evidence
of (1) a  clear indication that his financial problems were under control2 or (2) a good-faith effort
to repay his debts.3  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge stated that Applicant had not
demonstrated a track record of debt repayment sufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by
his financial problems.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008), which
the Judge cited in her decision.
Discussion   
At the close of the hearing, the Judge held the record open for three weeks in order to give
Applicant an opportunity to provide additional evidence concerning debt resolution, which he did.
Tr. at 104.  The documents Applicant submitted were admitted into the record as Applicant Exhibits
I through O.  These documents include Applicant’s communications with various creditors, a
certificate that Applicant’s real estate  taxes were up to date, a redemption deed, etc.  
In his appeal brief, Applicant contends that he was not advised of the full extent of the
information which the Judge wanted.  He states that he was not advised in advance that he may need
to provide evidence of current income, expenses, and the net remainder of his income after expenses.
It is true that, in discussing the post-hearing extension of time, the parties appeared to
contemplate that Applicant would submit evidence of debt resolution, and they made no mention
of income and expenses.  However, the Judge’s decision rests on evidence that Applicant had
overextended himself in entering into the construction contract for the larger house and that he had
not demonstrated responsible action concerning his  delinquent debts.  Although she noted that
Applicant has about $500 in discretionary income each month (Decision at 11), this does not appear
to have been a significant factor in her decision.  In a DOHA hearing, the applicant bears the burden
of persuasion concerning mitigation of the security concerns raised by his conduct.  Directive ¶
E3.1.15.  There is no basis in the record to conclude that Applicant was not apprised of his
obligation to present evidence in mitigation or that he was somehow misled regarding the
appropriate content of his presentation.  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
