 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08274 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a security 
clearance to work in the defense industry. The possible tolling of the statute of 
limitations does not resolve the security significance of Applicant’s $120,000 of 
unresolved delinquent debt.  Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on June 20, 2012, 
the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. DoD adjudicators could 
not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to me on October 2, 2012. At the hearing convened on December 5, 2012, I 
admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through Q, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted AE R, which I 
admitted without objection. The Government’s memorandum regarding the post-hearing 
submission is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. I received the 
transcript (Tr.) on December 13, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 47, has been employed by a federal contractor as an engineer since 
November 2010. Married for 23 years, he is the father of four children between the ages 
of 8 and 16. Applicant has spent most of his career working in the aerospace industry. 
He held a Top Secret security clearance from 1992 to 1995, without incident. In his 
current position he is considered a high performer and has received several 
performance-related commendations and financial awards. Applicant is active in his 
church community and devotes his free time to family activities.2  
 
Until 2002, Applicant and his wife had a strong credit history. Their financial 
problems began when Applicant experienced a period of decreasing income associated 
with layoffs in 2002 and 2005, which caused him to seek work in the financial services 
industry. In 2006, Applicant found an engineering position and relocated his family from 
State 1 to State 2. Initially, Applicant listed his home in State 1 for sale; however, the 
home did not appraise for the asking price. Applicant approached his mortgage holders 
about accepting a short sale. Despite having buyers willing to purchase the property, 
the second mortgage holder would not accept the terms of a short sale. For two years, 
Applicant, who was renting a home in State 2, continued to pay the mortgages on the 
home in State 1. He often relied on credit cards to help make ends meet. In 2008, the 
house in State 1 went into foreclosure. Applicant did not receive an IRS Form 1099-C 
from the second mortgage holder; as a result, a deficiency balance of $68,000 
remains.3  
 
Applicant tried to work with his creditors, explaining to each the hardship being 
caused by his inability to sell his home in State 1. None of the creditors were willing to 
accept repayment on terms amenable to Applicant. Seeking help in resolving his debt, 
Applicant enrolled in a nationally-advertised program that promises to turn outstanding 
debt into wealth. He paid the $10,000 enrollment fee using a credit card. When 
Applicant realized that he was not going to receive any benefit from the program, he 
demanded a full refund of his money, but to no avail. Unable to receive assistance from 
his creditors or the debt-to-wealth program, Applicant stopped making payments on his 
debts in 2008. In 2009, one creditor attempted to obtain a judgment against Applicant. 
The court dismissed the lawsuit, without prejudice, because the creditor failed to appear 
                                                          
2 Tr. 18, 25, 47-50, 71; GE 1; AE L-Q. 
 
3 Tr. 19-30, 52-62, 66-69; GE 1-5; AE B-H. 
 
3 
 
at the hearing. Applicant believes that the dismissal of the lawsuit also relieves him of 
his responsibility to repay the debt.4  
 
Since 2008, Applicant has focused his efforts on catching up on other financial 
obligations. However, he did not provide details on any non-SOR debts he has paid. He 
has also expended significant effort in cleaning up his credit report. Applicant has spent 
approximately $1,500 on the services of two credit counseling organizations with the 
aim of repairing his credit, primarily through having derogatory information removed 
from his credit report as required under the Fair Credit Reporting Act. Most recently, he 
has notified each of the four creditors listed in the SOR that he plan to initiate lawsuits 
against them for alleged violations of Sate 2’s Deceptive Trade Practices Act for failing 
to accurately report information to the credit reporting bureaus. To date, Applicant has 
not resolved any of the $120,000 in delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Although he 
admits to incurring the debt, he believes that the debts are uncollectible under the 
statutes of limitations in State 1 and State 2.5 
 
Applicant lives paycheck to paycheck. He lives modestly and within his means 
with the help of a budget. He is current on his recurring financial obligations.6  
                                        
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 22, 30-31, 59-61, 80-81; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. 31-32, 63, 81-86, 90-91; GE 2; AE I-J, R. 
 
6 Tr. 35-36, 80-81, 85. 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”7 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information within the defense industry.  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant incurred approximately $120,000 in delinquent 
debt, which includes the deficiency balance on the home he lost to foreclosure in 2008. 
Initially, Applicant admitted each allegation in the SOR, without explanation.8 However, 
in his post-hearing submission, he retracted his admissions and denies that he owes the 
four delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, claiming that the debts are now uncollectible 
because of the statutes of limitations in States 1 and 2.9 The Government has 
established its prima facie case against Applicant. He disclosed two of the four alleged 
debts in his security clearance application and discussed each debt in his subject 
                                                          
7  AG ¶ 18. 
 
8 Answer, dated July 12, 2012. 
 
9 AE R.  
 
 
5 
 
interview.10 The delinquent debts are also reported on his November 2010 and May 
2012 credit reports.11 The evidence shows Applicant’s  “unwillingness to satisfy debts”12 
and “history of not meeting financial obligations.”13 
 
Here, events beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his financial difficulties,14 
specifically several years of underemployment and the burden of having to pay the 
mortgage on the home in State 1 while it remained on the market. Initially, Applicant 
engaged in good-faith efforts to resolve his outstanding debts.15 He tried working 
directly with his creditors. Although his decision to enroll in a $10,000 program 
promising to turn his debt into wealth may have been unwise, he did so with the sincere 
belief that the program could help him resolve his debt.16 Under the perception that he 
had been treated unfairly by his creditors, Applicant decided not to repay his legitimate 
debts after he lost the home in State 1 to foreclosure. Instead, he decided to rely on the 
operation of the statute of limitations. While Applicant receives some credit for the 
mitigating evidence in the record, it is not sufficient to overcome the concerns raised by 
his conduct.  
 
Applicant’s reliance on the applicability of the statute of limitations fails on two 
grounds. First, the assertion is not supported by the record.17 Although he cited the 
relevant statutes, Applicant did not submit any information regarding the specific terms 
of the credit agreements, which prevents a “reasoned determination as to which states’ 
statute of limitations applies.”18 Second, even if the statute of limitations applied, it does 
not resolve the inquiry regarding Applicant’s security worthiness.19 Security clearance 
decisions are not controlled or limited by any statute of limitation, and reliance on the 
non-collectability of a debt does not constitute a good-faith effort to resolve that debt 
within the meaning of the Directive.20 Furthermore, even if a delinquent debt is legally 
unenforceable under state law, the federal government is entitled to consider the facts 
                                                          
10 GE 1, 3.  
 
11 GE 4-5. 
 
12 AG ¶ 19(a). 
 
13  AG ¶19(c). 
 
14  See AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
15  See AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
16  See AG ¶ 20(c). 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 08-01122 (App. Bd. Feb 9. 2009). 
 
18 Id. 
 
19 See ISCR Case No. 10-03656 (App. Bd. Jan.19, 2011). 
 
20 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 00-0030 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 20, 2001); ISCR Case No. 07-16841 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 19, 2008). 
 
 
6 
 
and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy 
the debt in a timely manner.21 Similarly, the security issues raised in this case are not 
diminished by evidence that Applicant is current on his recurring financial obligations.22 
 
Security clearance adjudications regarding financial issues are not debt collection 
proceedings.23 Rather, the purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a 
person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable 
security risk.”24 Applicant’s decision not to pay his debts reflects poorly on his judgment, 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Applicant’s 
decision also shows an unwillingness to take responsibility for his actions. With each 
line of credit, Applicant accepted the terms of repayment and used the credit extended 
to him. He refused to pay when the previously agreeable terms were no longer 
acceptable to him. Applicant is not a victim of illegal or deceptive practices by his 
creditors. While the creditors do have a statutory obligation to report accurate account 
information to the credit reporting bureaus, any failure to do so does not affect 
Applicant’s responsibility to pay his legitimate debts. Similarly, a dismissal of a creditor’s 
case, without prejudice, does not extinguish the debt. Based on Applicant’s behavior, it 
is not unreasonable to question his willingness to comply with security policies or report 
a security infraction or violation if he perceives the consequences to be unfair or 
contrary to his self-interest.  
 
The evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan25 and the clearly-consistent standard, I 
resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, 
I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. Despite the favorable information 
in the record, Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a 
favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.d.:    Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
21 ISCR Case No. 00-0345 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 12, 2001); ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 
27, 2003); ISCR Case No. 07-09966 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008). 
 
22 ISCR Case. No. 99-0296 (App. Bd. Apr. 18, 2000). 
 
23 ISCR Case No, 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun 21, 2010). 
 
24 AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
25 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
