 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07203 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 25, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. DoD acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 15, 2012, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on October 15, 2012. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
2 
 
 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 13, 2012, and the hearing 
was convened as scheduled on December 5, 2012. The Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and offered exhibits (AE) A and C, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record was kept open for Applicant to submit additional evidence. He 
submitted AE D in a timely fashion and it was admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 17, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations stated in the 
SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He is married and has no children. Since 2003, he has 
worked for a defense contractor as an information technologies specialist. He has a 
bachelor’s degree. He has no military background. He has held a secret security 
clearance since 2004.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) using marijuana 
between 1989 and July 2010, including while holding a top security clearance; (2) being 
arrested in February 1997 for possession of drug paraphernalia; (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.c); and (3) providing false information about his past drug use when completing his 
security clearance questionnaires in January 2011 and April 2004 (See SOR ¶¶ 2.a - 
2.c). 
  
 Applicant first used marijuana sporadically in 1989 while in high school. He used 
it on weekends and when at parties. When in college, he used marijuana at parties and 
at his friends’ houses. He would take puffs from marijuana cigarettes or pipes. He was 
stopped by police for a traffic violation in February 1997. A drug dog detected the 
presence of marijuana in his car. A pipe with marijuana residue was found in his car. He 
admitted to ownership of the pipe and pleaded guilty to possession of drug 
paraphernalia. After he graduated from college and moved to his present location, he 
continued to use marijuana on a less regular basis. From 1997 until 2010, he used 
marijuana once every two to three years. He married in 2006 and his wife did not agree 
with his use of marijuana. He used it after they were married. He received his security 
clearance in 2004 and used marijuana on approximately five occasions after receiving 
his clearance. His last use was in 2010 while attending a barbeque at a friend’s house. 
His employer uses drug screen tests upon employment, but not thereafter.2 
 
 On April 22, 2004, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SF 86). 
When answering a question about whether he used illegal drugs in the previous seven 
                                                          
1 Tr. 7, 30, 40; GE 1, 2, 3. 
 
2 Tr. 34, 35, 41, 44-46; GE 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
years, he answered “no”. That answer was false because Applicant had used marijuana 
on multiple occasions. He knew the answer was false when he gave it, but he was 
concerned that if he told the truth about his past drug use he would not get the position. 
In January 2011, Applicant filled out another security clearance application for a 
possible upgrade of his security clearance. Once again, he was asked whether he had 
used illegal drugs in the previous seven years and whether he had used illegal drugs 
while holding a security clearance. He answered “no” to both questions. Both answers 
were false. Applicant knew at the time he completed the application that his answers 
were false. He submitted false answers because he wanted his denials to be consistent 
with the information he submitted on his earlier security clearance application. He finally 
revealed the truth about his past illegal drug use when interviewed by an investigator in 
February 2011. However, he was not totally honest then either. He told the investigator 
that he put the false information on the application because he was in a hurry to fill out 
the form and did not completely read the questions. During his hearing testimony, he 
admitted this was false and he put the false information in his application to deceive the 
government about his past drug history.3 
 
 Applicant provided information showing his job performance rating as a 
successful contributor, high contributor, and exceptional contributor throughout his 
career. He has received numerous cash awards for his contributions. He is well thought 
of by his coworkers and by the customers for whom he provides services.4 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
3 Tr. 17, 33, 49, 52; GE 1, 2, 5. 
 
4 AE A-D. 
 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.   
 
 
5 
 
 
 Appellant used marijuana on a number of occasions including while holding a 
security clearance. He has pleaded guilty to possession of drug paraphernalia. I find 
that all the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s short period of abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate his 
intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. This is particularly so since his history 
shows he used marijuana while holding a security clearance, which he knew was 
prohibited. His actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. It is too soon to tell whether his use will recur. Although he 
claims he no longer uses marijuana, this is not enough to show a demonstrated 
intent not to use marijuana in the future. Neither AG ¶¶ 26(a) nor 26(b) applies. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, 
professional, or community standing.  
I find that Applicant intentionally gave false information on his security clearance 
applications. His explanation for falsifying, that he was afraid of the consequences of his 
drug use, confirmed his deliberate action. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. Applicant’s use of 
marijuana while holding a security clearance created a vulnerability to his personal 
standing. AG ¶ 16(e) applies. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s drug use 
while holding a security clearance and his false statements. Neither are minor offenses 
and both cast doubt on Applicant’s trustworthiness, particularly because of the multiple 
falsifications. Nothing about Applicant’s actions reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation or duress. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and (e) do not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s work 
performance and his coworker support. However, I also considered that he used 
marijuana on multiple occasions, most recently while holding a security clearance, and 
that he gave false information about his past drug use on multiple occasions. Applicant 
failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
