1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 11-05528
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se
January 22, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On June 1, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline E for Applicant. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On June 13, 2012, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
August 7, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 20, 2012, and I convened
the hearing as scheduled on September 10, 2012. The Government offered Exhibits 1
through 4, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf
and submitted Exhibits A and B at the time of hearing, which were also received without
objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on September 20, 2012. I
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until September 27, 2012, to
submit additional documents, and an additional document was received, identified as
2
Exhibit C, and entered into evidence without objection. Based upon a review of the
exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 45 years old. She is married and has six children. She received a
Bachelor’s degree in Electrical Engineering in 1998. Applicant was formerly employed
by a defense contractor, and she seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with her
employment in the defense sector. She is currently being sponsored by another defense
contractor. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she
exhibited conduct involving questionable judgement, lack of candor, dishonesty or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.
1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was terminated from her excepted
appointment as a contract specialist with the United States Navy on about April 9, 2008,
after she had been investigated for two ethics violations occurring in February and
March 2008. Applicant’s privately owned company was found to have received a
purchase order and a blanket purchase request to provide service to the United States
Navy while she was a contract specialist. 
Applicant testified that she started business in 2000, and she was the a sole
proprietor. Initially, the company built equipment for gyms. In 2005, the company
purchased a company to manufacture powder coating, and in 2007, the company began
performing powder coating. On January 29, 2008, the company submitted an invoice to
perform a powder coating for the Federal Government. Applicant began employment for
the Federal Government on February 4, 2008. On February 13, 2008, Applicant’s
company received payment for the powder coating in the amount of $2,900. (Tr at 36-
42.) 
Applicant received ethics training on February 29, 2008, after she began her
employment. It was then that she learned of the restriction that if she was a Government
contractor employee she could not do private work for the Government. However, she
believed there may have been an exception under DoD Directive 5500.7-R, which
states, ”Contracts for the procurement of goods and services between the Federal
Government and its employees are prohibited unless the needs of the Federal
Government cannot be met otherwise.” Since Applicant’s company was the only powder
coating facility for over 100 miles, she thought it would come within the exception.
(Exhibit B.)  
3
Applicant testified that she asked her supervisor what course of action she
should take based on this information, and she was advised to write a letter to the legal
department inquiring what she should do. Applicant’s letter, dated March 6, 2008, is
included as part of her RSOR. In March 2008, Applicant on behalf of the company
completed a Blanket Purchase Agreement, but based on what Applicant learned, her
company stopped any attempt to do business with the Government, which caused the
company to lose approximately $3,000. On December 19, 2008, Applicant’s business
closed. (Tr at 41-44.)  
Applicant did not hear anything for several months after her letter, and then she
was questioned by the NCIS. After informing the investigator of the entire situation, she
was informed that the case was being concluded because it was not a criminal matter.
On April 2, 2009, Applicant met with an individual, who indicated that a decision about
the matter would be rendered shortly. One week later, Applicant again met with this
individual, and she was informed that she was being terminated from her employment.
She was informed that signing a Blanket Purchase Agreement for her company while
she was a Government employee was an ethics violation for which her employment was
ended. (Tr at 44-46.) 
Exhibit 4, which includes all of the documentation involved in this matter confirms
that Applicant’s company entered into the powder coating contract with the Government
before she was a Government employee. Applicant began Government employment on
February 4, 2008, and the contract was completed and payment was made to
Applicant’s company on February 13, 2008, within two weeks of her beginning
Government employment. Applicant received ethics training on February 29, 2008, and
immediately conferred with her supervisor and wrote a letter to her legal department
requesting guidance.  Applicant believed that her company situation may have been an
exception under DoD Directive 5500.7-R, since Applicant’s company was the only
powder coating facility for over 100 miles. In March 2008, before she had received any
ethics advisement, Applicant signed a Blanket Purchase Agreement on behalf of her
company. However, the Blanket Purchase Agreement wasa never used, and the
company stopped any attempt to do business with the Government, which caused the
company to lose approximately $3,000. On December 19, 2008, Applicant’s business
closed.
Mitigation
Applicant submitted a positive character letter from her current employer, in
which she is described as an “outstanding person, [who] is not a security risk, and will
be an asset to this company.” (Exhibit A.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
4
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[any] doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant completed a
Government contract and received payment for her privately owned company after she
5
became a Government employee. Applicant also signed a Blanket Purchase Agreement
on behalf of her company after she became a Government employee. 
However, after reviewing all of the documentation and listening to Applicant’s
credible testimony, I am not convinced that Applicant knew or should have known that
her conduct constituted ethics violations. The powder coating contract work done by
Applicant’s company for the Government was initiated before she became a
Government employee. The work ended and payment was made less that two weeks
after her employment began, and before she received the Government’s ethics training. 
After Applicant received the ethics training, she showed significant concern by
immediately attempting to ascertain what was proper conduct, through her consultation
with her supervisor, and her subsequent inquiry to the legal department. While she did
sign a Blanket Purchase Agreement on behalf of her company shortly after she received
her ethics training, she did have a reasonable question as to whether this conduct was
permissible since her company was the only company in close proximity to the
Government site. However, Applicant never attempted to have her company do
additional business with the Government or in any other way attempted to skirt ethics
considerations.
Therefore, I conclude that no disqualifying conditions are applicable under
Guideline E. I do not find that Applicant’s conduct, considered as a whole, exhibits
questionable judgement, unreliability, or a lack of candor. I resolve Guideline E for
Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
6
above as to why no Disqualifying Conditions apply, I find that the record evidence
leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
