 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08560 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 24, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a long history of financial indebtedness. She currently has 12 
delinquent debts totaling $22,130 and failed to submit proof that she has made 
payments on any of them, that any are satisfied, or that she properly disputed them. In 
addition, she failed to disclose her financial delinquencies, as required, when 
completing her electronic questionnaires for investigations processing (e-QIP). She has 
not mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 16, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant’s undated Answer to the Statement of Reasons (SOR) was received by 
DOHA on October 1, 2012. In an email dated October 2, 2012, Applicant elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on October 16, 2012. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on November 29, 2012. She 
was afforded 30 days to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. As of January 10, 2013, she had not responded. The 
case was assigned to me on January 11, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer from February 2011 to present. On her e-QIP, she identified either 
full or part-time employment since February 2002, with no periods of unemployment. 
She indicated she was single and listed no children. (Item 5.) 
 
Applicant’s credit reports from March 12, 2011 and May 29, 2012, and her 
answers to interrogatories, show that Applicant was indebted to 12 creditors in the 
amount of $22,130 as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.l. She failed to present any 
documentation that she is repaying any of her delinquent accounts, despite her 
assertion in her Answer that she paid off 1.a and made payment arrangements with the 
creditors noted in ¶¶ 1.b through 1.f, 1.i, and 1.k. She indicated that she disputed the 
debt listed in 1.l, but gave no proof of her dispute. (Item 4; Item 6; Item 7; Item 8.)The 
debts are as follows: 
 
Applicant is indebted on a judgment filed against her by a furniture store in the 
approximate amount of $885, as alleged in ¶ 1.a. This debt has been past due since 
May 2010. (Item 8.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account owed to a bank in the approximate 
amount of $4,806, as alleged in ¶ 1.b. This debt has been past due since September 
2011. (Item 8.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a credit card account in the approximate amount of 
$2,728, as alleged in ¶ 1.c. This debt has been past due since before November 2009. 
(Item 8.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account owed to a bank in the approximate 
amount of $2,600, as alleged in ¶ 1.d. This debt has been past due since before 
November 2011. (Item 8.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account owed to a bank in the approximate 
amount of $2,131, as alleged in ¶ 1.e. This debt has been past due since before 
September 2010. (Item 8.) 
 
3 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account owed to a bank in the approximate 
amount of $1,500, as alleged in ¶ 1.f. This debt has been past due since before 
November 2010. (Item 8.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $105, 
as alleged in ¶ 1.g. This debt has been past due since January 2011. (Item 7.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $205, 
as alleged in ¶ 1.h. This debt has been past due since January 2011. (Item 7.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account owed to a bank in the approximate 
amount of $3,487, as alleged in ¶ 1.i. This debt has been past due since September 
2009. (Item 7.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $142, 
as alleged in ¶ 1.j. This debt has been past due since January 2011. (Item 7.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$3,400, as alleged in ¶ 1.k. This debt has been past due since May 2012. (Item 8.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $141, 
as alleged in ¶ 1.l. This debt has been past due since January 2011. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant’s e-QIP dated March 1, 2011, contains negative replies to the 
questions pertaining to her financial history. Specifically, she denied having any 
judgments rendered against her (Question 26.e); having had bills turned over to 
collection agencies (Question 26.g); and having any account or credit card suspended, 
charged-off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed (Question 26.h). In her Answer, 
she admitted having been over 180 days delinquent on any debt (Question 26.m); and 
being over 90 days delinquent at the time she completed her e-QIP (Question 26.n). 
Applicant claimed that she was unaware of the judgment; had not been contacted by a 
collection agent; and had no credit cards canceled. However, she acknowledged “I just 
finished from school and yes I was late for some payments.” She failed to acknowledge 
her debts to the Government until she was confronted by a Government investigator in 
March 2011. (Item 3; Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
Applicant submitted a personal financial statement with her answers to 
interrogatories. On the financial statement she indicated that her monthly net income 
was $2,478.92 and her expenses, without any apparent payments on her delinquent 
accounts listed above, was $2,415 monthly. (Item 6.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
 
4 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and she has been unable or 
unwilling to pay her obligations. Further, she had experienced financial problems since 
2009, without resolution, and continued to amass additional debts in 2010 and 2011. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The evidence does not show that Applicant has resolved any of the 12 debts 
alleged in the SOR. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. Applicant has been employed either full or part time 
since February 2002, with no periods of unemployment. She explained in her Answer 
that she incurred her debts while a student. AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual 
act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has worked for her current employer 
from February 2011 to present. She did not submit evidence of any payments, even on 
the smallest debts. She did not present a plan on how she will address her delinquent 
debts or provide other evidence to show any recent progress in addressing her debts. 
She has little income with which to satisfy her delinquent obligations. I am unable to 
make a determination that she acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant did not produce any evidence to suggest she attended any financial 
counseling. Further, there is little indication that Applicant’s delinquent accounts are 
being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve her delinquent 
debts. The record fails to establish that any payments have been made on any of her 12 
debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant disputed owing the debts alleged in ¶ 1.l. in her answer to the SOR. 
However, she presented no evidence to show that she was in the process of formally 
disputing this debt or that she had successfully disputed this debt in the past. AG ¶ 
20(e) is not applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant denied falsifying Questions 26.e, 26.g, and 26.h on her e-QIP because 
she was unaware of a judgment against her, did not believe that she had accounts in 
collections and did not have any credit cards cancelled. Her explanations with respect to 
 
7 
 
these questions are not credible. The judgment against her was filed in May 2010. She 
had a credit card accounts in collections beginning in 2009, and failed to disclose that 
an account or credit card had been suspended or closed by the bank. She admitted in 
her Answer that she was late on payments to creditors because she had just finished 
school. She did not disclose those delinquent accounts to the government when she 
completed her e-QIP. Instead, she waited until the Government investigator questioned 
her on the delinquent accounts to disclose her financial delinquencies. The Government 
has established sufficient concern under AG ¶ 16(a) to disqualify Applicant from 
possessing a clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant's falsification is unmitigated. The record contains no evidence that she 
sought to correct the falsification promptly after completing the application. Instead, she 
waited to disclose the debts until she was confronted by a Government investigator. 
Therefore AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply.  Applicant offered no proof that she falsified her 
application based upon the ill advice of another. AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply.  
Falsification of information provided to the Government cannot be considered minor. 
Her conduct reflects negatively on her trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) 
is inapplicable.  Applicant failed to fully acknowledge her falsification and she has taken 
no remedial steps to show such behavior is unlikely to recur. Therefore AG ¶ 17(d) does 
not apply. Similarly, she presented no evidence of positive steps taken to reduce or 
 
8 
 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 17(e) is 
inapplicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant has had ample opportunity to address her financial delinquencies since 
becoming gainfully employed, but has failed to do so. She also failed to be honest with 
the Government on her e-QIP. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations or 
Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
