KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline E
DIGEST: Appeal Board has no authority over how clearance investigations are conducted, and
federal officials are entitled to a presumption of good faith in the discharge of their duties. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not demonstrated that he was denied due process.  Applicant failed
to rebut the presumption that the Judge was unbiased.  
CASE NO: 11-01618.a1
DATE: 01/24/2013
DATE: January 24, 2013
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-01618
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 16, 2012, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On October 25, 2012, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Robert E. Coacher denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
1Applicant discussed these videotapes in his clearance interview, a summary of which is included in
Government Exhibit 8, Answers to Interrogatories.  He claimed that he had videotaped sexual acts with some of his
paramours because he was concerned that he might later be subject to a lawsuit for paternity or charged with rape.  He
stated that each of the women consented to being videotaped.  These videos fell into the hands of his wife and became
relevant during the proceedings leading up to the divorce.  During the pendency of the divorce, one of the women whom
Applicant had videoed became alarmed and threatened to institute legal proceedings of her own.  Applicant stated that
the videotapes were eventually turned over to his lawyer, who destroyed them.   
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider all of
the record evidence; whether Applicant was denied due process; whether the Judge was biased; and
whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following, we affirm the Judge’s decision.  
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
is an employee of a Defense contractor.  He has held a security clearance since 1985.  Born in
Bangladesh, he came to the U.S. to attend graduate school.  He holds a Ph.D. and a M.B.A.  He
married a U.S. citizen, but the couple divorced after 30 years of marriage.  He has two adult children
and is engaged to be married.  
The SOR alleged security concerns arising from Applicant’s connections in India and in two
other foreign countries.  It also alleged a number of Personal Conduct concerns.  The Judge cleared
Applicant on all but three of these allegations.  One of these three allegations, and the only one
under Guideline B which the Judge found against Applicant, pertains to an apartment that Applicant
owns in India.  It is worth $500,000 in today’s market and has no encumbrances.  Although he has
rented it out in the past, it is currently unrented because Applicant is trying to sell it.  The remaining
security concerns found against Applicant were alleged under Guideline E.  Applicant has had
numerous romantic relationships with foreign women, including at least one from Russia, while
Applicant was married.  Additionally, Applicant videotaped sexual acts and/or massages with at
least some of these women.1  The Judge also found that, while undergoing divorce proceedings,
Applicant had borrowed $100,000 from his employers at the time.  Although he paid back $83,000,
he has not repaid the balance because, when he left the company, he believed he was owed for
bonuses and other payments. Applicant did not provide documentation that would support his
contention.
Applicant is recognized as an outstanding worker and citizen, the most recent performance
evaluation in the record rating him in the top category.  Applicant also is highly praised by students
whom he teaches in performing adjunct professor duties at two universities.    
In the Analysis, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s property interest in India was
substantial and that Applicant had failed to produce evidence that it could not become a basis for
coercion or manipulation by foreign interests.  He also concluded that Applicant’s having videotaped
sex acts and having failed to pay back the loan cast doubt on his judgement and reliability.  In the
2One of the allegations which the Judge found in Applicant’s favor concerned Applicant’s having numerous
contacts in Russia, to include high level space officials, trainers for cosmonauts and fighter pilots, etc.  The Decision
contains no analysis explaining this favorable finding, although Applicant contended that the persons who provided him
with training were not government officials but, rather, private citizens.  
3
whole-person analysis, the Judge stated that, despite Applicant’s good work record, the poor
judgement evidenced by his security-significant conduct militated against the grant of a clearance.2
Applicant agues that the Judge overlooked certain evidence.  He cites to his evidence that
he was in the process of selling his apartment house and that he has devoted lifelong service to the
U.S.  He also cites to evidence concerning the circumstances of the loan.  A Judge is presumed to
have considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. ISCR Case No. 11-
05027 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Nov. 26, 2012).  The Judge discussed record evidence concerning the
matters that Applicant has cited.  His overall adverse decision is consistent with the record that was
before him.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence.  In support of his appeal, Applicant has submitted evidence from outside the record,
including his statement that he had sold his apartment in India.  We cannot consider new evidence
on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29 (“No new evidence shall be received or considered by the Appeal
Board.”)  However, even if the Judge did not extend sufficient weight to the evidence that was in
the record concerning the proposed upcoming sale, his overall decision would have been the same,
given Applicant’s other security significant conduct.  
Applicant contends that he was denied due process.  He argues that the investigation of his
case was too intrusive, inquiring into matters that were of limited security significance.  He also
argues that the SOR contained allegations that were of limited or no concern and that Department
Counsel engaged in unprofessional conduct by focusing on Applicant’s relationships with women.
The Appeal Board has no authority over how clearance investigations are conducted.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 01-03683 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 9, 2002).  Moreover, Federal officials and employees
are entitled to a presumption of good faith in the discharge of their duties, and a party seeking to
rebut that presumption has a heavy burden on appeal.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-18065 at 2 (App.
Bd. Nov. 18, 2008).  We have examined the record and conclude that Applicant has failed to
demonstrate improper conduct by Department Counsel or any other person. Applicant has not
rebutted the presumption that the officials involved in processing his case and conducting the
hearing acted in good faith.  We find no reason to conclude that Applicant was denied the due
process afforded by the Directive.  
Applicant contends that the Judge exhibited bias against him.  Again, a party claiming that
a Judge was biased bears a heavy burden of persuasion on appeal.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-
05027, supra, at 3.  In the case currently before us, Applicant’s argument amounts to a disagreement
with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  He has not demonstrated that the Judge lacked the
requisite impartiality.  He also contends that the decision contains inconsistent statements.
However, we have examined the statements cited by Applicant and find no error in the Judge’s
analysis.  It is not an inconsistency for a Judge to conclude that Applicant’s conduct raises security
4
concerns but, after considering Applicant’s evidence, further to conclude that the concerns had been
mitigated.  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
