 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06512 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James S. DelSordo, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are the result of circumstances beyond his control. 
He presented evidence of recent efforts to resolve his delinquent debts and is 
establishing control of his financial situation. Applicant expressed sincere remorse for all 
of his criminal behavior, and has taken significant steps to rehabilitate himself, including 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 23, 2009. 
On February 27, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
May 3, 2012, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
                                            
1 The DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DoD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
The case was assigned to other administrative judges before it was assigned to 
me on October 24, 2012. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a notice of hearing on August 2, 2012, scheduling a hearing for September 11, 2012. 
Applicant requested a continuance on August 22, 2012, which was granted. The notice 
of hearing was reissued on September 27, 2012 convening a hearing for October 24, 
2012. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. Applicant 
testified and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 16. AE 16 was received post-hearing. All 
exhibits were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
November 2, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f, and 2.a 
through 2.d, with explanations. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, and 2.e. His admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the evidence, including his 
testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old information technology network engineer employed 
with a government contractor. In September 1984, he enlisted in the U.S. Navy (Active 
Reserve), attended boot camp and “A” school, and served in the Active Reserve. In 
February 1986, he was transferred to the Inactive Reserve. He again served in the 
Active Reserve from November 2001 until June 2002. He has served in the Inactive 
Reserve since then. He is currently a First Class Petty Officer (E-6), with approximately 
23 years of service.  
 
Applicant married in October 1985, and divorced in October 1990. He married his 
second spouse in July 1992, and divorced in October 2007. He has a 20-year-old 
daughter from this marriage. He attended college from September 1999 until December 
2005. He was awarded a bachelor’s degree in telecommunications in 2005. (GE 1) 
 
Applicant has worked for numerous government contractors from June 2002 to 
present. He has worked in the same position, albeit for two different government 
contractors, since 2007. Applicant was issued a secret security clearance in 2000, 
which was upgraded to a top secret clearance in 2003. He has had access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI) since April 2005. There is no evidence to show that 
Applicant has compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. 
Outside of the security concerns alleged in the current SOR, there is no evidence that 
Applicant had any other security issues of concern.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his March 2009 SCA (Section 22-Police Record) that he 
was charged with public intoxication and obstruction of justice in September 2008; 
domestic assault in March 2005; and possession of marijuana in May 1977. He also 
disclosed in his answers to Section 26 (Financial Record), that during the prior seven 
years, he had debts turned over to collection agencies and was delinquent in court-
imposed alimony and child support obligations.  
 
3 
 
 
 
The subsequent background investigation revealed the six delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR, totaling over $70,000, and two contempt of court incidents for his 
failure to pay alimony and child support as required by court order. Applicant admitted 
the six delinquent debts. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h because he believes he was 
not arrested. He admitted, however, that both in 2008 and 2010, he failed to pay the 
court-mandated alimony and child support. In 2008 and 2010, he was found in contempt 
of court and was incarcerated for three to four weeks until he paid a $25,000 purge 
bond in 2008, and an $11,000 purge bond in 2010. Applicant sold some of his 
investment stocks to pay the $25,000 purge bond, and sold part of his inheritance to 
pay the $11,000 purge bond.  
 
Applicant explained that his financial problems were the result of a contentious 
divorce in 2007, and his periods of unemployment and underemployment. He was 
forced to leave the marital residence and to establish his own residence. At about the 
same time as his divorce became final, he lost a job where he was making around 
$80,000. Applicant was unemployed while in between jobs during two months both in 
2000 and 2007. He supported himself in 2007 with unemployment benefits and $500 
monthly income from a rental property. During his unemployment, Applicant had 
financial problems, and fell behind in his child and spousal support obligations. In 
December 2010, Applicant was ordered to pay his ex-wife’s legal fees (around 
$20,000). Additionally, he was paying his own legal fees, mortgage payments, his day-
to-day living expenses, and his child support obligation. Applicant was paying $3,150 a 
month in alimony and $629 a month in child support. His take home pay was $3,600, 
plus $500 from his rental property income.  
 
Applicant explained that he was alternating payments on all of his financial 
obligations because his income was insufficient to pay all of his monthly financial 
obligations. He also was making partial payments on some of his debts, including his 
alimony and child support.  
 
As of his hearing, Applicant was current on his alimony obligation. His daughter 
became an adult, and he was no longer required to pay child support. Applicant’s 
September 2011 personal financial statement indicated he had a monthly deficiency of 
approximately $1,800. At his hearing, he submitted a personal financial statement 
showing a monthly deficiency of approximately $2,300. He testified that he continues to 
alternate payments on some of his debts, or pays less than what he is required to pay 
on his debts, because he does not have sufficient income to pay his debts and his day-
to-day living expenses. 
 
During his March 2011 interview, Applicant stated his intent to go back to court to 
reduce his child support and alimony obligations, but he did not have the money to file 
the appeal. Applicant admitted he used his credit cards to supplement his income and to 
pay for his day-to-day living expenses. As of March 2011, he was approximately 
$20,000 delinquent on his credit cards, and he had not contacted any of his creditors 
concerning his delinquent debts. He was researching credit counseling and 
 
4 
 
 
consolidation companies, but as of the interview he was not participating in financial 
counseling.  
 
In his September 2011 response to DoD interrogatories, Applicant stated that he 
was scheduled to appear in court in November 2011 to request a reduction of his child 
support and alimony obligations. He also was seeking the sale of a jointly owned home 
(with his ex-wife) and the sale of inherited property to pay off some of his debts. 
Applicant also retained the services of a debt reduction and consolidation company to 
help him dispute some of the “over inflated” delinquent debts. 
 
As of the closing of the record (November 16, 2012), the status of Applicant’s 
delinquent debts is as follows: 
 
SOR 1.a – Applicant paid off this debt ($18,000) on October 23, 2012. (AE 9 and 
10) He had been making payments on the debt since September 2011. He used the 
proceeds of the sale of an inherited property to pay off this debt. 
 
SOR 1.b – Applicant initially disputed the debt in December 2011 through one of 
the credit bureaus, and he was told to resolve the debt with the creditor. Applicant again 
disputed the validity of this debt on April 18, 2012. At the hearing, he admitted, however, 
that he is indebted to another bank for an unpaid credit card account, and that it is 
possible the creditor he does not recognize may be collecting that debt. He promised to 
pay the debt if it is determined to be his debt. 
 
SOR 1.c – Applicant received a settlement offer for $4,700 (less than the $6,643 
owed) in August 5, 2011. He presented documentary evidence that he made the 
following payments: $100 in December 2011; $125 in February 2012; and $125 in April 
2012. (AE 16)  
 
SOR 1.d – Applicant started to make payments on this debt in 2009, but he was 
unable to make the agreed payments. In November 2011, he made a settlement offer 
and started to make payments. On July 16, 2012, Applicant made another settlement 
offer promising to start making payments by the end of July 2012. He presented 
documentary evidence showing he made the following payments: $100 in December 
2011; $120 in February 2012; and $120 in April 2012. (AE 16) 
 
SOR 1.e – Applicant settled the debt for $2,776 (less than the owed balance of 
$10,794). 
 
SOR 1.f – Applicant disputed the validity of this debt on April 18, 2012. He 
claimed that he had cancelled the wireless service and disputes the $105 debt. The 
dispute and the debt are unresolved. 
 
Concerning the criminal misconduct allegations, Applicant explained that in June 
1978, he was detained for a traffic violation. After a search of his car, the police officer 
found marijuana. Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana with 
 
5 
 
 
intent to distribute, possession of a controlled drug, inappropriate left turn, and driving 
down wrong way street. He claimed that the marijuana was not his, and that he was not 
aware there was marijuana in his car. Applicant testified the charges were later 
dismissed by a judge. 
 
In April 1985, Applicant shoplifted from a military exchange store. He was 
punished under Article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. 
 
In early 2005, Applicant’s wife filed for divorce. In March 2005, Applicant and his 
wife were involved in an argument. His wife hit herself with a door and filed an assault 
complaint against Applicant. He was arrested and charged with domestic assault. 
Applicant took an exculpating polygraph examination, and all charges were dismissed 
by the court.  
 
In September 2008, Applicant was charged with public intoxication. The charge 
was later amended to trespassing. He explained that while at a concert, he tried to sell 
two extra concert tickets. A police officer warned Applicant that he was not allowed to 
sell the tickets while in the concert grounds. Applicant tried to give away the tickets and 
his actions were misconstrued. The police officer believed Applicant was trying to sell 
the tickets after the warning. He was arrested and charged with public intoxication. In 
December 2008, Applicant pled guilty to trespassing. He paid a $75 fine, served two 
years of probation, and performed 50 hours of community service. After complying with 
the court conditions, the charges were dismissed. 
 
Applicant has learned his lesson and promised never to engage in any further 
criminal misconduct. He now understands the importance of having a clean criminal 
record to be eligible for a security clearance. He believes that he has matured since his 
last criminal incident in 2008. He has not been involved in any criminal misconduct or 
questionable incidents with law enforcement officers since 2010.  
 
Applicant takes his job and his obligations to the Government seriously. He 
admits responsibility for his mistakes. He acknowledged that he has had financial 
problems because of his divorce, but believes that his financial problems were caused 
by circumstances beyond his control. Applicant acknowledged that he needs to be more 
proactive taking care of his delinquent debts. He would like to resolve his debts, but it 
will take some time for him to sell the marital property and the property he inherited 
along with his siblings. He will consider filing for bankruptcy protection if he cannot sell 
both properties. He needs to sell both properties to raise money to pay his delinquent 
debts. 
 
Applicant considers himself to be honest, trustworthy, and a dedicated employee. 
He believes he demonstrated his loyalty to the United States through his years of 
military service. He would like to continue his service to his country and to resolve his 
delinquent financial obligations. He needs his security clearance to retain his job and to 
have the ability to pay all of his delinquent debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
7 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems that date back to the period from 
2005-2007. His financial problems continue to the present as evidenced by the six 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling about $70,000. Two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions apply: AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts, and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and he has extensive delinquent debt. 
However, Applicant’s divorce and his periods of unemployment and underemployment 
are circumstances beyond his control that contributed to his financial problems. 
Applicant’s acrimonious divorce started in 2005 when his wife filed for divorce. He was 
forced to leave the marital residence and to establish his own residence. At about the 
same time as his divorce became final, he lost a job where he was making around 
$80,000. He was unemployed during two months in 2007, and he remained 
underemployed for an extended period.  
 
 While separated from his wife, Applicant was required to pay monthly alimony 
($3,100) and child support ($629). His take home pay ($3,600), plus additional rental 
 
8 
 
 
income ($500), only provided him with approximately $4,100 a month. He had limited 
income to comply with the court-mandated alimony and child support obligations, to pay 
for his day-to-day living expenses, and to pay his delinquent debts. Additionally, 
Applicant was ordered to pay for his ex-wife’s divorce legal fees. (SOR 1.a) AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling and contracted the services of a debt 
reduction and consolidation company to help him dispute some of the delinquent debts. 
As a result of the security clearance process, he is now fully aware that he is required to 
maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a security clearance. Applicant sold a 
property he inherited and used the proceeds of the sale ($18,000) to pay off the debt in 
SOR 1.a. He also settled and paid the debt in SOR 1.e. Additionally, he presented 
documentary evidence of payments made toward the debts alleged in SOR 1.c and 
SOR 1.d in December 2011, February 2012, and April 2012.   
 
 Applicant disputed the debts alleged in SOR 1.b and SOR 1.f. He requested from 
the credit bureaus information about the creditor holding the debt alleged in SOR 1.b. 
He promised to pay the debt if it is determined that it is his debt. Applicant disputed 
SOR 1.f, because he claims he timely cancelled the service. AG ¶ 20(c) applies 
because Applicant participated in financial counseling, and there are indications that his 
financial problems are being resolved or under control.  
 
 Applicant demonstrated lack of judgment when he paid less alimony and child 
support than that ordered by the family court. He was alternating debt payments and 
paying less than what was required because he did not have the income to pay his 
financial obligations and his day-to-day living expenses. Since 2010, he has been 
current in his alimony obligation. He is no longer required to pay child support because 
his daughter became an adult. Applicant has learned his lesson as a result of the 
contempt of court proceedings. He also understands the security clearance 
consequences of not maintaining financial responsibility. 
 
 I considered Applicant’s difficult current financial situation, and that he has limited 
ability to resolve his delinquent debts. I also considered that there is no evidence of 
financial irresponsibility or delinquent debts prior to the divorce and the loss of his job. 
Applicant’s debts are the result of circumstances beyond his control. He has been 
making efforts to resolve his financial problems, and he has a viable plan to resolve his 
financial problems. On balance, I find the evidence is sufficient to establish that 
Applicant has started to establish a track record of financial responsibility, and that he is 
gaining control of his financial situation. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e) apply. The remaining 
mitigating condition (AG ¶ 20(f)) is not applicable to the facts of this case. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the Government’s concern is that criminal activity creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
 
9 
 
 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations. AG ¶ 30.  
 
The SOR alleged six criminal misconduct incidents. The 1978 possession of 
marijuana and the 2005 domestic assault charges were both dismissed by the courts. 
He received non-judicial punishment for shoplifting in 1985, and pleaded guilty to 
trespassing after forbidden in 2008. Additionally, he was found guilty of contempt of 
court in 2008 and 2010 for his failure to pay the required alimony and child support. 
Applicant’s behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) “a single serious crime 
or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted.”  
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists four conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that several of the Guideline J 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s 1978 possession of marijuana and the 2005 
domestic assault charges are serious offenses that normally would disqualify an 
applicant for eligibility for a security clearance. In this case, however, there are 
extenuating circumstances. Applicant charges were dismissed by the courts. Applicant’s 
2008 trespassing charge was dismissed after he complied with the terms of his 
sentence and probation. The dismissal of the charge provides an indication that the 
court either did not consider his behavior as a serious offence, or that he has been 
rehabilitated.  
 
 Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his criminal behavior, and has taken 
significant steps to rehabilitate himself, including the passage of time without recurrence 
of criminal activity. He appears to be doing well in his job and is taking steps to 
reestablish his credit. He has not been involved in any alcohol-related offenses since 
 
10 
 
 
2008. Considering Applicant’s overall behavior, I find that the criminal incidents are not 
likely to recur and they do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, judgment, and on his ability to follow the law. AG ¶¶ 32(a), 32(c), and 
32(d) apply. Applicant demonstrated maturity and a strong desire to continue working 
and retain his eligibility for a security clearance. I believe Applicant has learned his 
lesson. He now understands what is required of him to retain his eligibility for a security 
clearance.  
 
 Concerning the two contempt of court incidents, Applicant was pressured by his 
financial situation to pay less than what was required in an attempt to stay afloat with his 
other financial obligations. His actions showed a lack of maturity and understanding of 
the legal system. Considering his demeanor and testimony, I believe that as a result of 
the two contempt of court incidents, and the security clearance process, Applicant is 
now aware of what is required of him to retain his eligibility for a security clearance. I do 
not believe it is likely that he will engage again in similar behavior. The remaining 
mitigating condition is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant is 57 years old. He has honorably served 23 years in the Naval 
Reserve. He has significant experience working for government contractors while 
possessing a security clearance with access to SCI. Except for the current security 
concerns, there is no evidence of any problems or concerns while he possessed a 
security clearance.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems were largely the result of circumstances beyond 
his control. Because of his limited income he has been slow addressing his delinquent 
debts. He settled and paid two of the SOR debts with the proceeds of the sale of a 
property he inherited. He intends to sell other properties to satisfy the remaining 
delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant more fully understands the importance of maintaining financial 
responsibility and about the importance of having a clean record. He was honest and 
truthful in his answers to the SCA questions. Considering the record as a whole, 
Applicant has a viable plan to resolve his delinquent debt, and he is taking control of his 
financial situation. Applicant expressed sincere remorse for all of his criminal behavior, 
and has taken significant steps to rehabilitate himself, including the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity. 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
