 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-09857   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant strategically defaulted on 
over $219,000 in business debts he personally guaranteed. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive,1 on August 31, 2012, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to me on October 9, 2012. At the hearing convened on December 5, 2012, I 
admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and 
B, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant submitted AE C through L, which I 
admitted without objection. The Government’s memorandum regarding the post-hearing 
submissions is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. I received the 
transcript (Tr.) on December 13, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant, 43, has worked for a federal contractor as an account manager 
specializing in military sales since November 2010. He holds undergraduate and 
graduate degrees in business administration, the latter with a concentration in finance.  
Married for 16 years, he is the father of a seven-year-old daughter. Together, Applicant 
and his wife earn a household income of over $400,000. In addition, he reports holding 
over $400,000 in other assets.2 
 
 According to the SOR, Applicant is indebted to 19 creditors for approximately 
$254,000 in delinquent debt. Seven of the alleged debts, ¶¶ 1.d. through 1.h., 1.k., and 
1.o., totaling approximately $7,200, are personal accounts that Applicant has resolved.3 
The majority of the remaining delinquent accounts are business debts Applicant 
personally guaranteed. 
  
 Capitalizing on his background as a retired professional athlete and his career in 
sales, Applicant decided to open an athletic store in 2002. He created a limited liability 
company (LLC) and entered into a franchising agreement with a nationally-recognized 
athletic store chain. Through the LLC, Applicant leased retail space in a shopping center 
and purchased merchandise from several globally-recognized vendors.4 Understanding 
the potential ramifications of the decision, Applicant personally guaranteed some of the 
loans, credit cards, and sales contracts he entered into to establish and operate the 
business, the largest being a $125,000 Small Business Administration loan made 
through a commercial bank.5  
 
 Applicant shuttered the store in 2006, surrendering all of the store’s contents, 
including unsold merchandise and fixtures to the landlord. When the store closed, the 
LLC owed at least $219,0006 in business-related debts. The LLC filed for Chapter 11 
                                                          
2 Tr. 22, 50, 56, 100; GE 1, 3. 
 
3 GE 3,8; AE D, G, I,  L. 
 
4 Applicant testified that the nationally recognized companies would not contract with an individual, only 
businesses.  
 
5 Tr. 22-23, 26-27, 30 – 31, 43, 56. 
 
6 This number is an estimate based on the SOR allegations Applicant indicated as being debts from the 
failed business, specifically  ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c., 1.m., 1.p., 1.r. – 1.s. 
 
 
3 
 
bankruptcy protection in March 2006, converting to Chapter 7 three months later. The 
LLC entered into a receivership agreement with one vendor in an attempt to resolve the 
outstanding debt. Ultimately, the court dismissed the bankruptcy petition because the 
LLC failed to appear at the initial creditor’s meeting. After the bankruptcy was 
dismissed, the LLC’s creditors obtained civil judgments against Applicant for the debts 
he personally guaranteed. The LLC filed for bankruptcy protection again in August 2012 
to protect Applicant’s personal assets from the receivership, which was trying to force 
the sale of Applicant’s home to satisfy the debt. Filing the petition effectively halted any 
collection efforts by the receivership and allowed Applicant to negotiate a settlement. 
Applicant settled the obligation, as alleged in ¶ 1.a., in September 2012.7  
 
 Aside from the receivership settlement, Applicant has not made efforts to resolve 
the business debts he personally guaranteed. He has not contacted any of his creditors. 
Nor has he attempted to initiate any payment plans. Applicant chose to strategically 
default on the personally-guaranteed debt, deciding instead to deal with the 
consequences of bad credit for the seven years creditors are allowed to report the 
negative information under Fair Credit Reporting Act. Applicant believes the last of the 
debts should be removed from his credit report by October 2013. He justified this 
approach because it provided him the best opportunity to protect his personal assets 
and preserve his marriage.8  
 
 Applicant has disputed, with the credit reporting agencies, the validity of several 
of the alleged accounts as being inaccurately reported on his credit reports or as being 
reported in violation of the Fair Credit Reporting Act’s seven year limitation on 
derogatory information. He has filed disputes related to ¶¶ 1.b. through 1.c., 1.l. through 
1.n., 1.p. through 1.s. Applicant does not deny that he incurred the debts either in 
furtherance of his business venture or for his personal benefit. Applicant chose not to 
file for personal bankruptcy protection because he believed it would hurt his future 
employment prospects, even though he understood it would resolve the personally-
guaranteed business debts.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
7 Tr. 23, 27-28, 42-43, 105-108; GE 4, 5; AE B, D. 
  
8 Tr. 57-62, 105, 110-113. 
 
9 Tr. 32-35, 37-38, 85-95,104-105, 113-114; AE D. 
 
4 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because such “[f]ailure 
or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may 
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”10 Similarly, an individual 
who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in 
handling and safeguarding classified information within the defense industry. Here, 
Applicant has accumulated over $254,000 in delinquent debt, the majority of which is 
                                                          
10  AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
personally-guaranteed business debt, which he has chosen not to pay. The evidence 
supports a finding that Applicant has demonstrated both an “inability and unwillingness 
to satisfy debts”11 as well as “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”12  
 
Although Applicant’s payment of approximately $7,200 in delinquent personal 
accounts is evidence of some “good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors,”13 this is 
not sufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by his conduct or merit the 
application of any of the financial considerations mitigating conditions. Fully 
understanding the possible ramifications of his decisions, Applicant assumed the risk 
inherent in becoming a small-business owner, personally guaranteeing the debts he 
incurred in an attempt to establish the LLC as a going concern. When repaying the debt 
was contrary to his self-interest, he strategically defaulted on legitimate debts. For the 
past six years he has lived with the consequences associated with having a derogatory 
credit history. While a negative credit history may be a heavy burden to bear, it does not 
diminish the security significance of Applicant’s decision to not pay his creditors. Neither 
does the operation of the Fair Credit Reporting Act or the statute of limitations on the 
collectability of Applicant’s delinquent debts resolve the underlying security issues.14 
 
Security clearance adjudications regarding financial issues are not debt collection 
proceedings.15 Rather, the purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a 
person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable 
security risk.”16 Applicant’s decision to not pay the debts he personally guaranteed 
reflects poorly on his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Further, the decision calls into question his willingness to follow 
the rules of properly handling and safeguarding classified information if doing so might 
conflict with his financial interest. Here, Applicant chose to default on debts because he 
believed doing so was necessary to protect his assets and preserve his family. Despite 
having the means to address the debt, he made no attempts to repay the debts 
associated with his business. He dismissed the idea of filing for personal bankruptcy, 
which he understood to be a legitimate method of addressing the outstanding business 
debts, because he believed it would compromise his future job prospects. Given the 
record, it is not unreasonable to extrapolate or question Applicant’s willingness to report 
a security infraction or violation if doing so might jeopardize his job or his standing with 
his employer or some other personal interest. 
 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 19(a). 
 
12 AG ¶ 19(c).  
 
13 AG ¶20(d).  
 
14  See ISCR Case No. 00-0345 at 3 (App.Bd. Dec. 12, 2001); ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Mar. 27, 2003), ISCR Case No. 07-09966 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008 ).  See also ISCR Case No. 08-
01122 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2009) 
 
15 ISCR Case No, 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun 21, 2010). 
 
16 AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
 
6 
 
The evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan17 and the clearly-consistent standard, I 
resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, 
I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. Nevertheless, Applicant did not 
meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This 
case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a.:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b. – 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.d. – 1.h.:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.i.:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.j. – 1.k.:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.l. – 1.n.:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.o.:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.p. – 1.s.:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
17 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
