1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                        )      ISCR Case No. 11-02813
                                                                     )
Applicant for Security Clearance                  )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The
SOR was dated May 3, 2012. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2012. A notice of
hearing was issued on December 4, 2012, scheduling the hearing for December 18,
2012. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence without
objection. Applicant testified and presented Applicant Exhibits (AX) 1 and 2. I  received
the transcript (Tr.) December 28, 2012. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony,
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted four of the five factual allegations
under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) with explanations concerning billing for work that
he completed. He denied SOR ¶ 1.d.
Applicant is a 42-year-old engineer who is currently self-employed. He obtained
his undergraduate degree in January 1996. He is  working on his master’s degree. (Tr.
18) He is married and has one daughter. During his professional career, he has worked
as a contractor and a consultant for the Department of Defense (DoD).  He believes he
has never held a security clearance.  (Tr. 19)
The SOR alleges that Applicant either while self-employed as a government
contractor or employed by a government contractor for the U.S. Army, from 2001 until
2007 regularly and intentionally rounded up work hours by 5% to 10%, resulting in
being paid for work that Applicant did not perform. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b) Additionally, the
SOR alleges that from 2006 until 2011, Applicant intentionally rounded up his hours by
5% to 7%, resulting in an overpayment of $20,000 per year for time not actually worked.
(SOR ¶ 1.c) The SOR alleges that Applicant did not intend to change his billing
practices. (SOR ¶1.d) Finally, the SOR alleges that in January 2008, as a result of the
allegations in 1.a through 1.d that another governmental agency denied Applicant’s
application for a security clearance. (SOR ¶ 1.e)
Applicant was sponsored for access to sensitive compartmented information
(SCI) in November 2006 by his employer. During February, May, and November 2007
interviews, Applicant was questioned about his accounting practice for his time keeping.
The report notes that Applicant acknowledged that he did not record hours regularly,
and that he was “sloppy” with his bookkeeping. Applicant does not agree with the report
that states he completed time cards by guessing the number of hours worked and
rounds up the numbers so that he defrauds the government. According to the summary
report, Applicant  overestimated his weekly time by 5% to 10%.  The summary further
notes that Applicant, by that account, was overpaid by approximately $20,000.
Applicant denies that he ever billed for work that he did not perform. Applicant is quoted
as saying that he would continue with the same reporting practices in the future, unless
given different guidelines from his employer. 
Since 2006, Applicant was employed as a government contractor. He worked for
a small company that did not have a procedure for reporting time worked. He claimed
that the owner told him to record hours as “best he can.” (GX 2) Based on that advice,
Applicant calculated time for phone calls, emails and other administrative tasks on a
given contract as a fixed percentage of the engineering time. (Tr. 21) 
In 2008, Applicant was denied a clearance by another agency. He appealed the
decision because “much of  the information and important details were not correct or
omitted.” (GX 3) The appeal was denied based on Applicant’s “overestimated billing
practices.” (GX 4)
3
In a March 2008 letter in which Applicant appealed the January 2008 Clearance
Decision Statement, he was very specific concerning his disagreement with the
decision. Applicant noted that important details that would help explain his conduct
were ignored. He wrote that the decision statement “appears to suggest that I have
been chronically skimming on my timecard, which was not at all what I believed I had
conveyed in my interviews.” Applicant acknowledged that he had not been concerned
with a strict minute-by-minute accounting but he reported fairly and did not commit
fraud. Applicant’s hours varied each week. He was self-employed for five years and any
timecard policy was at his discretion. He was never given a detailed policy or procedure
for reporting hours. He agrees that he would round up but compensate for that by not
reporting smaller or less productive time periods. Applicant did not have a specific
percentage on daily rounding but does not agree with the interviewer’s insistence that
he provide specific numbers on daily rounding. (GX 3) Applicant has followed any given
procedures or reporting policies that were in place with any company that had one. He
maintains that he has not broken any company guidelines regarding timekeeping, and
has not committed fraud.
At the hearing, Applicant explained that this was a misunderstanding of his billing
practices. He was adamant that he never billed for time that he did not work. He
elaborated that no one ever complained about his billing practice. He was adamant that
he never charged for hours that he did not work. He has been consistent in his
responses made in his appeal and his answer to the SOR. Although he now uses
language that refers to “administrative” time versus “engineering” time, he was credible
in his explanation that during his work day he often switched from contact to contract
when using the phone or sending correspondence. He stated that it was not feasible to
record actual time spent on each contract. He estimated the overhead required to
handle the program management function from each contract as a fixed ratio of the
engineering required on each contract. Also, when Applicant was self-employed, he set
his own timekeeping policy so it was not a question of whether he was following
company procedure. (GX 2)
Applicant acknowledged that he told the interviewer after the 2007 polygraph that
he did not do a good job of keeping track of his time and that he would complete a time
card and round up the numbers by five to ten percent. (Tr. 29) However, he was trying
to convey the idea that he did not list any hours for which he did not work. 
Applicant produced a spreadsheet to explain his current method of reporting
hours he has worked. (AX B) He lists the contracts and the number of hours that he
spends each day on each contract. 
Applicant explained that he has a contract that describes the scope of his work
as engineering services. He understands that he can bill for all functions performed as
billable work, including administrative details, such as phone calls, and emails. (Tr. 28)
He has never been questioned about his billing by any employer. 
4
 Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .” The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance
of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.   
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Any reasonable doubt
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information. The decision to deny an individual a
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
5
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information;
6
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources.
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group;
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to
the employer as a condition of employment; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
As alleged above, Applicant used a method of recording his engineering work
hours in a way that did not comply with standard government procedure. The evidence
for this “fraud” is noted in summary reports from a 2007 security investigation. Applicant
admitted that he was sloppy with his bookkeeping; but he insisted that he did not list
hours that he did not work.  He was denied a clearance by another agency in 2007. AG
¶¶ 16(b) and 16(d) apply.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
7
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
Applicant admitted that he did not follow any specific government accounting
procedure when completing his billing invoices. However, he explained the procedure
he used, and he was adamant that he did not defraud the government on any contracts.
He appealed the 2008 decision to revoke his security decision and tried to explain on
numerous occasions that parts of what he said were quoted out of context. There is no
evidence of overpayment other than the alleged admissions about inflating his hours 5
to 10%. He had no specific rules about reporting administrative hours to follow when he
was a contractor or self-employed. He never received complaints about his accounting.
He intends to follow whatever procedure is required. He acknowledged that a new way
of reporting would be better and he presented the evidence in a chart at the hearing.  I
have no doubts about his judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. After considering
the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17, I conclude Applicant has  mitigated the
security concern under personal conduct. AG ¶¶ 17 (c), (d), (e), and (f) apply.. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
8
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 42-year-old professional who is educated and has worked in the
engineering field for many years. He has contracted with various government agencies.
He was trying to explain his timekeeping procedures in 2007 when interviewed as part
of a security clearance process with another agency. His clearance was denied
because of a belief that he defrauded the government through inflating the hours
worked on his time cards.  
I find Applicant credible in his explanation concerning his timekeeping and his
conviction that he did not defraud the government. The interviews took information he
provided out of context. When he prepared time cards, he estimated the hours worked
and failed to keep good records of hours worked on a daily basis. There were no
specific rules about timely recording of hours worked. The alleged admissions from the
three interviews were refuted. Applicant has  met his burden in this case. He has
mitigated the security concerns about  personal conduct. Clearance is granted.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
9
