1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-05020
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on May 6, 2010. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 23, 2012, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline J, Criminal
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for
Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
Department Counsel included documents received from Applicant in the Government’s exhibits. The1
documents from Applicant are copies of AE A and AE B, which were admitted into evidence at the hearing.
Applicant did not bring copies of these exhibits to the hearing, since he had submitted copies of these exhibits
by email to Department Counsel just before the hearing. Department Counsel did not receive the documents
before the hearing as he had departed on travel for this hearing.
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient2
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
2
Applicant received the SOR on April 4, 2012, and he answered it on April 24,
2012. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), which was received. Department Counsel was
prepared to proceed on June 5, 2012. DOHA assigned this case to another
administrative judge on July 27, 2012. Since Applicant was out-of-the-country for
several months and a hearing could not be scheduled until his return, DOHA reassigned
the case to me on October 12, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 26,
2012, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 16, 2012. The
Government offered exhibits (GE) marked as GE 1 through GE 4, which were received
and admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. He submitted exhibits
(AE) marked as AE A and AE B, which were received and admitted into evidence
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 29, 2012. I
held the record open until December 17, 2012, for Applicant and the Government to
submit additional matters. The Government submitted one additional document, GE 5,
which is received and admitted without objection.  Applicant timely submitted AE C and1
AE D which were received and admitted without objection. The record closed on
January 8, 2013. An email dated January 8, 2013 is admitted as AE E.
Procedural Ruling 
Notice
Applicant received the hearing notice on November 5, 2012, less than 15 days
before the hearing. I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to
receive the notice 15 days before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to
the 15-day notice. (Tr. 9)  
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all the factual allegations in the
SOR.  After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the2
following findings of fact.  
GE 1; AE B.3
GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 18, 21-23.4
GE 1; Tr. 18.5
Applicant stated that the payroll deductions stopped when his children turned 18.  W hen he was not working,6
the payments would stop. He would pay his arrearage when he returned tot work. Tr. 24, 32.
SOR; AE D; Tr. 24-26.7
3
Applicant, who is 53 years old, works as operations food service manager for a
Department of Defense contractor. He began his current position in April 2010. His
performance evaluations reflect meets or exceeds on his skills and performance. His
performance evaluations also show that he has successfully developed a highly
effective team, which is achieving extraordinary results. His employer praises his work
skills.3
Applicant is not married. He married his first wife in 1982, and they divorced in
1986 in State A. He has a 29-year-old son and 27-year-old daughter from this marriage.
As part of his divorce degree, Applicant paid child support, initially directly to his wife,
then as a payroll allotment through State A. He married his second wife in 1990, and
they divorced in 1998 in State B. He has a 20-year-old son from this marriage, for whom
he also paid child support. The debts in the SOR did not arise out of his marriages and
divorces.  4
Appellant started working in the restaurant industry at age 14 as a dishwasher.
He attended college and earned an Associate of Arts degree in culinary arts. He is a
certified executive chef. His work assignments have been in several areas of the United
States in the last 10 years, as well as three years in Japan and one year in
Afghanistan.5
The largest debt listed on the SOR is $140,000 owed to State A for child support
payments for his two oldest children (SOR ¶ 1.m). Applicant denies owing this debt.
When he worked for two large hotel companies, his child support payments were
deducted from his pay and forwarded to State A for disbursement.  After learning about6
the debt, Applicant contacted an attorney. His attorney advised him to seek a copy of
the payment records from his past employers and to make concurrent arrangements to
pay the claimed arrearage. His attorney told him that once Applicant showed the
previous payments, he would assist Applicant in obtaining a reimbursement of his
current payments. Applicant wrote his previous employers more than one year ago, but
he has not received any information from the employers. His previous employers tell
him that they are looking for the archived information on his pay. He made
arrangements for bi-weekly payments to State A, which began in 2010. To date, he has
verified payment of more than $31,600 between May 2010 and November 8, 2012. He
indicated that State A levied his bank account and took $30,000 from the bank account
in January 2010, which is not verified.7
GE 3; GE 4; AE A; Tr. 20-21, 28-29, 33-36.8
GE 3; GE 4; AE A; Tr. 21-23, 26, 28, 30, 33-36.9
GE 3; GE 4; AE A; Tr. 22-23, 30, 35-36.10
4
The May 2010 credit report lists all the SOR debts, except the child support debt.
Most of the small debts relate to utility, cable, or telephone bills generated after
Applicant moved to another work location. Applicant believed he had paid his bills in full
when he moved. He never received any additional bills from the original creditor. When
Applicant learned about the debts on his credit report during his security clearance
investigation, he disputed the debts online with the credit reporting companies. He did
not dispute the debts directly with the original creditors. The May 2010 credit report
reflects that he disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.g and 1.i. The December 2011
credit report also shows that he disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.g. This credit
report does not list the debts in SOR 1.i ($12,557 medical bill), 1.j ($935 cable bill), 1.k
($178 telephone bill), 1.l ($178 telephone bill), and the child support arrearage.
Applicant submitted a credit report dated October 22, 2012. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a
($433 medical bill), 1.b ($281 utility bill), and 1.h ($313 telephone bill) are listed as
unpaid and not challenged. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.f are shown as owed, after
being updated from his dispute. The $710 debt in SOR ¶ 1.g remains disputed. The
debts in ¶ 1.i through ¶ 1.l and the child support arrearage are not listed in this credit
report. Applicant disputed two other non-SOR debts listed on the May 2010 credit
report, which have been removed from his credit report. He has not received a direct
response from the credit reporting agencies.8
Applicant denies ever seeking medical care at the metropolitan hospital facility
issuing the $12,557 bill. The May 2010 credit report shows that this hospital account as
opened in August 2008. Applicant’s e-QIP reflects that he moved from the metropolitan
area to State C in July 2008. The May 2010 credit report lists, as an alias, a name
similar, but not the same as Applicant’s and past-due child support in State C with a
zero balance and closed. He denies owing any child support in State C. He also denied
ever using the alias and disputed this listing with the credit reporting companies. This
name is not listed on the more recent credit reports.  Applicant’s testimony, that he9
disputed the SOR debts because the debts were not his, is supported by the information
in the May 2010 credit report. I find that Applicant successfully disputed the $12,557
medical bill, two non-SOR debts, and the alias name.10
Applicant stated that he will pay the SOR debts if the debts are his. Based on his
testimony at the hearing, Applicant does not appear to understand that his disputes
have been resolved against him and that he owes these debts. The SOR identified 13
purportedly continuing delinquencies as reflected by credit reports from 2010 and 2011,
totaling approximately $159,000. Some accounts have been transferred, reassigned, or
sold to other creditors or collection agents. Other accounts are referenced repeatedly in
both credit reports, in many instances duplicating other accounts listed, either under the
same creditor or collection agency name or under a different creditor or collection
GE 5 contains a second bench warrant document for a November 1998 arrest, with a notation “contains11
outdated chg/bail infor.” This arrest is not contained in the SOR and will not be addressed in this decision. GE
5; SOR.
GE 5, p.. 1; AE E; Tr. 19-20, 36-40.12
5
agency name. Some accounts are identified by complete account numbers, while others
are identified by partial account numbers, in some instances eliminating the last four
digits and in others eliminating other digits. 
In December 1997, the police in State B arrested and charged Applicant with
driving under the influence (DUI) of intoxicating beverages and operating a vehicle on a
suspended or revoked operator’s license. The SOR and bench warrant reflect a guilty
finding on both counts in January and February 1998.  The court document indicates11
that a bench warrant was issued, possibly on September 21, 2011, for “failure to
comply” with an address in State B. Applicant denies any knowledge of this warrant. He
states that he paid the $467 fine assessed by the court. He has not lived in State B for
more than 10 years. When he tried to renew his passport in January 2010, children
support issues with States A and B arose. He contacted State B and learned about the
warrant. The individual in State B to whom he spoke advised that the warrant had been
resolved. He received his passport. Likewise, when he contacted State B’s child support
office in the past, this office advised him that there were no outstanding warrants for
him. After the hearing, Applicant called this county to determine the status of this
warrant. He was advised that there were no outstanding warrants. The county advised
that it would forward this information to him, but he had not received confirming
information as of December 14, 2012. He advised by email dated January 8, 2012 that
he was in Afghanistan and had not yet received any documentation.12
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
6
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
7
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Appellant developed significant financial problems because of child support
arrearage. His change of job locations resulted in additional small, unpaid bills. Most of
the debts have not been resolved. These two disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
The debts in the SOR are old and occurred some time ago. Applicant pays his
current bills. The child support may have occurred as a result of record keeping errors
by State A, an unusual circumstance as Applicant paid his child support through his pay
check. Applicant was surprised by debt, which he did not know existed until his bank
account was levied and the funds were taken by State A. He made arrangements with
State A to pay this debt. His payments began in May 2010 and have continued regularly
since that date. Applicant has reduced his child support debt by over $62,000. This debt
will not occur again as, he pays monthly on his debt, his children are grown, and no
additional debt beyond this amount will be incurred or owed.  AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c) and
20(d) apply to SOR allegation 1.m.
Applicant challenged six SOR debts because he did not owe these debts. Some
debts may belong to the person whose name is listed as Applicant’s alias on the May
18, 2010 credit report. Applicant had a legitimate basis to dispute these debts,
8
particularly the medical bill as he had not received medical care in August 2008. His
disputes resulted in the removal of several debts from his credit report, including the
$12,557 medical bill. Several non-SOR debts were also removed after his challenges.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR allegations 1.h and 1.i. 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
The record reflects that there is an outstanding arrest warrant for a DUI in 1998.
This is the only criminal offense in the record for Applicant. The Government
established its case under AG 31 ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c).
The Criminal Conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 32(a) through
32(d), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
The DUI arrest occurred more than 13 years ago. The warrant indicates a guilty
finding on the arrest charges. The warrant is for a “failure to comply,” but it does not
specify the sentence or fine that Applicant did not perform or pay. Applicant states that
he paid the $467 fine levied by the court many years ago. Since late 1998, Applicant
has not been arrested for any criminal conduct. He works steadily and has worked for
the United States in a war zone on two separate occasions. He has mitigated the
concern about this old court matter under AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d).
In assessing whether an Applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F, the Appeal Board provided13
the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of
“‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007).
However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off
each and every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 (App. Bd.
Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has “. . . established
a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.”
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can reasonably
consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating the
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is
credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a
determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding
debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for
the payment of such debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.
9
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern.13
10
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s
financial problems began with his job moves and bills not reaching him. He was
unaware of his debts for many years. When he learned about the debts, he disputed
many of them, which resulted in the removal of several debts, including the $12,557
medical bill. His credit report also listed an alias for him, a name which he denied. He
disputed this name with the credit reporting companies, which removed it from his credit
report. Some of the removed debts may belong this individual. Some debts may have
been removed because of age.  
 Applicant has a good record of commendable duty performance at his current
position. His three children are grown and on their own. While he denies owing child
support, he followed the advice of his attorney and arranged a payment plan with State
A. He has sought child support payment information from two employers, but he has not
received any information because it has been sometime since he worked for these
employers and their records are not readily available. Most significantly, he has taken
affirmative action to pay the largest SOR debt raising security concerns and has
established a track record for paying the debt. (See AG & 2(a)(6).) The remaining
unresolved debts in this case total less than $6,000. These debts cannot be a source of
improper pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are
paid; it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a
security clearance. While some debts remain unpaid, they are insufficient to raise
security concerns in light of all the circumstances in this case. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) 
The warrant is problematic given the original date of his arrest and court hearing.
The warrant appears to have been issued more than 12 years after his court date and
does not identify what part of his original sentence he did not complete. Applicant’s
credible testimony that he paid the fines many years ago and that he has been told
several times that there were no outstanding warrants in State B supports mitigation
under the criminal conduct guideline.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances and
criminal conduct under Guidelines F and J.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1m: For Applicant
11
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
