 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )         ISCR Case No. 11-08255                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                               Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on February 24, 2011. On July 30, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 22, 2012, Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR and 
elected to have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on November 26, 2012. I convened a hearing on December 17, 2012, to consider 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
 
2 
 
 
clearance for Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced four 
exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 4 and entered in the record without 
objection. The Government also introduced one demonstrative exhibit, which I marked 
as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 and entered in the record. Applicant testified and introduced 
13 exhibits, which were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through M and 
entered in the record without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record 
open until close of business on January 4, 2013, so that Applicant could, if he wished, 
provide additional documentation showing payment of delinquent debts. Applicant 
timely filed a document which included a cover sheet and 22 additional pages. I marked 
Applicant’s post-hearing submission as Ex. N and admitted it, without objection, to the 
record. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 28, 2012. 
 
                                                   Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 18 allegations of financial conduct that raise security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.r.) The financial 
delinquencies alleged in the SOR total approximately $33,000. In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted 16 of the SOR allegations. He denied the SOR allegations at 
¶¶ 1.a. and 1.r. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant, a high school graduate, is 48 years old. From 1984 until 2004, 
Applicant served in the U.S. military and held a security clearance. After receiving an 
honorable discharge, he accepted civilian employment as a security officer with a 
government contractor. He has been steadily employed as a security officer since 2005. 
(Ex. 1; Ex. A; Ex. B; Tr. 13, 48-50.) 
 
 Applicant married in 1985. Two sons, now adults, were born to the marriage in 
1990 and 1992. Applicant and his family lived in a large city with a history of urban 
gang-related crime. Applicant and his wife separated in 2003, and they divorced in July 
2012. (Ex. 1; Tr. 50-51.) 
  
 When Applicant and his wife separated, they agreed that their two young sons 
would go to live with Applicant’s mother in a rural community because they believed 
such an environment would be safer and more conducive to their sons’ personal and 
educational development. The boys went to live with their grandmother in 2005. 
Applicant sent his mother $900 every month for the support of his two sons. He 
continued these payments until December 2012. In addition, he provided his older son 
with approximately $400 each month while he attended college. (Ex. H; Tr. 51-52.) 
 
 Applicant’s older son recently graduated from college and aspires to become a 
military officer. His younger son is currently pursuing college studies. (Tr. 52-54.) 
 
 In 2005, while separated from his wife, Applicant entered into a spouse-like 
relationship with another woman. Applicant and the woman are the parents of a son 
who is now eight years old. Applicant and his partner have recently separated, but 
Applicant stated that they are hoping to reconcile. They have an informal arrangement 
 
3 
 
 
for sharing custody of their son. Applicant estimates that he provides approximately 
$100 to $150 a month for his youngest son’s care. (Ex. 1; Tr. 54-55, 101-102.) 
 
      The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant is responsible for a $2,324 judgment filed 
against him in 2005, and as of the date of the SOR, the judgment remained unsatisfied. 
The judgment appears on Applicant’s credit bureau report of March 2011. Applicant 
denied the allegation. He stated that he paid the judgment in 2008 with a cashier’s 
check at the time he purchased his home. He further stated that he was required to 
satisfy the judgment before he could be approved for his home mortgage loan. He 
stated that he had disputed the debt with the credit reporting agency but had not 
received a response. He did not have a record or receipt showing satisfaction of the 
debt. (Ex. 3; Ex. 4; Tr. 56-57.) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is responsible for the following eight delinquent 
medical debts: ¶ 1.b. ($94); ¶ 1.c. ($94); ¶1.d. ($34); ¶ 1.e. ($121); ¶ 1.f. ($61); ¶ 1.g. 
($318); ¶ 1.h. ($99); and ¶ 1.i. ($876). Applicant testified that he had paid the debts 
identified at SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., and 1.h. He provided a document from the 
creditor confirming a payment agreement of $35 a month as of June 29, 2012 for the six 
debts. He also provided a document, dated September 2012, corroborating payment of 
the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f.  Additionally, he provided a document, dated December 
17, 2012, confirming an agreement to pay the creditor $50 a month until the debts 
identified at SOR ¶¶ 1.g. and 1.i. were satisfied. In a post-hearing submission, he 
provided acknowledgment from the creditor of a postdated check for $50, which would 
be deposited on December 31, 2012.  (Ex. 4; Ex. J; Ex. N; Tr. 58-61.)    
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.j. that Applicant owes a $3,332 judgment entered against 
him in 2008, and the judgment remained unsatisfied as of July 30, 2012. Applicant 
stated that the judgment arose from delinquent credit card debt. He stated that he had 
an agreement with the creditor to pay $50 a month on the account, and in 2012, he had 
made three $50 payments. (Ex. 2; Tr. 61-64.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.k. that Applicant was 90 days past due in paying $208 on 
a credit card debt with a balance of $3,245. He testified that the creditor deducted 
payments on this debt four times a year from his military retirement pay. In a post-
hearing submission, he provided documentation, dated January 2, 2013, which notified 
him that the last garnishment from his military retirement account was for $264. The 
communication also stated that his account was four payments past due, and his next 
payment of $88 was due on January 12, 2013. (Ex. N at 22; Tr. 72-77.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.l. that Applicant was 90 days past due on a payment of 
$32 on an account with a balance of $740. Applicant’s Ex. I is a December 2012 letter 
to Applicant from a debt collection firm which represents the creditor. In the letter, the 
debt collection firm states: “In light of your current financial situation [this firm] has 
agreed to accept up to 3 installment payments and place your account in a temporary 
hardship status.” The letter then specifies that it will accept payments of $35 from 
Applicant on December 15, 2012, January 15, 2013, and February 15, 2013. The letter 
 
4 
 
 
further states that, upon receipt of the three specified payments, the creditor will contact 
Applicant to discuss payment arrangements on the remaining balance. At his hearing, 
Applicant stated he would try to provide bank statements showing past monthly 
payments of $75 to this creditor, but he failed to do so. (Ex. I; Tr. 77-79.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.m. that Applicant was 60 days past due in the amount of 
$3,000 on a home mortgage with a total account balance of approximately $259,000. At 
his hearing, Applicant stated that he had caught up on his mortgage delinquencies, and 
the mortgage company had agreed to a mortgage modification to lower his monthly 
payments of $1,642. In a post-hearing submission, Applicant provided documentation 
showing he had written a check to the mortgage company, dated December 22, 2012, 
for his November 2012 mortgage payment. He also provided documentation that he had 
sent the mortgage company his December 2012 mortgage payment by Western Union 
on January 3, 2013. (Ex. N, 1-2; Tr. 79-81.)    
  
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.n. that Applicant owes a creditor $9,234 on an account in 
collection status. Applicant stated that he purchased an automobile on credit for his son. 
His son agreed to make the monthly payments on the automobile, but he fell behind and 
did not inform his father of the delinquency. The automobile was repossessed. Applicant 
provided documentation, dated June 2012, in which the creditor agreed to accept 
monthly payments of $50 on the debt. Applicant stated he had made three payments on 
the debt and was entering a new arrangement authorizing payments from his bank 
account in December 2012. (Ex. 4; Tr. 69-72.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.o. that Applicant owes a creditor $9,226 on a delinquent 
account in collection status. Applicant stated that this debt arose when he purchased an 
automobile for his former wife, and she allowed it to be repossessed in 2009. Applicant 
provided documentation from the creditor, dated June 2012, in which the creditor 
agreed to accept monthly payments of $50 on the debt, beginning in July 2012. 
Applicant stated that he had a previous agreement with the creditor, and, pursuant to 
that agreement, he had made two payments in 2010 and none in 2011. (Ex. 4; Ex. N; 
Tr. 82-83.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.p. that Applicant is responsible for an unpaid debt, of 
$462, in charged-off status. Applicant provided documentation, dated December 10, 
2012, showing that amount owed on the debt was $387.42. The collection agent for the 
creditor noted that the debt was unpaid, past due, and demanded payment. (Ex. L.) 
 
   The SOR alleges a $423 debt, in charged-off status, at ¶ 1.q. Applicant stated 
that this debt was to the same creditor as identified in the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.p. In his 
answer to the SOR, he stated that he was paying the creditor $25 each month on each 
of the debts. At his hearing, he stated that he had satisfied the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.q. and was continuing to pay the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.p. He did not have a letter 
or a receipt from the creditor showing satisfaction of this debt. (Tr. 84-85.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶1.r. that Applicant owes $165 on a medical account that 
was placed for collection. Applicant denied the debt, which is listed on his credit bureau 
report of March 2011. He stated that he had disputed the debt in writing, but had 
received no response. (Ex. 3; Tr. 86.)  
 
 Applicant provided two commendations and five letters of character reference 
which attested to his trustworthiness, leadership abilities, and excellent work as a 
security officer charged with protecting high government officials. His coworkers and 
supervisors consider him to be a valuable member of their professional team. (Ex. A; 
Ex. B; Ex. C; Ex. D; Ex. E; Ex. F; and Ex. G.  
 
 Applicant provided a current financial statement in a post-hearing document. He 
listed his monthly net income from his employment at $3,492. In addition, he receives 
$1,485 each month in military retirement pay. Applicant’s total net monthly income is 
$4,977. (Ex. N at 3.) 
 
 Applicant identified the following monthly living expenses: home mortgage, 
$1,645; car payment, $485; groceries, $200; clothing, $100; utilities, $330; car 
expenses, $70; and medical expenses, $60.1 Additionally, he identified five debt 
payments, which total $294. Applicant’s net monthly remainder is $1,793. The record 
does not reflect that Applicant has had financial credit counseling. (Ex. N at 3.)  
  
                                                 Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
                                            
1
 Applicant did not include the $100 to $150 he said he provides for his younger son’s expenses when he 
has custody of the child. 
 
6 
 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
7 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. For several years, Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt 
and was unable or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise 
these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial difficulties and inattention to his financial 
responsibilities. Many of his attempts to resolve his debts occurred recently, in June and 
July of 2012. While he arranged some plans to pay his debts in the past, he was unable 
to follow through and pay those debts consistently over time. He reported that he had a 
payment plan to resolve a debt that arose from an automobile repossession, but made 
only two payments in 2010 and none in 2011. The debt has not been resolved. 
 
 Applicant has recently set up a number of payment plans in order to resolve 
debts alleged in the SOR. He merits some credit for these actions. However, what is 
missing from Applicant’s record is consistent payment of his debts over time. He has not 
established a track record that demonstrates that he can be relied upon to allocate his 
resources to satisfy his many substantial financial delinquencies. 
 
 Applicant’s financial delinquencies occurred under circumstances that are likely 
to recur. He stated that he had resolved a number of small medical debts, but he 
provided documentation to corroborate payment of only one of those debts. He has not 
 
8 
 
 
had financial credit counseling, and he lacks a clear and timely strategy for resolving his 
delinquent debts. 
 
 Applicant’s post-hearing financial statement reflected a net monthly remainder of 
nearly $1,800. It appears he has the resources to make substantial payments to resolve 
his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude that while AG ¶ 20(d) has partial 
applicability in this case, AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c) and 20(e) do not apply in mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 48 
years. His colleagues and coworkers regard him as a valued professional. His financial 
problems began several years ago and are ongoing. His efforts to address his financial 
delinquencies are recent. He does not have a reliable history of timely and consistent 
payment of his financial obligations. He failed to support many of his assertions of debt 
payment with corroborating documentation. Despite a steady income for several years, 
he has failed to budget his income to satisfy his many debts, and he has not sought 
credit counseling. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment as well as his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his financial delinquencies.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.e.:            Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.f.: and 1.g.: For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.h.:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.i.:             For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.j. - 1.r.:              Against Applicant     
 
                                              Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
