1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-----------------------------------  ) ADP Case No. 11-07761
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a public trust position. The evidence shows Applicant has a history of
financial problems or difficulties consisting of state and federal tax liens and associated
back taxes. His tax  problems are unresolved and ongoing. Looking forward, it is too
soon to predict if or when he will resolve his tax problems. Applicant failed to present
sufficient evidence to overcome the concerns stemming from his tax problems.
Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.
 Exhibit 5. 1
 The AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The2
AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 3
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some4
of which may be identified as exhibits in this decision.  
2
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted an application for a public trust position in December 2010.1
On July 25, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a statement of
reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F for financial
considerations and Guideline E for personal conduct. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information with Industry (Feb. 20,
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive);
Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Jan. 1987),
as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)  implemented by the2
DOD on September 1, 2006. The SOR recommended submission of Applicant’s case to
an administrative judge to determine his eligibility to occupy an automated data
processing (ADP) position designated I, II, or III to support a DOD contract. 
Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so, the case
will be decided on the written record.3
On or about November 6, 2012, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and
material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of relevant4
material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it November 21, 2012. He did
not reply within the prescribed 30-day period. The case was assigned to me January 11,
2013.  
Findings of Fact
In general, the SOR alleged a history of financial problems or difficulties
consisting of state and federal tax liens and associated back taxes. The SOR also
alleged that Applicant provided false answers to questions about his financial history
when completing official documents. In his reply to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the
financial allegations, but he denied any intent to deceive or mislead anyone when he
answered the questions. His admissions are accepted and adopted and incorporated
herein as findings of fact. In addition, the following findings of fact are supported by
substantial evidence.
 Exhibit 5. 5
 Exhibit 6. 6
 Exhibits 7, 10, and 11. 7
 Exhibits 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11. 8
 Exhibit 7. On this basis, I am not persuaded that Applicant gave deliberately false answers. Accordingly, the9
two falsification allegations under Guideline E are decided for Applicant. 
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 10
3
Applicant is a 64-year-old employee. He is seeking to obtain or retain eligibility to
occupy a position of public trust for his job as a data center manager. He has had this
job since early 2007. 
Applicant completed an application for a public trust position in December 2010,5
and it is that application under review. He also completed a declaration for federal
employment in November 2010.  In both documents, he did not report or otherwise6
disclose that he had been subject to a tax lien within the last seven years. Likewise, he
did not report or otherwise disclose that he was then delinquent on any federal debt. 
The available documentary evidence establishes that Applicant has had four
federal tax liens in the amounts of $4,344, $1,396, $10,400, and $13,381.  The liens7
were filed by the IRS in April 1998, March 1992, October 1992, and May 1993,
respectively. 
The available documentary evidence also establishes that Applicant has had
eight state tax liens (all from the same state) in the amounts of $8,347, $6,372, $11,083,
$17,460, $10,723, $11,639, $8,920, and $6,612.  The eight liens were filed by the state8
in October 2009. 
In his reply to the SOR, Applicant did not dispute the tax liens, but does dispute
the amounts owed to state and federal tax authorities. He explained that he had hired a
firm to assist him in resolving his tax issues, and he presented documentary evidence
showing that he retained a firm for that purpose in May 2012. Concerning the
falsification allegations, he explained that he had no intent to deceive or mislead
anyone. In addition, he stated that he did not discover the tax problems until after he
completed the application.  9
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant10
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant11
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  12
 AG ¶ 19(a).  13
 AG ¶ 19(c). 14
4
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline11
F is: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  12
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information within the
defense industry.   
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. The state and federal tax liens and associated back taxes raise
serious concerns. It should be obvious, but it is nonetheless stated here, that an
applicant who is unwilling or unable to fulfill their income tax obligations is not a good
candidate for a position of public trust, which is a privilege granted by the federal
government. His tax problems indicate inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a13
history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The14
facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions, and the facts also
suggest a degree of financial irresponsibility.
 
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F. Any of the
following may mitigate security concerns:
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
 ISCR Case No. 99-0201 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999) (“[T]he concept of ‘good faith’ requires a showing that a15
person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.
Such standards are consistent with the level of conduct that must be expected of persons granted a security
clearance.”) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No. 02-30304 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (relying on a legally
available option, such as Chapter 7 bankruptcy, is not a good-faith effort) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No.
99-9020 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001) (relying on the running of a statute of limitations to avoid paying a debt is not
a good-faith effort). 
 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).16
5
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control;
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;15
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
AG ¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
I have considered all the mitigating conditions, and none, individually or in combination,
are sufficient to overcome and mitigate the concerns stemming from Applicant’s tax
problems, which are unresolved and ongoing.   
For reasons not entirely clear from the record, Applicant fell behind on his state
and federal income tax obligations. The result is multiple tax liens and substantial back
taxes owed to state and federal tax authorities. In May 2012, he took the first step in
resolving his tax problems by retaining a firm to assist him in doing so. He did not
provide any additional information about this process in response to the FORM. At this
point, he is facing a major problem that will not be easily or quickly solved. It is clearly
too soon to predict if or when he will resolve his tax problems.  
To conclude, the evidence leaves me with doubt about Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a public trust position. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence
as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable
evidence or vice versa. I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  For all16
these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations
concern.
6
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.l: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a & 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for an ADP I, II, or III position. Eligibility for
access to sensitive information is denied.
        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
