 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-09172 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. DoD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 7, 2012, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on October 15, 2012. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 13, 2012, and the 
 
2 
 
 
hearing was convened as scheduled on December 6, 2012. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant 
testified but offered no documentary evidence. He also showed me several original 
photographs and diplomas at the hearing, including pictures of his daughter and his 
brother who is a colonel in the Marine Corps. These items were not included in the 
record but were described by me. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 19, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted both the allegations under 
Guideline H. After a thorough and careful review of the evidence submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He is currently engaged, and has one child from a 
previous marriage who lives with him. He has a bachelor’s and a master’s degree. 
Since 2005, he has worked for a defense contractor. He has no military service and has 
held a security clearance since 2005.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted using marijuana on approximately five occasions from 
October 2007 to May 2010 while holding a security clearance (as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
– 1.b). Applicant claims he never used marijuana before 2007. He testified that in 2007, 
he used marijuana four times in a ten-to fourteen-day period. He stated that these uses 
were not preplanned, but came about when he was at several parties at a friend’s 
apartment. He was given the marijuana and has never purchased it. His most recent 
use came in 2010 when he again attended a party at a friend’s house. He ate some 
baked goods at the party. Apparently, someone had baked marijuana into the products. 
Applicant did not know this at the time he ate the baked goods. Later, he felt the effects 
of something and a friend told him that there was marijuana in the baked goods. He 
stated that he no longer associates with the person who put the marijuana in the baked 
goods. When interviewed by a defense investigator in April 2011, he failed to bring up 
this circumstance concerning his most recent marijuana use. He told the investigator 
that he used marijuana “in a social setting, five or six times between October 2007 and 
May 2010.” He provided no other details.2  
 
 Applicant also testified that he now lives a healthy lifestyle. He wants to be a 
good example for his daughter who began living with him in 2009. He also testified that 
he would like it noted that he voluntarily admitted his marijuana use during his security 
clearance upgrade review. He believes that without his honest admissions, his past use 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6-7, 19, 25-27; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 28-31; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
would have remained undisclosed. He has not sought out or received any drug 
counseling.3 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 32-34, 36; GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 25, and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana on a number of occasions. He also used marijuana 
after being granted a security clearance in 2005. I find the above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s use of drugs was frequent and recent (last use May 2010). The 
period of abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s intent not to use in the 
future. I am troubled by the fact that he claims he never used marijuana before 2007, 
but started using after he was granted a security clearance. Additionally, I do not find his 
testimony about the use involving the marijuana baked goods credible. Applicant failed 
to bring this version of the facts forward to a defense investigator in April 2011 when the 
events would have been much clearer in his mind. Therefore, I discount his version of 
 
5 
 
 
an unintentional use in 2010. Although he claims to have changed his lifestyle and 
some friends, he has not convinced me that he has a demonstrated intent not to use 
marijuana in the future. Moreover, his affirmative decision to use marijuana after 
receiving a security clearance casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply, and AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s statement 
about his changed lifestyle. However, I also weighed that he used marijuana on several 
occasions, all while holding a security clearance, and as recently as May 2010. 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
   
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
