 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00030 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 26, 2012, the Department of Defense issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On October 22, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record. On November 2, 2012, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
 
2 
 
 
and it was received on November 8, 2012. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
provide additional information. The case was assigned to me on January 11, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 2003. She married 
in 2008 and has no children. She has worked for a federal contractor since May 2010 
and submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 12, 2010.  
 
 In December 2009, Applicant was required to take a polygraph examination as a 
condition of her employment. During the pre-test interview, Applicant told the examiner 
that she never used or sold any illegal drugs. The examiner advised Applicant that 
during the polygraph test she had significant reactions to the drug questions. At that 
time, Applicant admitted that she used marijuana one time when she was about 13 or 
14 years old. On December 3, 2009, Applicant made the following written statement:  
 
The examiner told me I had significant reactions to the drug question. 
Before the exam I stated I had no drug use however during the testing I 
remembered that at the age of 13-14 I was at a friend’s house and tried 
marijuana once.1 
  
Applicant stated the following in her answer to SOR ¶ 1.d that alleged she 
provided false and misleading information during her polygraph examination: “I deny, 
when I recalled the information and the occasion listed I informed the polygrapher right 
away. The incident had happened over 10 years ago.”2 
 
 On July 21, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator. She told the investigator that she had taken a 
polygraph in February 2010 and was advised that she had failed the test. She told the 
investigator that she was not given a reason as to why she failed the test. When she 
was asked by the investigator why she thought she failed the test, she indicated that 
she did not know why.3 In her answer to SOR ¶ 1.c that alleged that she provided false 
and misleading information during her OPM interview she stated: “I deny, I was not 
informed of the failed polygraph reason. I could only guess that the drug question was 
the result. No formal reason from the [agency] was given.”4  
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Item 2.  
 
3 
 
 
 In Applicant’s response to interrogatories asking her why she denied knowing the 
reason she failed the polygraph examination when she was questioned by the OPM 
investigator, she stated:  
 
When I was sent the letter notifying me of failing the polygraph it did not 
give [a] specific reason. I also do not recall signing the statement for the 
significant reactions to the drug question. I could only assume that the 
drug questions was the reason for the failure as I was not officially told the 
reason. As such, I should have discussed my assumption with the 
investigator.5 
 
 In Applicant’s SCA, she responded “no” to Section 13C Employment Record 
indicating that she had never been fired from a job; quit a job after being told she would 
be fired; left a job by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct; 
left a job by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance; or left a 
job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances. The question also asked if she 
had been laid off from a job by an employer. Applicant responded in her SCA that she 
was laid off by an employer in February 2010 because “my services were no longer 
needed.”6 She stated in her OPM interview that after her employer was advised by the 
agency who conducted the polygraph that she had failed it, she was no longer eligible to 
participate in contracts with the agency. Applicant stated her supervisor wanted to retain 
her, but there were no contracts for her to work on, so she was laid off.7  
 
Applicant was employed by federal contractor “A” from April 2005 to January 
2006. During her OPM interview, she confirmed that in the past ten years she had never 
been fired from a job, quit a job after being told she would be fired, or left a job by 
mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct or unsatisfactory performance, 
nor any other unfavorable circumstances. She confirmed that she had never 
deliberately concealed or falsified any relevant materials on any forms used to 
determine employment eligibility.  
 
During Applicant’s OPM interview, she indicated that she voluntarily resigned 
from employment with “A” because she did not like her job or her supervisor. She 
indicated she did not have any disciplinary problems or personality conflicts, but rather 
the job was not what she expected it to be. These reasons caused her to come to the 
decision to resign in February 2006. She indicated she would probably be eligible for 
rehire by “A.”8 
 
                                                          
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 2. 
 
7 Item 4.  
 
8 Item 4. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant made a written statement to “A” signed on December 30, 2005, 
witnessed by two people, and stating it was true and correct to the best of her 
knowledge. Applicant was confronted by “A” and was told that people she was to have 
contacted in person and interviewed, as part of her work assignment, verified that she 
did not contact them as required. Applicant falsely documented in her official work 
report that she had contacted and interviewed these people. In her statement, she 
admitted she made false representations. She explained:  
 
At the time, I was assigned a multitude of cases and felt under 
considerable pressure to get this work in on time as required by 
[supervisor]. I know there is not much more I can say and this is very 
much unlike me. If there is anything I can do to help [A] resolve this issue, 
please let me know because I will do anything I can to bring this matter to 
a favorable close.9 
 
On January 3, 2006, “A’s” internal office mail stated: “Effective today (1/3/2006) please 
terminate [Applicant]. Her social security number is [XXX-XX-XXXX.] There are 
questions of her integrity; she was terminated due to concern of falsification.”10 An email 
dated January 3, 2006, from the deputy program manager stated: “The matter that led 
to the suspension of [Applicant] is now concluded and her employment with [A] has 
been terminated effective today.”11 The email directed different employees to notify 
different entities that Applicant’s employment was terminated due to “an integrity 
concern (falsification)” and to “cancel her facility access” and “remove her from any and 
all” access across the board. Another email confirmed that Applicant turned in her 
credentials January 4, 2006.12 Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b addressing her 
employment termination and failure to list it on her SCA. She did not offer any other 
information or explanations about these allegations.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
9 Item 6. 
 
10 Item 6. 
 
11 Item 6.  
 
12 Item 6. 
 
5 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
6 
 
 
I considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 that could raise a security 
concern and concluded the following are potentially applicable. 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal , professional or community standing. . . . 
 
There is substantial evidence to conclude Applicant deliberately omitted, 
concealed, and falsified relevant information on her SCA and when interviewed by an 
OPM investigator. She deliberately failed to disclose she was terminated from 
employment and the circumstances surrounding it. She lied to her employer that she 
had completed certain work when she had not. She misled the OPM investigator about 
being unaware of the reason she failed her polygraph examination. The evidence also 
supports the allegation that she did not disclose her prior drug use until after being 
confronted by the examiner that she had significant reactions on the polygraph to the 
drug questions. Applicant attempted to minimize and conceal information about the 
polygraph and her employment record. Her falsifications create a vulnerability to 
exploitation as it is the type of activity, which, if known, would affect her personal and 
professional reputation. Applicant’s explanations were not credible and her behavior 
lacked good judgment and were untrustworthy. The above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
None of the above mitigating conditions apply. Applicant did not make a prompt, 
good-faith effort to correct her omission, concealment, and falsification before being 
confronted with the facts. Her deliberate lies to her employer about her work are serious 
and cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. Her pattern 
of dishonesty raises questions about her integrity. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(b) do not apply. 
Despite substantial derogatory evidence, Applicant has not acknowledged the behavior 
or taken positive steps to alleviate the factors that caused her inappropriate behavior. I 
am not convinced her behavior is unlikely to recur. Therefore, AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) do 
not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 31 years old. She intentionally failed to disclose derogatory 
information on her SCA about her employment record. She repeatedly misled the OPM 
investigator about the circumstances surrounding her polygraph failure and her 
employment record. Applicant has exhibited a pattern of dishonesty that demonstrates a 
lack of trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
