 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case: 11-08431 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
Department Counsel: Braden M. Murphy, Esq. 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns raised under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On April 1, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 13, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under the guideline for Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of Defense  
on September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 31, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
a hearing. DOHA received Applicant’s answer (AR) on September 5, 2012, and 
 
2 
 
 
assigned the case to me on October 11, 2012. On November 6, 2012, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing, setting the case for November 20, 2012. The case proceeded as 
scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) 1 through 8 into 
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on November 30, 
2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in paragraphs 1.a through 
1.c of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact herein.  
 
 Applicant is 50 years old and married for 21 years to his second wife. He has two 
children from a previous marriage and three children with his current wife. He also has 
two step-children. Three of the seven children live at home. (GE 1.) As a parent, he is 
involved in his children’s sports activities and martial arts. He has been a Cub Scout 
leader for three of his boys. His wife works part time as a customer service 
representative for an insurance company. (Tr. 25-26.) 
 
 Applicant enlisted in the Marine Corps in August 1979, soon after graduating 
from high school. He served until June 2000, when he retired with an honorable 
discharge. While on active duty, he deployed to an African country in 1994 and to 
another country in 1997. (Tr. 8.) He was a shop supervisor for communications and 
navigational systems that are installed in aircraft. (Tr. 29.)  He received a Navy and 
Marine Corps Achievement Medal and a Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal. 
At different times while in the Marine Corps, he held a Confidential clearance, a Top 
Secret security clearance, and had access to sensitive compartmented information 
(SCI). He was an E-6, staff sergeant, when discharged. (Tr. 27; AE. 8.) After leaving the 
Marine Corps, Applicant began training soldiers for a defense contractor, traveling 
throughout the United States. (Tr. 24.)  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to his wife’s loss of employment in 
2007 and her annual salary of $25,000, along with the economic slowdown in 2008, 
when the electronics industry moved out of the United States and created a downward 
trend in the need for electronics training. For several years, his annual salary remained 
at $45,000 because of the poor economy. (Tr. 58.). Subsequently, he and his wife 
supported their large family on his salary, plus $12,000 he earned from his Marine 
Corps pension. In 2011 his annual salary increased to $48,000. Currently, his salary is 
between $49,000 and $50,000. His wife now works part time, earning $10,000 annually. 
(Tr. 29-31, 34-35.)  
 
 When Applicant realized in 2008 that he and his wife were beginning to 
experience financial difficulties, he sought assistance through a debt consolidation 
company. At the time he did not have delinquent debts and wanted to prevent that from 
happening. Per the advice of the company, he consolidated all financial obligations into 
one repayment plan in October 2008. (AE 4.) The company began paying creditors, one 
 
3 
 
 
by one, which in turn created some delinquent accounts. As of July 3, 2012, the 
company notified him that since October 16, 2008, it had reduced approximately 
$55,000 of debt to $28,000 through its negotiations and settlements. (AE 4.) To date, he 
has resolved more than seven debts, as indicated on a May 2012 credit bureau report 
(CBR), some of which were not included on the SOR. (GE 4.) He continues to pay the 
company $500 monthly to resolve debts. (Tr. 36-39, 61-62.)  
 
 Applicant has not participated in a formal credit or financial counseling course. 
However, he and his wife have eliminated credit cards and learned to closely monitor 
their income and spending. (Tr. 56-57.) He submitted a detailed budget. His net 
household monthly income is $6,116, including $1,128 from his military pension and 
$750 from his wife’s income. All of their expenses and obligations total $5,937, leaving 
about $180 remaining at the end of the month. (Ex. 5.)  
 
 The SOR alleged three delinquent debts that totaled $32,222. The debts became 
delinquent in 2008. The status of each debt is as follows: 
 
 1.a. The Chase credit card debt for $14,000 is included in Applicant’s 
repayment plan. The debt consolidation company has not yet negotiated a 
settlement. It will be resolved when the company receives an acceptable 
offer. (Tr. 41; AE 4.) 
 
 1.b. The BOA credit card debt for $11,000 was paid and released through 
the repayment plan. The company settled the debt, which had increased to 
$15,966, for $4,710. (Tr. 39; AE 2.) 
 
 1.c. The THD/CBNA/Home Depot debt for $7,222 is included in Applicant’s 
repayment plan. The company offered to settle the account for $2,528 with 
10 monthly payments of $252, beginning at the end of November 2012. The 
matter is being resolved. (Tr. 40, 64; AE 3.) 
 
  Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from the president of his 
company, who has known him for 12 years. He noted that Applicant is a trustworthy 
employee, demonstrating “responsibility and care with company assets” over the past 
12 years. (AE 7.) A program manager with Applicant’s employer stated that Applicant 
“has always performed professionally and handled himself with the utmost integrity.” 
(AE 6.) 
  
  Applicant testified forthrightly and credibly. He takes full responsibility for his 
debts and finances. He and his wife are cooperatively resolving them and living on a 
tight budget. He loves his job and country. (Tr. 66-67.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
 
4 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
The security concerns pertaining to Financial Considerations are set out in AG ¶ 
18: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying, two of which are raised by the evidence in this case: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant began accumulating delinquent debts in late 2008, including the three 
debts alleged in the SOR. He has been unable to repay all of them to date due to 
insufficient income. The evidence raised the above disqualifications. 
After the Government raised potential disqualifying conditions, the burden shifted 
to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 20 
includes three conditions that could mitigate the security concern arising under this 
guideline: 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in 2008 after he became the 
sole support for his family in 2007 when his wife lost her job. His income was insufficient 
to pay all family expenses for seven people. He responsibly attempted to manage those 
financial obligations through a debt consolidation company that he hired in October 
2008. The evidence supports the application of AG ¶ 20 (b).  
Although he has not participated in formal credit counseling, Applicant has made 
commonsense decisions to resolve his debts, such as hiring a debt consolidation 
company, eliminating credit cards, and monitoring spending and income. Based on his 
good-faith efforts to consolidate his obligations through a repayment plan, he has paid 
one SOR-listed debt, will pay off another debt in ten months, and is in the process of 
settling the third debt. His budget accommodates the repayment plan with sufficient 
 
6 
 
 
income to avoid incurring additional debt. At this time there are clear indications that his 
finances are under control, warranting the application of AG ¶ 20 (c) and AG ¶ 20 (d).  
Whole-Person Concept   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an honest, responsible, 50-
year-old former Marine, who honorably served this country for 20 years. He held some 
level of a security clearance during his service. In 2008 he realized that his income was 
no longer sufficient to handle his bills, so he sought help with a debt consolidation 
company. He has worked with the company for the last four years, and will continue to 
do so until all financial obligations are resolved. His monthly repayments on that plan 
are included in his budget. At the end of November, he began resolving a $7,222 debt 
for $2,528. The remaining SOR-listed debt for $14,000 is being negotiated and will 
begin to be paid when a settlement is reached. Until 2008 there was no evidence that 
he experienced financial difficulties. The likelihood of a recurrence is minimal, given his 
financial awareness and management of the debts. He removed any potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising from financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:        For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
  
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
