1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-06775
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
January 15, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On February 2, 2012, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD)
Directive 5220.6, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. (Item 1.) The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
 
On April 21, 2012, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.)
On June 13, 2012, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered 13 documentary exhibits. (Items 1-13.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on September 27, 2012. Applicant
submitted a response, which has been identified and entered into evidence without
2
objection as Item A. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on November
28, 2012. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted additional document, and the FORM, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 53 years old.  He is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks
a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists seven allegations (1.a. through 1.g.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts totaling $28,205, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The debts
will be discussed below in the same order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $9,986, for a judgment filed against him in April 2006. Applicant denied this SOR
allegation in his RSOR. (Item 2.)   Applicant’s credit reports (CR), dated November 29,
2011; and June 18, 2010; list this judgement debt. (Items 6 and 7.) Applicant admitted
this debt in his response to DOHA interrogatories. (Item 14.) No evidence has been
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $196. Applicant
denied this SOR allegation in his RSOR. (Item 2.)  Applicant’s June 2010 CR lists this
delinquent debt. (Item 7.) In a Personal Subject Interview (PSI), dated June 25, 2010,
Applicant indicated that he disputed this debt. (Item 4.)  However, no evidence has been
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.       
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $122. Applicant
denied this SOR allegation in his RSOR. (Item 2.) Applicant’s June 2010 CR lists this
delinquent debt. (Item 7.) No evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt
has been resolved or reduced.       
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $10,402.  Applicant
denied this SOR allegation in his RSOR. (Item 2.) Applicant’s June 2010 CR lists this
delinquent debt. (Item 7.) No evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt
has been resolved or reduced.       
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $708.  Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in his RSOR. (Item 2.) Applicant’s June 2010 and
February 8, 2010 CRs list this delinquent debt. (Items 7 and 9.) No evidence has been
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.       
3
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $6,264  on a judgment
entered against Applicant in June 2006. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in his
RSOR. This judgement was entered in State Civil Court Judgement and Lien Filings
record, listing Applicant’s home address. (Items 10 and 11.) No evidence has been
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $527 on a judgment
entered against Applicant in June 1990.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in his
RSOR, but claimed that it had been “paid in full.” (Item 2.) The State Civil Court
Judgement and Lien Filings record lists this judgment and show that it is unpaid. (Item
13.) No evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or
reduced. 
In Applicant’s Security Clearance Application, it is indicated that Applicant was
unemployed from January to May 2010. (Item 3.) In his PSI, Applicant explained that he
owned a used car business, which he closed in approximately 2003. Applicant did not
report the closure of the business to the State Secretary of State as required by law. In
2005 he received a bill from the state for penalties and back taxes, which he was unable
to pay. Applicant claims to have resolved his outstanding State tax bill in May 2010 as
part of a state tax amnesty program. Applicant also indicated in his PSI that he planned
to contact the creditors of his overdue debts to attempt to resolve said overdue debts.
(Item 4.)  As reviewed above, no evidence has been introduced to establish that these
debts have been resolved or reduced.    
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
4
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
5
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s unemployment in 2010, in addition to the closure of his business in 2003
could potentially make this mitigation condition applicable. However, since Applicant
failed to follow the law of his state by notifying the State Secretary of State when he
closed his business, in addition to the fact that there is no evidence that Applicant has
made any attempt to resolve his overdue debts, I do not find that Applicant has acted
responsibly. Therefore, this mitigating condition is not applicable in this case. 
Additionally, I do not find that AG ¶  20(d) is applicable, since Applicant has not
“initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,”
Finally, I do not find that any other mitigating condition applies to this case. Therefore, I
find Guideline F against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on the lack of evidence to
establish that Applicant has made any attempt to resolve the past-due debts listed on
the SOR, plus his failure to follow the law of his state by notifying the State Secretary of
State when he closed his business, I find that the record evidence leaves me with
significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-person concept. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.g.: Against  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
