 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
             )           ISCR Case No. 11-05424                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                            )          
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on November 8, 2010. On April 13, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was undated. By letter dated June 30, 2012, he 
declined to have a hearing before an administrative judge. On October 12, 2012, he 
communicated with Department Counsel and requested a hearing. I marked Applicant’s 
request as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 and entered it in the record. The case was assigned 
 
2 
 
 
to me on November 9, 2012. I convened a hearing on December 3, 2012, to consider 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced six 
exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 6 and entered in the record without 
objection. Applicant testified, called no witnesses, and introduced eight exhibits, which 
were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through H and entered in the record 
without objection. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 11, 2012. 
 
                                                     Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains nine allegations of financial conduct that raise security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.i.) In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations at ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.g., 
1.h., and 1.i. He denied the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f.  Applicant’s admissions 
are entered as findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He has never been married, and he has no 
dependents. He is employed as a functional analyst by a government contractor, and he 
seeks a security clearance for the first time. (Ex. 1; Tr. 53-54.) 
 
 Applicant attended college from 2003 until 2004. From 2000 until October 2007, 
he was employed as a real estate agent. Between 2000 and 2004, Applicant’s 
estimated income was approximately $100,000 a year. The SOR alleges at ¶¶ 1.a. and 
1.c. that Applicant failed to file federal income tax returns and state income tax returns 
in his state of residence in 2005, 2006, and 2007. Applicant stated that he failed to file 
federal and state income tax returns because, as a real estate agent, his income was 
affected by the downturn in the housing market, and he did not have sufficient money to 
pay his taxes. He believed that if lacked the money to pay his federal and state income 
taxes, he was not required to file. He stated that his yearly income dropped from 
$100,000 a year to $50,000 a year in about 2005 and thereafter.1 (Answer to SOR; Ex. 
1; Ex. 2; Ex. 3; Tr. 36-37, 52.)    
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant owes the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) $67,360 for unpaid federal taxes for tax years 2005, 2006, and 2007. The SOR 
alleges at ¶ 1.d that Applicant owes his state of residence $15,586 for unpaid state 
income taxes for tax years 2005, 2006, and 2007. In a March 19, 2012, response to 
DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that he had filed his federal and state tax returns 
and was awaiting confirmation that they had been received by the taxing authorities. 
However, at his hearing he stated that he had his federal and state tax returns prepared 
and ready to file but had not yet filed them. He further explained that he was attempting 
to sell his home by short sale and felt he should address that issue first. (Ex. 2; Tr. 40-
42.) 
                                            
1 In 2005, in managing his financial obligations, Applicant used 2005 income to pay his 2004 federal 
income taxes. (Tr. 37.) 
 
3 
 
 
 During his time as a real estate agent, Applicant purchased a condominium 
apartment. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.g. that Applicant is past due $271 on a home equity 
line of credit with a balance of approximately $19,944. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.h. that 
Applicant is past due $3,464 on a home equity line of credit with a balance of 
approximately $27,288. Both lines of credit are held by the same creditor. Applicant 
stated that the creditor had verbally agreed, upon completion of the short sale, to accept 
approximately $42,000 in settlement of the two delinquent debts. Applicant anticipated 
that his monthly payment to the creditor would be between $500 and $600. (Tr. 32-33, 
42-43.) 
 
 The SOR also alleges at ¶ 1.i. that Applicant owes $12,868 on a delinquent first 
mortgage on the property with a balance of approximately $112,000. At his hearing 
Applicant provided documentation establishing that the holder of the first mortgage had 
approved a short sale of the property. He also provided a document showing that 
buyers had signed a residential contract of sale on the property and had offered to 
purchase the property for $145,000. At his hearing, Applicant stated that he had also 
signed the contract, although his signature was not on the document he provided. (Ex. 
G; Ex. H; Tr. 43-45.) 
 
 In October 2007, Applicant took a position with a government contractor and 
served overseas. With a few short breaks for vacations in 2007 and 2009, Applicant 
worked overseas until July 2010. His yearly pay was approximately $120,000.2 During 
that time, he did not rent his condominium, and it stood empty. He continued making 
most of his mortgage payments, however. (Tr. 39-40.) 
 
 In 2009, while he was overseas, Applicant filed and paid his 2008 federal income 
tax. He used a computer software program that was available to him in the country 
where he was working. The SOR also alleges at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant failed to file 
federal income tax returns in 2009 and 2010. In response to DOHA interrogatories in 
March 2012, Applicant stated he had not filed his 2009 and 2010 federal income taxes 
but planned to do so. At his hearing, Applicant stated that he hired a firm to help him 
with his tax delinquencies when he returned to the United States in 2010, but the firm 
was not helpful. He stated that he paid the firm approximately $3,500. Applicant has not 
yet contacted the IRS to arrange payment of his tax delinquencies. He intends to write a 
hardship letter to the IRS, explain his overseas employment, and request a reduction in 
the amount he will owe.  (Ex. 2; Tr. 34-38, 63-64.)  
  
 Applicant denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.e. stating that he failed to file state 
income tax returns in State B for tax years 2009 and 2010. He stated that he was a 
resident of State A during the years he was employed overseas. He acknowledged that 
he became a resident of State B in August 2010. He failed to explain why he did not file 
a state income tax return for the four months in 2010 when he was a resident of State B. 
(Answer to SOR.) 
                                            
2 Applicant did not have a clear understanding of his employment status when serving overseas. He 
believed he was an employee. (Tr. 55-62.) 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant also denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.f. which stated that he owed a 
telecommunications company a debt of $1,482. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
stated that he believed he paid the debt in 2009. He further stated that he would visit the 
office of the creditor at a future time and seek clarification of the debt. Applicant’s credit 
reports of January 2011, January 2012, and November 2012 list the debt as in 
collection status and unpaid. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 4; Ex. 5; and Ex. 6.) 
 
 In his March 2012 response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that he 
was contemplating bankruptcy. In a statement attached to his response to the SOR, he 
stated he would seek bankruptcy protection if the short sale of his condominium is not 
completed. At his hearing, he confirmed that he was still considering filing for 
bankruptcy. (Ex. A; Ex. 2; Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 Applicant’s current annual salary is $65,000. He acknowledged that if he pays 
$500 to $600 a month to the creditor on his two home equity debts, he would not be in 
position to agree to a payment plan with the IRS on his federal tax delinquencies. (Tr. 
48-49.) 
 
 Applicant is seeking to enhance his income by working as a bartender. He 
provided letters of reference from individuals with whom he worked overseas and after 
his return to the United States. The individuals praised Applicant’s technical skills and 
work ethic. Applicant has not had financial credit counseling. (Ex. 3; Ex. A; Ex. D; Ex. E; 
Ex.F; Tr. 50-51.)   
 
                                                 Policies   
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
5 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying. Under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may 
raise security concerns. Additionally, under AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual federal, 
state or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same” raises 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. He failed to file federal income tax returns for tax years 
2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, and 2010. He also failed to file state income tax returns for his 
state of residence in 2005, 2006, and 2007. He also failed to file a state income tax 
return when he resided in State B for four months in 2010. This evidence is sufficient to 
raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties and inattention to his financial 
responsibilities over a period of several years. His income declined in 2006 when the 
real estate market underwent a downturn. In 2007, he began work for a government 
contractor overseas, with an estimated annual salary of $120,000. Despite his higher 
income, Applicant did not file his federal income tax returns for 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 
and 2010. He also did not file his state income tax returns for 2005, 2006, 2007, and 
part of 2010. Applicant’s federal and state tax returns for those years remained unfiled 
as of the date of his hearing in December 2012. While Applicant suffered a decline in 
income in 2006 and 2007 that was beyond his control, he did not act responsibly under 
the circumstances. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 While he was employed as a real estate agent, Applicant purchased a 
condominium apartment. Applicant became delinquent in paying his first mortgage on 
the property and two home equity loans attached to the property. While Applicant, to his 
credit, attempted to resolve his delinquencies through a short sale of the condominium, 
it was unclear at the time of his hearing that the short sale would be completed. 
Because of this uncertainty, Applicant was also contemplating filing for bankruptcy. He 
acknowledged that he lacked sufficient resources from his current annual salary of 
$65,000 to pay the creditor holding his two delinquent home equity loans and to commit 
to a plan with the IRS to pay his delinquent federal income taxes.   
 
 Applicant’s unresolved federal and state income tax debts total approximately 
$83,000. Additionally, if the short sale of his condominium occurs, Applicant will owe an 
additional $42,000 to the creditor holding his delinquent home equity loans. The record 
reflects that Applicant lacks the financial resources at the present to resolve these 
delinquencies, and at the time of his hearing, he had no definite plans in place to satisfy 
them. Applicant’s financial situation reflects multiple unresolved debts which remain 
unsatisfied and which have occurred under circumstances that are likely to recur.    
 
Applicant’s financial picture was also clouded by his continuing assertions that he 
planned to seek protection from his creditors by declaring bankruptcy. While bankruptcy 
is a legitimate legal tool in the resolution of debt, it does not erase concerns about an 
individual’s good-faith efforts to satisfy his creditors and demonstrate current and future 
financial stability.  
 
 DOHA’s Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
“good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim 
the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition.] 
 
(ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. April 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-
9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 For many years, Applicant was inattentive to his financial responsibilities. He 
failed to address his delinquent debts and to demonstrate that he had made good-faith 
efforts to satisfy them. Moreover, Applicant has not had financial counseling, and there 
is no evidence that his financial situation is under control.  I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply in mitigation in Applicant’s case. 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 37 
years. As a real estate agent and as the employee of a government contractor, he has, 
at various times, earned a high income. His financial problems began several years ago 
when there was a downturn in the real estate market. However, Applicant has failed to 
take a comprehensive interest in resolving his tax and real property obligations. His 
current financial situation remains uncertain and unresolved. At his hearing, he stated 
that his federal tax returns for 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, and 2010 had not yet been filed. 
He stated that he would file his federal and state returns and satisfy other delinquent 
debts in the future. His failure to act in good faith to carry out his financial obligations 
continues to raise security concerns about his judgment and reliability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
delinquencies.  
                                                   Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.i.:            Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                              Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
