 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08606 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 23, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns that arose out of his three alcohol-
related convictions and related questionable judgment during the period of 2006 through 
January 2011. He has matured and no longer consumes alcohol to the point of 
impairment. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2012, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines G and E. The SOR 
further informed Applicant that based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 25, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 3, 2012. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
 
2 
 
December 3, 2012, scheduling the hearing for January 8, 2013. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through E, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called seven 
witnesses. The record was left open for additional exhibits and on January 14, 2013, 
Applicant presented a 12-page exhibit, marked AE F. The Government had no 
objections and AE F was admitted into the record. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on January 16, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 2.a, with 
qualifications. (Answer.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old government contractor. He has been employed at a 
military installation for the past eight years, with various contracting entities. He worked 
his way up from an entry-level position on base to a more senior role. Applicant is a high 
school graduate and has never been married. He resides with his four-year-old 
daughter, his girlfriend, and his girlfriend’s minor child. (GE 1; Tr. 36-41.) 
 
 On December 2, 2006, Applicant was charged with Disorderly Conduct: Alcohol 
and Obstruction of Public Officer. Applicant was a passenger in a vehicle that was 
stopped by a police officer after leaving a bar. The vehicle was stopped near Applicant’s 
residence and Applicant requested he be permitted to leave. The officer would not let 
Applicant go home, but instead, arrested Applicant for Disorderly Conduct after 
Applicant questioned his authority to detain him. Applicant pled guilty to this charge and 
was sentenced to two years of probation. Applicant was 21 years old at the time of this 
offense. Applicant admits that his judgment at the time was impaired. (GE 1; GE 4; Tr. 
45-46.) 
 
 On October 8, 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the 
Influence (DUI). Prior to his arrest, Applicant consumed six-to-eight beers at a friend’s 
home, but felt he could drive himself home. On his way home, he was stopped by a 
police officer for a dim taillight. The officer detected alcohol on his breath and Applicant 
was arrested. Applicant testified that his blood alcohol content was between .12 and 
.13, which was beyond his state’s legal limit. He pled guilty and was sentenced to serve 
three days in jail, a fine of $1,955, and placed on probation for five years. Applicant is 
still on probation for this offense. (Answer; GE 1; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; Tr. 46-49.) 
 
 On January 21, 2011, Applicant was charged with Disorderly Conduct: Drunk, 
While Serving a five-year Court ordered DUI probation since October 2010. Applicant 
had been drinking at a sports bar and was intoxicated. He left the sports bar to walk 
across the street to a restaurant so that he could eat while he waited for a sober driver 
to pick him up. A police officer, who knew him from his previous DUI, saw he was 
intoxicated and arrested him for Public Intoxication. Applicant pled guilty and was 
sentenced to a fine of $645. (GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 50; Tr. 50-51.) 
 
3 
 
 Applicant was also required to attend a three-month traffic-and-alcohol-
awareness class as a result of his alcohol-related offenses. He presented a certificate of 
completion of the class dated April 4, 2011. Applicant testified that while taking the 
class, he grew to understand the seriousness of operating a motor vehicle while 
intoxicated. (AE F; Tr. 25, 48, 64.) 
 
 Applicant testified that his October 2010 DUI impressed upon him that he should 
not drink and drive, but that it was not until he was arrested in January 2011 that he was 
cognizant of the lapses in judgment he makes while intoxicated. He admitted that his 
actions were “stupid.” Since that date, he has not consumed alcohol to the point of 
intoxication. He still consumes alcohol, usually with his father who also has a security 
clearance, but does so infrequently and always in moderation. He limits his alcohol 
intake to a maximum of three beers (his drink of choice) over a seven-hour period. He 
does not consume any other type of alcohol. He now only consumes beer at family 
gatherings and never drives after consuming any alcohol. He is no longer friends with 
his drinking buddies and does not go out and party. He testified, “There is no more 
partying.  All those days are behind me . . . I choose not to do that anymore because 
that's not who I am.  That's not who I've become.”  He has taken up new hobbies such 
as golf and racing. His focus is on providing a good life for his daughter, girlfriend, and 
girlfriend’s daughter. Applicant and his girlfriend do not customarily have alcohol at their 
home, unless they host a family event. Applicant’s girlfriend testified that Applicant did 
not consume any alcohol on New Year’s Eve, as they were at home. (Tr. 32-35, 50-58.) 
 
 Applicant’s girlfriend, mother, father, facility security officer, supervisor, and co-
workers spoke at the hearing on Applicant’s behalf. Additionally, Applicant presented 
four letters of support. Each confirmed that Applicant has matured significantly over the 
past two years. His girlfriend, parents, and co-workers (who Applicant sees socially) 
testified that Applicant’s use of alcohol has significantly reduced since his alcohol-
related incidents. He has taken responsibility for his past mistakes and now drinks 
responsibly. His facility security officer testified, “I think that you have learned from your 
mistakes, [Applicant].  I don't see you as somebody who has an alcohol problem.  I think 
that you've learned what alcohol can do and where it takes you.” His facility security 
officer testified that Applicant voluntarily self-reported the two incidents that occurred 
while employed with his current employer and that she has counseled him. None of his 
witnesses felt that Applicant had a problem with alcohol or reported seeing Applicant 
intoxicated since his January 2011 incident. His co-workers and supervisor indicated 
that Applicant is a good employee and none believe Applicant is a security risk. He also 
presented a letter of appreciation and copies of certificates he has earned to show he is 
a good employee. (AE A; AE B; AE C; AE D; AE E; AE F; Tr. 23-30, 60-89.) 
 
 On January 11, 2013, Applicant attended an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting to 
further learn about the dangers of alcohol. He plans to attend future meeting (AE F.)  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
Applicant had three alcohol-related incidents away from work, including two 
Disorderly Conduct convictions and one DUI. These convictions resulted from his 
decision to engage in binge drinking that impaired his judgment. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) 
are disqualifying. 
 
One Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 is potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol related incident occurred in January 2011. It has been 
two years since he had any alcohol-related problems. During the past two years, he 
successfully completed a court ordered three-month traffic-and-alcohol-awareness 
class. He also is going beyond the court mandate and seeking further information on 
alcohol through Alcoholics Anonymous. In addition, he has changed his drinking 
pattern. He limits himself to consuming alcohol in moderation with his family in a home 
setting. He no longer drives after consuming alcohol. He no longer drinks to the point of 
intoxication. He has changed his associations. He now focuses on spending time with 
his young child, girlfriend, and girlfriend’s daughter. He has developed new hobbies to 
fill his time. He no longer “parties.” These changes are not the result of his continued 
probation, but instead reflect the efforts of a man who has matured past his youthful 
 
6 
 
indiscretion and wants to be a productive member of society. Applicant’s past problems 
with alcohol are unlikely to recur given the new, positive influences and changes in his 
life. AG ¶ 23(a) is mitigating. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant admits he used questionable judgment when intoxicated. His 
questionable judgment led to three criminal convictions. AG¶ 16(c) is disqualifying. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 AG ¶ 17(c) applies. As discussed above, Applicant has matured and modified his 
drinking. Future criminal incidents are unlikely to recur given his commitment to drinking 
in moderation and his focus on his family. His past alcohol-related incidents of 
questionable judgment do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
7 
 
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) also applies. Applicant has completed the three-month traffic-and-
alcohol-awareness class. He has changed his drinking pattern, no longer associates 
with his friends that drink heavily, and has found new hobbies to fill his time. Future 
alcohol-related incidents of poor judgment are unlikely to recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E and D in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has acknowledged the seriousness of his prior alcohol-related incidents 
and related poor judgment. Since his last incident in January 2011, Applicant has 
matured significantly. He is now a responsible father, son, boyfriend, and employee, as 
attested to by those who know him best. He has made significant behavioral changes. 
He no longer associates with any heavy drinkers, he no longer goes to bars, and he will 
not drive with any alcohol in his system. He limits his alcohol consumption significantly 
and has not consumed alcohol to the level of intoxication since his January 2011 arrest. 
These behavioral changes were motivated by his love for his child, girlfriend, and by his 
growing dedication to his job. The likelihood of a recurrence is low. I am sufficiently 
persuaded that he will not engage in future binge drinking and seek rehabilitative 
assistance should he be unable to manage his consumption of alcohol. The whole-
person concept is found for the Applicant.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
8 
 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Alcohol Consumption and Personal Conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
