1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-06104
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ernest Mitchell Martzen, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.          
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on May 18, 2010. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 21, 2012, detailing security concerns
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for
Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
AE L is a letter dated January 10, 2013 from the Drug Enforcement Agency (1 Page); AE M is a copy of the1
court record from State A (7 pages); AE N is a copy of the first page of Applicant’s tax returns for the years
2000-2003 (4 pages); AE O is a copy of Applicant’s 2002 W -2 (1 page); and AE P is a copy of a lease in State
B in 2002 (6 pages).
AE Q is an affidavit signed by Applicant, and  AE R is an affidavit signed by Ms. A, Applicant’s close female2
and roommate.
2
Applicant received the SOR, and he answered it on August 7, 2012. Applicant
retained counsel and requested a hearing before an administrative judge with the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), which DOHA received on August 13,
2012. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 4, 2012, and I received
the case assignment on October 15, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on
October 26, 2012, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 15, 2012.
The Government offered exhibits (GE) marked as GE 1 through GE 8, which were
received and admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and one witness
testified. He submitted exhibits (AE) marked as AE A through AE G and AE K, which
were received and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing
transcript (Tr.) on November 27, 2012. At the request of Applicant and his counsel, I
held the record open until December 14, 2012, for Applicant to submit additional
matters. Through counsel, Applicant timely requested additional time to submit the
further documentation. On December 18, 2012, I issued an order, granting Applicant
until January 15, 2013 to submit additional information. Applicant timely submitted a
motion to consider his submissions. The Government responded to the motion and did
not object to the submission of AE L - AE P, which were received and admitted.  The1
Government objected to the admission AE Q and AE R.  The record closed on January2
15, 2013.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Notice
  
Applicant received the notice of the date, time, and place of his hearing on
November 7, 2012, less than 15 days before the hearing. At the hearing, I advised
Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to receive the notice 15 days before
the hearing. Through his counsel, Applicant affirmatively waived his right to the 15-day
notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. (Tr. 9)
Evidentiary ruling
Applicant offered ten documents tabbed as 1 to 10. The documents were marked
as AE A through AE J. After a review of all documents and discussion of objections to
some of the documents, AE A through AE G were admitted as evidence. AE H and AE I
were admitted for administrative notice only. AE J was a motion to hold the record open,
not a substantive evidentiary exhibit. At the close of the hearing, Applicant’s counsel
submitted AE K as evidence in support of its motion to hold the record open.
AE I.3
AE H.4
3
The Government objects to the admission of the two affidavits (AE Q and AE R)
on the grounds the Government did not have an opportunity to cross-examine the
affiants on the information contained in their affidavits. Department counsel extensively
cross-examined Applicant at the hearing concerning his receipt of the court documents
in question and his residency in 2002. This objection is overruled. The information
contained in the second affidavit supports information contained in AE P. The objection
to this document is overruled, and the document will be assigned weight as determined
appropriate.
Post-hearing, Applicant’s counsel submitted a copy of State A’s service of
process rule and a case discussing State A’s service of process for a defendant in a
civil action who resides in another state. Applicant, in his motion for admission of these
documents, argues that if he is the true defendant, then the summons and court papers
should have been served under this rule. These documents have been marked as
Hearing Exhibit 2. The Government objects to these documents, arguing that the
documents misstate the law of State A on service of process because Applicant was a
resident of State A and properly served the summons and court papers under State A’s
service of process rules for residents of State A. Applicant’s submission is not a
misstatement of the law. These documents present State A’s rules and law on service
of process on a nonresident defendant, which Applicant argues he is, if he is the proper
defendant. Hearing Exhibit 2 is accepted. The Government also submitted additional
information concerning State A’s service of process rules for state residents, which is
marked as Hearing Exhibit 3. Applicant’s motion to consider additional documents is
granted.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts relating to Afghanistan. The request and the brief outlining the
Government’s position on the security risks associated with Afghanistan were not
admitted into evidence, but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit 1. The facts
administratively noticed will be limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not
subject to reasonable dispute, and are set out in the Findings of Fact below. 
I take administrative notice of the following general facts related to the financial
issues in this case. Under the laws of State A, Art. 2 §211(b), “A money judgment is
presumed to be paid and satisfied after the expiration of twenty years from the time
when the party recovering it was first entitled to enforce it . . . ”  15 USCS § 1681c (a)3
discusses information which is to be excluded from consumer reports. More specifically,
15 USCS § 1681c(a)(2) excludes “Civil suits, civil judgments, and records of arrest that,
from date of entry, antedate the report by more than seven years or until the governing
statue of limitations has expired, whichever is the longer period.”  State A, Art. 3, § 3084
HE 3.5
HE 2.6
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient7
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
4
provides the rules for personal service of a summons upon a resident within the state by
delivery to the person to be served (§ 308.1.) or by delivering the summons to a person
of suitable age and discretion at the usual place of abode or business and by either
mailing the summons by first class mail to the named defendant last known residence or
usual place of business without indicating on the outside that the mailing was from an
attorney and marking the envelop “personal and confidential” (§ 308.2.). Section 308.2
required the two mailings to be done within 20 days of each other and for proof of
service to be filed within 10 days.  State A, Art. 3, § 313 provides for service of process5
on an out-of-state resident.  In particular, this section of the civil practice rules requires
that service be perfected in the same manner as service must be perfected within the
state. The person serving a summons must be authorized in the state where a
defendant resides to serve process. In the case submitted by Applicant’s counsel, the
court in State A noted that numerous authorities hold that personal delivery of a
summons to the wrong person does not constitute valid personal service even though
the summons shortly comes into the possession of the party to be served.  6
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a -
1.c of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied
the factual allegations in ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b of the SOR.  He also provided additional7
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings
of fact.  
Applicant, who is 55 years old, works as a linguist and cultural advisor for a
Department of Defense contractor. He began his current employment in March 2010
and served as a linguist and cultural advisor in Afghanistan from April 2010 until
December 2010. His employer hired him as a Category I interpreter, meaning he had no
access to classified information. He previously worked in Afghanistan from August 2005
until July 2006 as a Category II interpreter, meaning he was an American citizen with an
interim clearance who could do classified work. During this employment, Applicant
worked with American soldiers in the spring offensive. A senior intelligence officer and a
brigade communications officer wrote letters of recommendation, praising Applicant’s
GE 1; AE A; AE D; AE E; Tr. 56-59.8
GE 1; Tr. 50-54.9
Tr. 40-41, 82-86.10
5
skills as a linguist and liaison with the Afghan National Security Forces. They stated that
Applicant has an outstanding attitude and is highly motivated to accomplish the
brigade’s mission. Applicant speaks Farsi, Dari, Pashto, and English.8
Foreign Influence
Applicant was born and raised in Afghanistan. His father had three wives.
Applicant, his siblings, his stepsiblings, and his father’s wives all lived together when he
grew up. Applicant’s three brothers live in Afghanistan. He has two stepbrothers, who
live in Afghanistan; one stepbrother, who is a citizen and resident of Canada; and one
stepsister, who is a citizen and resident of the United Kingdom. He has five sisters-in-
law, who live in Afghanistan. His father, mother, two stepmothers, one brother, one
sister, and one stepsister are deceased.  9
In 1977, the Taraki communist government began ruling Afghanistan. Life in
Afghanistan became more difficult. This government killed an uncle. In 1981, Russia
invaded Afghanistan, and life became much harder. The Russians arrested and
interrogated one brother, uncles, and cousins, keeping them in jail for several months.
The Russians killed an uncle and one cousin. In 1981, his immediate family members
fled Afghanistan. During this time, Applicant worked at a family-owned motel, which
eventually shut down. A 70-year-old Afghan man watched the building for him and his
family. The Russians came looking for Applicant two or three times, but he was not at
the building. On their last visit, the Russians told the 70-year-old man that if Applicant
was not at the building when they returned, they would kill the old man. Applicant was
not at the building when the Russians returned, and they killed the 70-year-old man.
After this incident, Applicant fled Afghanistan and came to the United States. His
siblings, who left Afghanistan during this time, later returned to live in Afghanistan.10
Applicant arrived in the United States without a valid visa or proper immigration
status. He applied for political asylum. Initially, the United States Immigration and
Nationalization Services (INS), now called the United States Citizenship and
Immigration Services (CIS), placed Applicant in detention. After 70 days, Applicant was
allowed to work while his status was pending. The INS conducted a hearing on his
asylum request in 1984. INS denied his request, and in 1985, INS ordered him
deported. Along with many other immigrants ordered deported, Applicant was flown to
several countries around the world, but was not accepted by any country. He returned
to the United States, where he was released on parole and allowed to work. Under a
program instituted by President Reagan, Applicant was granted amnesty, because he
had been a resident of the United States since 1981, and was given his green card. He
became a U.S. citizen in June 1996. He lived in State A until 1998, when he moved to
GE 1; Tr. 41-48. 11
GE 1; Tr. 54-56.12
AE K ; AE L; Tr. 72-75, 77.13
6
State B, where he now lives. Applicant is not married, but he lives with Ms. A, a close
female friend, who is a citizen and resident of the United States. He does not have any
children.11
Applicant does not know the addresses for his stepbrother in Canada and his
stepsister in the United Kingdom. He has not had any contact with his stepbrother in
Canada for several years. Likewise, he has not had contact with two of his brothers
since 2006 or earlier. He talks with one stepbrother every few years. One of his two
stepbrothers called him in 2006 and asked for $500. Applicant refused to send him the
money, and this stepbrother stopped talking with him. He does have telephone contact
with his youngest brother around various holidays. Applicant does not talk with his
sisters-in-law. Should he speak by telephone to any of his brothers, he does not speak
to his sisters-in-law, as is the custom in his family. He will ask about the family, but he
does not make a specific inquiry about his sisters-in-law, as such an inquiry is not
acceptable in his family. Applicant’s family was not aware that he was in Afghanistan in
2010. He did call his youngest brother when his work site was attacked, and the attack
was on the news. Before his first trip to Afghanistan in 2005, Applicant called his
youngest brother and asked if he would be harmed by his working as an interpreter. His
brother advised him that no one bothers their family. Applicant last visited Afghanistan
in 2003 without being sponsored by his employer. He did see his family members on
this trip. His youngest brother is aware that he traveled to Afghanistan to work for the
U.S. Army.  12
In 2005 and 2010, Applicant worked as a cultural advisor and interpreter. His
duties involved work on U.S. contracts, including determining which Afghan nationals
would be awarded contracts. As is the custom in Afghanistan, Afghans seeking to get
the contract work offered him bribes, as much as $100,000. He did not accept the
bribes. Money would be left as a gift. He took this money to his commander. He
reported these problems and the lack of honesty of these individuals to his superiors.
Applicant also performed confidential work for the United States Drug Enforcement
Agency, which the Agency declined to confirm or deny.13
The division executive officer and senior medical person for his unit testified on
behalf of Applicant. He worked with Applicant beginning in the summer of 2005.
Because Applicant was a Category II interpreter, Applicant was exposed to classified
information. Applicant never compromised the classified information. The witness stated
that Applicant had great skills as an interpreter and cultural advisor because they
worked in the province where Applicant was raised. Applicant’s language skills were
important strategically to the mission and played an important role in the interrogation of
detainees during the spring offensive. Not only did Applicant speak three languages and
AE B; Tr. 104-120.14
GE 5 - GE 8; AE F; Tr. 64-72.15
7
a regional dialect, he read the local newspapers and provided information to the Army
about what was being written in the papers. The witness is aware that Applicant had
one brother in Afghanistan. He never met Applicant’s brother. The witness also verified
that twice contractors gave Applicant money, which Applicant brought to him.
Eventually, the money was returned to the Army finance department at the instruction of
the legal department. The witness also provided a written statement. He recommended
Applicant for a security clearance.14
I take administrative notice of the following adjudicative facts. Afghanistan is an
Islamic Republic and emerging democracy. With the support of the U.S. and other
nations, its new government endeavors to build a new system of government and to
rebuild the country’s infrastructure. Its Army and police force are well trained. It
continues to face significant challenges from the insurgency and terrorist organizations
supported by the ousted Taliban and Al Qa’ida. The Afghan government is not
complacent about the terrorist threat or the insurgency; rather it actively seeks to
eliminate both with the assistance of the U.S. and NATO. The new government is
working to reverse a long legacy of serious human rights abuses, but serious problems
remain. Afghanistan is now an active member of the international community, has
signed a “Good Neighbor” declaration with six nations bordering it, and promotes
regional cooperation. The U.S. supports the emergence of a broad-based government
in Afghanistan. Sometime ago, the leaders of both countries concluded a strategic
partnership agreement committing to a long-term relationship between both countries.
Despite its differences with the U.S., Afghanistan continues to seek U.S. support as it
moves towards democracy and stability. Afghanistan is not an active collector of
intelligence information.
Financial
With two exceptions, the credit reports of record reflect that Applicant pays his
bills. The SOR alleges that Applicant owes two debts, totaling $13,476. SOR ¶ 2.a
concerns a $904 medical bill. Applicant injured his arm while driving a truck in 2007. He
received medical treatment at a clinic for this injury. He understood from his employer’s
representative that his medical treatment costs would be paid under its workers’
compensation insurance. Applicant recently hired an attorney to verify that this bill was
covered by workers’ compensation. The attorney requested a determination on whether
payment had been made or should be made and the appropriate notification to the
credit reporting companies. If insurance does not pay the bill, Applicant stated that he
would pay it. The February 2012 and the June 2012 credit reports show that Applicant
disputed this debt with the credit reporting agencies.15
The two October 2005 credit reports show that an action for judgment against
Applicant in the amount of $12,572 was filed in September 2002 by the creditor in SOR
Applicant, through his counsel, provided a list of cases showing that judgments related to deceptive practices16
under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act had been entered against the law offices which filed the case
against Applicant. This information has limited relevance to the issues in this case. Applicant’s counsel
submitted a list of cases involving judgments against the credit collection company’s attorney for deceptive
practices. Given the minimal information contained in this document and the lack of a direct connection to the
judgment case with Applicant’s name, this document has little probative value in this case. AE G. 
GE 1; GE 2 - GE 5; Tr. 102-103. 17
Tr. 61-63, 88-98.18
AE M.19
8
allegation 2.b, which is a collection company for the original creditor.  A more detailed16
web document indicates a filing date of April 25, 2002 and a disposition date of June 2,
2007, without further explanation. The plaintiff is the collection agency in SOR ¶ 2.b,
and the defendant is identified as an individual with the same first and last name as
Applicant and with the notation “aka” showing Applicant’s first name, a middle name
(which is American, not Afghani), and Applicant’s last name. Neither the first or second
page of this document show a court date or an amount of judgment. The 2005 credit
reports show disposition as unknown. Applicant provided a copy of his passport,
commercial driver’s license, Social Security card, and U.S. passport card. Each of these
documents contain a first name and last name for Applicant. No middle name is listed.
On his SF 86, Applicant entered a first and last name and “NMN” for a middle name. He
denied having a middle name, and specifically, the middle name listed in the court
document. His first and last name are very common Afghan names, like “John Smith” is
in the United States.17
When he learned about the judgment, Applicant called the court and credit
reporting companies. He did not obtain a copy of the court record. He did deny receiving
any information from a creditor about this debt or the judgment. Applicant is not aware
of court procedures and did not receive any notice of a hearing. Because he called the
credit reporting agencies and the judgment is not listed on any recent credit reports, he
assumed that the debt had been resolved.18
Post-hearing, at my request, Applicant, through counsel, submitted
documentation from the court about this judgment. The documentation reflects that the
credit collection company, as the plaintiff, filed a lawsuit on April 9, 2002 against an
individual, the defendant, with the same name as Applicant. In addition, the defendant in
the lawsuit was listed with an “aka” name which included a middle name. The court
issued a summons, which states that its venue is based on the fact the named
defendant resides in County 1 of State A.19
In a sworn Affidavit of Facts for judgment, the credit collection company averred
that it delivered a demand for payment to the defendant named in the lawsuit after
receiving assignment of the debt from the original creditor. This sworn statement did not
give an address, showing where it delivered the demand for payment or the date of
AE M, p. 3-4.20
AE M, p. 6-7.21
AE M - AE R.22
9
delivery, although the signed statement avers that the defendant received, accepted
and retained the letter without objection. A copy of the letter and documentation
showing that the defendant actually received the letter is not attached to the affidavit.20
The court documents contain an affidavit of service, showing that a process
server delivered the court papers to an individual named in the court papers on April 22,
2002 at an address in State A. In an affidavit in support of a default judgment based on
the named defendant’s failure to answer the complaint, an associate attorney, in the
office of the credit collection company’s attorney, stated a copy of the summons and
verified complaint was mailed by first class postage through the U.S. Postal Service to
the named defendant (with the “aka” name) at the named defendant’s last known
address on May 7, 2002, and that the papers had not been returned by the Postal
Service. The affidavit appears to be in compliance with State A’s rules of procedure for
requesting a default judgment. The court entered a judgment by default on September
27, 2002.21
Applicant provided additional documentation to establish his residency in State B
at the time this lawsuit was filed. Applicant provided a copy of the first page of his 2000,
2001, 2002, and 2003 federal tax returns and his 2002 W-2, which show his address in
State B. He also provided a copy of a lease signed by Ms. A for this address. He is
listed as a resident of the apartment on the lease. Ms. A, in signed, sworn statement,
advised that Applicant has lived with her continuously since 1998 in State B, except
when he took trips, such as to Afghanistan for the U.S. Army. She also stated that he
lived continuously with her in 2002. Applicant submitted a signed and sworn statement,
which advises that he has never been known with a middle name since arriving in the
United States, that he was not in State A or the residence identified in the lawsuit in
April 2002, and that he was not a resident of the county in which the lawsuit was filed in
April 2002. The October 5, 2005 credit report listed three addresses for Applicant in
State B, including the addresses on his post-hearing documents, and two addresses in
State A, including the address on the court papers. The dates of these addresses are
not shown on this credit report. The October 12, 2005 credit report reported two
addresses for Applicant in State A as of January 1999 and February 2000, which are
not the addresses in the court papers, and four addresses for Applicant in State B,
beginning February 2000, which correlate to the addresses on Applicant’s tax returns,
W-2 statement, and the lease agreement.22
The two 2005 credit reports list an account with the original creditor with a “pays
as agrees” status and a notation that the consumer requested the account to be closed.
The account number listed on these credit reports is different from the account number
listed in the court papers by the credit collection company. These credit reports also list
GE 4, p. 6, 9; GE 5, p. 4, 6.23
10
another account with another agent for the same original creditor with a zero balance.
However, the account had been transferred in 1999, the account numbers are different,
and the account has a zero balance.23
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
11
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. I
have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.
Ms. A, Applicant’s close female friend, is a citizen and resident of the United
States. His father, mother, two stepmothers, one brother, one sister, and one stepsister
are deceased. One stepbrother is a resident and citizen of Canada, and his other
stepsister is a resident and citizen of the United Kingdom. Thus, no security concern is
raised by these family members. Applicant has three brothers, two stepbrothers, and
five sisters-in-law who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Of his three brothers,
Applicant talks by telephone with his youngest brother around the holidays. He last
spoke to one brother in 2006 and lost connection with another brother because this
brother’s wife did not respect and get along with Applicant’s mother. In 2006, one
stepbrother asked Applicant for $500, and Applicant refused to give him the money,
Because of his refusal, the stepbrother stopped speaking to him. Applicant speaks to
12
his other stepbrother every few years. Applicant does not speak or communicate with
his five sisters-in-law. When he talks to his brothers, he does not talk to their wives. He
will ask about the family during their conversation, but he does not ask specifically about
any of his sisters-in-law, which is his family custom. Before Applicant traveled to
Afghanistan in 2005, Applicant called one brother to ask if he or the family would be hurt
if Applicant came to Afghanistan as an interpreter. His brother advised that no one
would bother the family because of Applicant. His family relationships are not per se a
reason to deny Applicant a security clearance, but his contact with his brothers must be
considered in deciding whether to grant Applicant a clearance. The Government must
establish that this family relationship creates a risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion by terrorists or would create a potential conflict of
interest between his obligations to protect sensitive information and his desire to help
his family member who may be threatened by terrorists. 
In determining if such a risk exists, I must look at Applicant’s relationship and
contacts with his brothers and stepbrothers as well as the activities of the government of
Afghanistan and terrorist organizations within this country. The risk that an applicant
could be targeted for manipulation or induced into compromising classified information
is real, not theoretical. Applicant’s relationships and contacts with his brothers in
Afghanistan raise a heightened risk of security concern because the terrorist threats to
safety and security are of great concern. The evidence of record fails to show that the
Afghanistan government engages in espionage activities in the United States or that it
targets U.S. citizens in the United States or Afghanistan by exploiting, manipulating,
pressuring, or coercing them to obtain protected or classified information. Thus, the
concern that the Afghanistan government will seek classified information is low.
Under the guideline, the potentially conflicting loyalties must be weighed to
determine if an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S.
interests. In determining if Applicant’s contacts in Afghanistan cause security concerns,
I considered that Afghanistan and the United States have a close relationship, and that
Afghanistan and the United States are working together in the fight against terrorism
and to continue developing democracy in Afghanistan. There is no evidence that the
Afghanistan government targets U.S. citizens for protected information. The human
rights issues in Afghanistan continue to be a concern, and the terrorist organizations,
not the Afghanistan government, target U.S. citizens and interests in Afghanistan. While
none of these considerations by themselves dispose of the issue, they are all factors to
be considered in determining Applicant’s vulnerability to pressure or coercion because
of his family members in Afghanistan. Because of the significant activities of terrorist
organizations in Afghanistan, Applicant’s presence in Afghanistan, and his occasional
contacts with his family raise a heightened risk under AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b).
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
13
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.;
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation; and
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons,
groups, or organizations from a foreign country.
Applicant’s normal relationship with his family members is not a basis to deny
him a security clearance; however, his burden of proof on mitigation requires him to
provide information that shows that his family is not subject to coercion. Applicant has
not had any contact with one brother since 2006, and he lost contact with another
brother because of the strained relationship between this brother’s wife and his mother.
His contact and communications with one stepbrother ended in 2006 after he refused to
give him money. The record has no evidence his family members have held a political
position, work for the Afghan government, or receive benefits from the Afghan
government. His family members have not been targeted by the Afghanistan
government or terrorists. His family members in Afghanistan have not suffered any
abuses from the Afghanistan government or been threatened by terrorists. The person
closest to Applicant is a citizen and resident of the United States. He owns no property
nor does he have financial assets in Afghanistan. When working in Afghanistan,
Applicant has taken specific care not to contact his family members to let them know he
is working in Afghanistan. While performing his duties as cultural advisor, Afghan
nationals, seeking to obtain contracts from the U.S. military, tried to bribe him with
money and gifts in exchange for favorable treatment. He refused the gifts and gave any
money left for him to his commander, which eventually returned the money to the U.S.
Army finance department. Applicant also read the local newspapers and advised the
military about what was being written in the papers about events. Balancing these
factors as well as the efforts by the Afghanistan government in attacking terrorism within
its borders, and the lack of evidence that the Afghanistan government targets U.S.
citizens for protected information against Afghanistan’s human rights record, I find that
Applicant would resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. interests. Likewise, any threats
by terrorist organizations against Applicant’s family in Afghanistan would be resolved in
favor of U.S. interests because Applicant will be unable to help his family members in
Afghanistan if there are any threats to them. His loyalties are to the United States, not
Afghanistan or terrorist organizations. Applicant has mitigated the Government’s
14
security concerns as to his family contacts specified in the SOR under AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b),
8(c), and 8(e).
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
The 2005 credit report shows a large judgment against Applicant, which is not
paid. The more recent credit reports also show one unpaid medical bill. These two
disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;    
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control.; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.     
Applicant denies owing both SOR debts. When he learned about the judgment in
2005, he disputed it with the credit reporting companies because he had no knowledge
15
of the judgment and did not believe it was his. The judgment is not listed on the more
recent credit reports, even though under the law of State A, the creditor had 20 years
from the date of entry of judgment to seek enforcement in court, and under federal
credit reporting laws, the debt can remain on his credit report until 2022. The 2012
credit reports also show that Applicant disputed the $904 debt because he believes
insurance should have paid the debt.
Given that  Applicant pays his bills, credit counseling is not necessary. Applicant
retained legal services to help him resolve the unpaid medical bill because Applicant
believes that worker’s compensation should have paid or did pay the bill. As of the
hearing, his attorney had not received a response to the inquiry letter. Given that his
debts are paid, Applicant’s testimony that he will pay this debt if the debt is verified as
owed by him is credible.  Applicant is in the process of resolving this debt.
Applicant denies any knowledge of the judgment entered against him in 2002.
The court records list a defendant with a first and last name the same as Applicant’s.
This name is as common in Afghanistan as John Smith is in the United States. The
papers also list an “aka” name that included an American, not Afghan, middle name,
which Applicant denies is his. Applicant provided copies of his passport, Social Security
card, commercial driver’s license, and U.S. passport card. None of these documents
have a middle name for Applicant. Likewise, Applicant did not list a middle name on his
e-QIP. The court documents show that the court papers were served in April 2002 on
the named defendant in State A, a person who was a resident of State A. Applicant
provided documents indicating that he lived in State B in 2002 and before. The October
12, 2005 credit report shows Applicant with the same address as the addresses listed
on his tax returns, W-2, and lease. Applicant’s documents provide substantial evidence
that he resided in State B from sometime before February 2000. Based on a review of
all the documentation in the record, Applicant has provided substantial evidence to
show that he was not a resident of or residing in State A. His evidence supports his
denial that he was served with the court papers, that he is not the person name in the
court papers, and that this judgment was against another person in State A with a
similar, but different name. The 2005 credit reports reflect that Applicant had one
account in good standing with this creditor in the past and another closed account with
the creditor with a zero balance. The case detail sheet indicated that there was a
disposition of the judgment in 2007. There is no explanation about the meaning of this
entry, such as the judgment had been paid or vacated by the court. After reviewing all
the evidence of record, I find that Applicant has resolved this debt issue for security
clearance purposes. Applicant has mitigated the financial security concerns under AG
¶¶ 20(c) and 20(e).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
16
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
fled Afghanistan during the Russian invasion and entered the United States without a
visa or passport. Although his asylum request was denied, he legally remained in the
U.S. through an amnesty program. He became a U.S. citizen in 1996. He works in
private industry when not working on behalf of the United States. He served two duty
tours in Afghanistan, working for the U.S. Army as an interpreter. During his first tour, he
served as an interpreter and cultural advisor during the spring offensive in 2005. In
2010, he provided information to the U.S. Army about local activities and views because
he read the local newspapers. Afghan nationals offered him bribes to help them obtain
U.S. work contracts. He refused the bribes and gave any money left as a bribe to his
command. He has put his life in harm’s way for the United States. His refusal to accept
bribes and his decision to give any bribe money left for him to his command reflects an
honest and trustworthy person. His family does not present a security concern as he
limits his interactions with them and remains separate from them when he is working in
Afghanistan. Applicant is loyal to the United States and would make decisions in favor
of the United States should a foreign national try to pressure, coerce, or exploit him
because of his family in Afghanistan.
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to question his responsibility for the
judgment listed on Applicant’s 2005 credit reports. The court papers list a second name
for the named defendant in the case, a name that Applicant has never used and is not
part of his name as verified by his passport, driver’s license, Social Security card, and e-
QIP. His tax returns, W-2, and lease agreement provided substantial evidence to show
As a resident of State B, the provisions of Art. 3, § 313 apply. 24
17
that he was a resident of State B, when the court papers were filed and served on some
person in State A.  The court papers show an account number for the debt which is24
different from the account number for the two accounts Applicant held with the original
creditor. One of these accounts was in good standing and the second account is closed.
Applicant successfully disputed the judgment with the credit reporting agencies. Except
for the judgment and one medical bill, which he is working to resolve, Applicant pays his
bills. He does not live beyond his financial means. His finances do not raise a security
concern.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign influence
and finances under Guidelines B and F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
