Item 5.1
Item 1.2
1
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-08082
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant accrued about $18,855 in delinquent debts over the past four years.
She made no progress toward resolution of any of them, and offered no evidence of an
effective plan to resolve these debts or of changes to prevent continued financial
irresponsibi lity. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based on a review of
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on January 21,
2011.  On July 3, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons1
(SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding2
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Item 3.3
Item 4.4
The Government submitted 13 Items in support of the SOR allegations. 5
Items 5 and 6.6
Items 1, 4, and 9.7
Items 6 and 7.8
2
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant received the SOR on July 17, 2012.  She submitted an undated written3
response, and requested that her case be decided by an administrative judge on the
written record without a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the Government’s4
written case on November 6, 2012. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material
(FORM)  was provided to Applicant, and she was afforded an opportunity to file5
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of
her receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of her copy of the FORM
on November 15, 2012, and returned it to DOHA. She provided no further response to
the FORM within the 30-day period, did not request additional time to respond, and
expressed no objection to my consideration of the evidence submitted by Department
Counsel. I received the case assignment on January 4, 2013.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 65 years old, and has worked for a defense contractor since 1968.
She graduated from high school in 1965, and has no prior military or Federal
Government service. She is married, since 1973, and has one adult son. She has held a
security clearance in connection with her work since at least 2006.  6
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the truth of the factual allegations
set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. The total due on Applicant’s 3 delinquent debts
alleged in the SOR, and supported by entries in the record credit bureau reports, is
$18,855.  Applicant’s admissions, including those made in response to DOHA7
interrogatories,  are incorporated into the following findings of fact.8
Applicant submitted sworn statements concerning her then-delinquent debts to
investigators from the Defense Investigative Service in October 1985 and September
1992. The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) obtained a copy of her credit reports
in July 2004, which reflected nine delinquent accounts and several more that had
Items 11, 12, and 13.9
Items 6, 8, 9, and 10.10
Item 6.11
Item 7.12
3
recently been delinquent for 60 or 90 days. Only one of these debts exceeded $1,000,
and many were less that $100.  9
The $4,636 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a arose from a voluntary repossession on an
account that was opened in March 2011 and became delinquent in August 2011. The
$2,219 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a credit card account that was opened in October
2006 and became delinquent in September 2008. The $12,000 debt alleged in SOR ¶
1.c is actually a $12,273 debt also arising from a repossession. This loan was opened in
January 2007, with a date of last activity in November 2008. As noted by Department
Counsel, Applicant’s post-SOR credit report from November 2012 showed several
additional minor delinquencies.10
Applicant told an interviewer from OPM that she got past due on her delinquent
accounts because her spouse had cancer in 2009 and she was overwhelmed with
medical bills.  Comparison of the dates noted in the preceding paragraph shows that11
each SOR-listed debt was either in delinquent status before 2009 or was an account
opened after that date. 
Applicant submitted a personal financial statement reflecting a net monthly
surplus of $220, but the arithmetic was inaccurate, the estimates were incomplete, and
no payments toward her admitted delinquent debts were included. Applicant submitted
no evidence of financial counseling.12
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of her professional
performance, the level of responsibility her duties entail, or her track record with respect
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. She submitted
no evidence that would demonstrate her good judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or
reliabili ty. I was unable to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person
since she elected to have her case decided without a hearing. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
5
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Department Counsel asserted, and the record evidence established, security
concerns under two Guideline F DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant’s SOR-listed delinquent debts arose over the past five years, and
remain completely unresolved. Her financial problems were not shown to have arisen
from incidents beyond her control. She provided no evidence of available income, or
other assets, from which to satisfy these debts or avoid incurring additional
delinquencies. This evidence raises substantial security concerns under DCs 19(a) and
(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those
concerns. 
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s three SOR-listed delinquent debts arose over the past five years, total
more than $18,800, and continue to date. They are frequent, recent, and arose under
circumstances that involved Applicant’s voluntary choices. She showed no capacity to
6
avoid additional delinquent debt. The ongoing nature of these debts precludes a finding
of unlikely recurrence. Applicant failed to demonstrate that her reliabi li ty,
trustworthiness, and judgment have improved, and failed to resolve any of these debts
even after their security implications became apparent. Her history of delinquent debt
dates back to at least 1985, 1992, and 2004. The evidence does not establish mitigation
under MC 20(a). 
Applicant offered insufficient evidence to support mitigation under MC 20(b). She
blamed her spouse’s cancer for creating unexpected medical expenses, but offered no
evidence to corroborate that claim. Furthermore, the SOR-listed delinquencies either
predate 2009 or involve a loan obligation originating after that date. Finally, her absence
of any effort toward resolution of these debts is not responsible action under the
circumstances. 
Applicant offered no evidence of financial counseling, and did not establish clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control. She provided no
evidence to establish any good-faith effort to repay her overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve her debts, particularly in the absence of evidence of the means to do so. MC
20(c) and 20(d) are therefore inapplicable. 
Applicant admitted owing each of the SOR-listed delinquent debts. The record
credit reports corroborate these allegations. Accordingly, she failed to demonstrate
mitigation under MC 20(e).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an accountable
7
adult, who is responsible for her voluntary choices and conduct that underlie the
security concerns expressed in the SOR. Her financial irresponsibi lity spans many
years, and continues at present. It involves delinquent debts totaling more than
$18,800, toward which she had made no payments by the close of the record. She has
not shown the ability or willingness to fulfill her legal obligations to her creditors. She did
not demonstrate that these debts arose under circumstances that were beyond her
control, or that she initiated any changes to prevent additional financial difficulties. She
offered no evidence of financial counseling, rehabilitation, or responsible conduct in
other areas of her life. The potential for pressure, coercion, and duress remains
undiminished. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s
present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. She did not meet her burden to
mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibi li ty for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
