 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-09108
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
01/31/2013
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant’s financial problems were all the result of the severe economic downturn
in the area in which he resides. A residence he owned has been foreclosed on and there
is apparently no balance owed. He has satisfied all his other delinquent accounts.
Clearance is granted.
On August 29, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  The SOR alleges a security1
concern under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant submitted a response,
dated September 28, 2012, in which he admitted SOR allegations 1.a, 1.d and 1.e, denied
allegations 1.c and 1.b, and requested a hearing.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
The case was assigned to me on December 20, 2012. A notice of hearing was
issued on December 21, 2012, scheduling the hearing for January 8, 2013. The hearing
was conducted as scheduled. The Government submitted seven documentary exhibits that
were marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-7 and admitted into the record without
objection. Applicant testified and submitted 14 documentary exhibits that were marked as
Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1-14 and admitted into the record without objection. The record was
held open to provide Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation in
support of his case. Two documents were timely received, marked as AE 15 and AE 16,
and admitted into the record without objection. Department Counsel’s e-mails indicating
she did not object to Applicant’s post-hearing submissions were marked as Appellate
Exhibits (App. Ex.) I and II, and are included in the record. The transcript was received on
January 16, 2013. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is a 38-year-old man who has been employed in various jobs by a defense
contractor since May 2009. Applicant was self-employed as an architectural designer from
June 1996 until February 2008. However, due to a severe decline in the economy in the
region where Applicant lives and operated his business, he apparently had little to no
income from July 2007 until he found employment in February 2008. That employer was
forced to go out of business in February 2009, and Applicant remained unemployed until
he began working for his current employer. 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1993. He attended college from
September 1993 until June 1998 without receiving a degree. He has been married since
January 2005, and he has two children, ages six and three, from this marriage.
Applicant resided in the same residence from his birth until January 2009.
Documents Applicant provided (GE 5) indicate Applicant obtained a mortgage on the
residence in September 2006 in the amount of $136,000. It appears that Applicant
purchased the family home from his parents shortly after he married. His parents continue
to live with Applicant and his family. Applicant’s mother suffers from Alzheimer’s disease
and is cared for by Applicant’s father. 
In 2007, while his business was still providing him a steady income, Applicant
decided to sell the family home and build a new residence for his family. He placed the
original family home on the market after it was appraised for $170,000. However, almost
immediately thereafter the housing market collapsed and he was unable to either rent or
sell the original residence. The mortgage company even failed to approve several attempts
he made at a short sale of the residence.
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
3
Applicant had already obtained a construction loan and began construction on the
new residence. With his inability to sell the original residence, the loss of income from his
business, and the following loss of the replacement employment he had obtained,
Applicant was financially unable to continue making the mortgage payments on the original
residence. Foreclosure proceedings resulted in the sale of that residence. Applicant
submitted documentation from the mortgage company that reflects the current principal
balance is $0.00. (GE 5) He also submitted information from the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) indicating a 1099-A Acquisition or Abandonment of Secured Property was issued for
tax year 2010, that reflects the mortgage owed on the property was $132,375, and the fair
market value of the property was $72,622. (GE 6)
Due to his loss of income and expenses related to completing construction of the
second residence, Applicant incurred a number of delinquent debts that he discussed
during a personal subject interview conducted on May 17, 2011. He satisfied most of those
debts prior to issuance of the SOR. However, the two judgments listed in SOR
subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c remained outstanding when the SOR was issued. Those
judgments are duplicates of the debts listed in subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e. Applicant has
now satisfied both judgments. (AE 15 and AE 16)
Applicant’s annual income is $52,000. His wife is employed full time and her annual
income is about $32,000. They are current on all debts. Applicant’s references include
supervisors and a co-worker. They attest that Applicant is a valued employee who
performs his duties in an above average manner. He is considered to be honorable,
honest, trustworthy, and hard working.  
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision must be a fair
and impartial decision based upon relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive.
Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against
clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guideline F (financial
considerations) with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case.
  The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of2 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2.6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 Id. at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
4
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden
of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of5
the evidence.”  Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant6
to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
her.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable7
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard9
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access10
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.    11
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (Adjudicative
Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant’s residence was the subject of a foreclosure. Additionally, he had a
number of debts become delinquent, including the two credit card debts listed in the SOR
that resulted in judgments being entered against him. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a):
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19(c): a history of not meeting financial
obligations apply.
5
Applicant was successfully self-employed until a severe economic downturn
destroyed his business and resulted in an extended period of unemployment. He found
replacement employment that ended after only a year because his employer was also
forced to go out of business. Since regaining full-time employment, Applicant has resolved
all his delinquent debts. The mortgage lender issued a document indicating there is no
balance due on the mortgage and a 1099-A to the IRS. Applicant and his wife are both
employed full-time and earning a substantial income. They are current all their living
expenses and debts. 
The following Mitigating Condition (MC) apply: MC 20(a): the behavior . . . occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  MC 20(b): the conditions
that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss
of employment, a business downturn . . .), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances; MC 20(c): . . . there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved
or is under control; and MC 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, the whole-person concept, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant mitigated the financial
considerations security concern. Applicant has overcome the case against him and
satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant a security clearance. Guideline F is decided for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

