 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-08203 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concern. He stopped 
paying on five credit card accounts in 2008 and owes over $47,000 on these delinquent 
accounts. He has repeatedly promised the Government that he would resolve his debts 
and, even though he has been in a position to start repaying his debts for nearly two 
years, he has yet to make a payment towards resolving his debts. Despite having held a 
clearance without issue for over 25 years, Applicant’s financial issues cast doubt as to 
his continued suitability. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 31, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations).1 Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge on September 24, 2012. 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On October 18, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready 
to proceed with a hearing. I was assigned the case on October 31, 2012 and, after 
coordinating with the parties, scheduled the hearing for November 27, 2012.2  At 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and offered two character letters, 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and B. which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on December 3, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old, divorced, with one college-age child. He served 
honorably in the U.S. military from 1979 to 1983. He started working for his current 
employer, a DoD contractor, in 1986 and was first granted a security clearance at that 
point. He is thought of highly by his friends and co-workers. (GE 1; GE 2 at 4; AE A – B; 
Tr. at 24-25)  
 
Applicant’s financial trouble started in approximately November 2007, when his 
former girlfriend was diagnosed with a serious medical condition and became 
unemployed. Applicant financially supported her for the next 18 months. The financial 
strain of maintaining two households became too great and he started falling behind on 
his own bills. He began relying on credit cards and then stopped paying his credit cards 
in about 2008. Currently, he has five delinquent credit card accounts, with a combined 
balance of over $47,000. (Tr. at 20-21, 27-29, 35; GE 2; Answer) 
 
Applicant disclosed his delinquent debts on his recent security clearance 
application, which he submitted in November 2010. (GE 1 at 35-40) He was 
subsequently interviewed in December 2010 and May 2011. During both interviews, 
Applicant promised to resolve his delinquent credit card accounts. As of his last 
interview in May 2011, Applicant had a net monthly remainder of over $1,000, but had 
yet to start repaying his delinquent debts. (GE 2 at 7-11)  
 
In June 2012, Applicant responded to a DOHA financial interrogatory that 
requested an update on his efforts to resolve his five delinquent credit card accounts. 
Applicant disclosed that he had sought the assistance of a consumer credit counseling 
service. The counseling service prepared a debt repayment schedule, but Applicant 
claims he was unable to afford the proposed debt repayment of $1,149 per month. 
Applicant also disclosed in his interrogatory response that his net income had increased 
by over $300 a month since his last interview in May 2011, and that his net monthly 
remainder stood at $1,140. He attributed his inability to repay his delinquent debts to his 
voluntary decision to help his daughter pay for college. A credit counselor advised him 
to reduce his expenses and to speak to a professional about the possibility of filing for 
bankruptcy. (GE 2) 
 
                                                          
2
 The parties received actual notice of the hearing via e-mail on November 5, 2012. However, 
Applicant did not receive the notice of hearing until November 16, 2012, or nine days before the hearing. 
Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement and indicated he was prepared to proceed. (Tr. at 4-5) 
 
3 
 
 
 Shortly before receiving the SOR, Applicant cut his expenses in half by moving 
into the basement apartment of a friend. As of September 2012, he had the disposable 
income to pay the debt repayment schedule proposed by the counseling service. 
However, he has still not made a payment towards the satisfaction of his delinquent 
debts, because he is concerned that an adverse security clearance determination would 
result in losing his job, which would then leave him unable to repay his debts per the 
terms of the counseling service’s repayment schedule. He has not spoken to a 
professional about pursuing bankruptcy because he wants to resolve his debts and 
fears the negative security ramifications of a bankruptcy discharge on his record. He 
has not accrued any additional bad debt and does not have any credit cards. He does 
not have a savings account, but has accumulated about $5,000 to $6,000 in his 
checking account. (Tr. at 21-24, 28-44) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions regarding an applicant’s suitability include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is set forth at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially overextended 
may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of a substantial amount of 
delinquent credit card debt and his unwillingness to repay his debts, when he has had 
the means do so, directly implicates this concern. It also establishes the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 An applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the analysis, 
because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”3 Accordingly, Applicant may mitigate the 
financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions 
listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
                                                          
3
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial situation is partially attributable to his selfless, voluntary 
decision to assist his former girlfriend when she was ill and out of work. However, he 
has not managed his financial situation in a responsible fashion. He stopped paying his 
credit cards in 2008 and, other than the debt repayment schedule that he has never 
made a payment on, he failed to submit any proof of having contacted his creditors to 
resolve his debts. He has repeatedly promised the Government he would resolve these 
debts and, even though his income has steadily increased over the past four years, he 
has not made any payments towards the satisfaction of his debts. Applicant has sought 
financial counseling and reduced his expenses, which are significant mitigating actions 
tending to show that he is starting to put his financial house in order. However, his 
substantial credit card debt is ongoing and unresolved. Applicant reported that, as of 
May 2011, after paying his monthly expenses, he had over a $1,000 a month that he 
could have used to start repaying his debts. Instead, he took on additional financial 
obligations. Accordingly, I find that AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies but is insufficient to 
mitigate the concern at issue. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).4 I have considered all the favorable and extenuating 
factors in this case. Applicant assisted his former girlfriend during her time of need and 
now is helping his daughter to pay for her college education so that she will not be 
saddled with student debt. However admirable such voluntary financial decisions may 
have been, they call into question Applicant’s judgment. Applicant has been on notice 
for quite some time that his delinquent credit card debt is a concern which could result 
in the loss of his clearance. Instead of resolving these longstanding debts, Applicant has 
voluntarily taken on further financial obligations. Applicant does not appear to recognize 
that he is unable to afford his noble gestures and, thus, the likelihood of recurrence of 
further financial problems appears high.  
 
                                                          
4
 The whole-person factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
 
 More troubling is the fact that Applicant has had the financial means to, at a 
minimum, start repaying his overdue creditors but has elected not to out of fear of losing 
his security clearance and, presumably, the job that depends on maintaining a 
clearance. His refusal to resolve his credit card debts out of concern that he may lose 
his job and then be held liable for the very same financial obligations he has refused to 
pay for the past four years speaks directly to the financial considerations concern. An 
individual who is unwilling to meet his financial obligations may similarly fail to discharge 
his security obligations. Although Applicant has held a clearance without issue for over 
25 years, his short sightedness and refusal to meet his financial obligations raises a 
serious concern about his judgment and ability to safeguard classified information. Such 
concern must be resolved in favor of national security.5 Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s continued eligibility and 
suitability for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
5
 AG ¶ 2(b). See also Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“security-
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials”); ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 3 
(App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012) (“Even years of safeguarding national security information may not be sufficient 
to mitigate a history of ongoing, significant delinquent debt”). 
 
