KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: Record does not sustain Judge’s conclusion that the two years that had elapsed since
Applicant’s last reported use of marijuana were sufficient to demonstrate rehabilitation.  The
Judge failed to analyze significant inconsistent statements by Applicant.  Applicant’s claim that
he used marijuana only for analgesic purposes not supported by the record as a whole.  Even if
this explanation were true, one would have to consider Applicant’s prior inconsistent
explanations in evaluating his security worthiness.  Favorable decision reversed.    
CASE NO: 11-00193.a1
DATE: 01/24/2013
DATE: January 24, 2013
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-00193
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Silvia J. Esparza, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 14, 2012, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 28, 2012, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Richard A. Cefola granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse . . .”  
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 25(g): “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance[.]”  
3Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 26(a): “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment[.]”
4Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 26(b): “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as . . . (4) a
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation[.]”   
5Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 16(c): “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports
a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information[.]”  
2
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his
application of the mitigating conditions and whether the Judge’s application of the whole-person
factors was erroneous.  Consistent with the following, we reverse the decision of the Judge.
Facts
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact:  In 1989, at age 18, Applicant began
using marijuana “infrequently and on a recreational basis,” until the early to mid-1990s.  Decision
at 2.  In 2000, he signed a statement to the effect that he had no intention of using marijuana again,
because of its effect on his security clearance and because marijuana use is illegal.  His clearance
was granted in 2001.  In 2003, Applicant used marijuana, in order to alleviate pain from a fractured
toe, as verified by a psychiatrist witness.  
In 2008 through 2010, Applicant used marijuana, again in order to alleviate pain from a
medical condition, as verified by the psychiatrist.  Previously Applicant had stated that his use of
marijuana had been recreational rather than medicinal.  Applicant explained that he had been
embarrassed to share his medical conditions with others.  
In the Analysis, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s conduct raised security concerns under
Guideline H, specifically Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 25(a)1 and 25(g).2  He also concluded that
Applicant had mitigated these concerns, citing to Mitigating Conditions (MC) 26(a)3 and 26(b)(4).4
The Judge stated that Applicant’s last marijuana use was two years in the past and that he had signed
a declaration eschewing future drug involvement.  The Judge stated, “The fact that twelve years ago
he said that he would not smoke marijuana, does not vitiate his current Declaration.”  Id. at 4.  Under
Guideline E, the Judge concluded that DC 16(c)5 applied but that the concern had been mitigated
6Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 17(c): “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment[.]”  
3
under MC 17(c).6  The Judge acknowledged Applicant’s inconsistent statements concerning his
marijuana use, but he concluded that the inconsistencies were minor.  
Discussion 
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  The Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s
decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong
presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913
F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After the Government presents
evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or mitigate those
concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and
whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the
particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light
of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20,
2006).
In deciding whether the Judge’s rulings or conclusions are arbitrary or capricious, the Board
will review the Judge’s decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it
fails to articulate a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection
between the facts found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear
error of judgment; it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the
decision that runs contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed
to a mere difference of opinion.  In deciding whether the Judge’s rulings or conclusions are contrary
to law, the Board will consider whether they are contrary to provisions of Executive Order 10865,
the Directive, or other applicable federal law.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun.
2, 2006).
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s treatment of the Guideline H mitigating
conditions was not supported by the totality of the record evidence.  We find this argument to be
7The SCA inquired if Applicant had used illegal drugs during the previous seven years.  Applicant responded
that he had engaged in occasional recreational use of marijuana from 2003 until the present.  Government Exhibit (GE)
1 at 37.  Later, during his security clearance interview, conducted in October 2010, he stated that he had used marijuana
twice a month between August 2003 until the present.  The interview summary was accompanied by Applicant’s
certification that the interview report was accurate.  GE 2, Interrogatories, at 127.  In addition, one of the interrogatory
questions inquired whether Applicant had ever used drugs, to include cannabis, except as prescribed by a doctor.
Applicant replied that he had used marijuana in 2003 and again from 2008 until 2010, once in a while at social events.
Id. at 120.  Another question inquired about changes in Applicant’s circumstances that might demonstrate a “change of
lifestyle away from your past drug usage.”  In response to this question, Applicant listed his professional success, his
concern for the environment and for the improvement of political and social conditions, and his 2009 marriage.  Id. at
125. The pagination of GE 2 begins at page 119.  There are no other page markings consistently utilized throughout the
document. 
8On cross examination, the psychiatrist admitted that he had relied only on Applicant’s statements to him during
the examination conducted in anticipation of the hearing.  “Q: Did you see any medical reports on any of those?  A: No.
Q: So, you had to take him at his face value?  A: Yes.  So, if it turns out that he didn’t use it for medical reasons . . . he
could have been lying to you.  A: Yes.  And that could throw things off.  Is that correct?  A: Yes.”  Tr. at 54.  This cross
examination undermines the Judge’s finding that the psychiatrist had verified that Applicant had used drugs to alleviate
pain, to the extent that verification would imply consideration of corroborating evidence.   
4
persuasive.  Although the record contains no evidence of any marijuana use by Applicant after 2010,
which was two years prior to the hearing, Department Counsel contends that Applicant’s drug
involvement had been extensive.  The record demonstrates that Applicant had used marijuana over
a 21 year period, which included a period of several years abstinence following his 2000 promise
not to use the drug again.  His resumed use undercuts the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s two
recent years of abstinence are sufficient to demonstrate that his conduct was remote in time or that
he had clearly reformed his conduct.  Department Counsel persuasively argues that the second clause
of MC 26(a) has not been satisfied because Applicant’s multiple instances of  marijuana use while
holding a clearance and after having promised to refrain cast doubt on his current reliability.
Moreover, evidence of Applicant’s prior broken promise significantly undermines the applicability
of 26(b)(4), in that it could lead a reasonable person to question Applicant’s resolve to abide by his
current declaration of intent.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-06480 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 19, 2011), in
which an applicant’s use of marijuana after having stated that he would not do so undermined the
applicant’s case for mitigation.  In the case currently before us, the Judge’s statement that this
evidence does not vitiate Applicant’s current declaration is not accompanied by any analysis or
explanation and provides no reasonable basis to distinguish Applicant’s circumstances from those
in ISCR Case No. 10-06480.   
Department Counsel also cites to evidence of Applicant’s inconsistent statements concerning
the reasons for his drug use.  In his security clearance application (SCA), his clearance interview,
and his answers to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that his use of marijuana had been
recreational.7  However, at the hearing, Applicant’s psychiatrist testified that Applicant had used
marijuana in order to combat pain and that he had previously described the use as recreational to
avoid the embarrassment of having to advise strangers about his medical conditions.8  Applicant also
testified to this effect.  Applicant’s presentation at the hearing is inconsistent with his prior
statements, which significantly undercuts his credibility.  These inconsistent statements could
persuade a reasonable person to believe that Applicant’s presentation at the hearing was a recent
5
fabrication.  The Judge’s conclusory statement that the inconsistencies are minor is not reasonable
on its face and is not accompanied by analysis or explanation.  This paucity of analysis lends force
to Department Counsel’s argument that the Judge appears to have substituted a favorable impression
of Applicant’s demeanor for record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-18324 at 7 (App. Bd.
Mar. 11, 2011).  
For reasons set forth above, the record does not support the Judge’s favorable application
of Guideline E MC 17(c).  Evidence that Applicant had used marijuana over a period of many years
is not consistent with the Judge’s conclusion that the circumstances of Applicant’s drug use were
unusual.  As the evidence in note 7, supra, illustrates, the temptation to use drugs appears to be  an
ongoing feature of Applicant’s social life.  Even if one accepts as true Applicant’s evidence that his
drug use during the past seven years was for analgesic purposes, painful injuries or illnesses are not
unusual, but rather a real possibility for anyone.  More significantly, if, for the sake of argument, one
accepts this evidence as true one must conclude that Applicant has repeatedly lied during the
investigation of his clearance, undercutting his claims of rehabilitation.  The Judge’s treatment of
MC 17(c) is not sustainable on this record.  Moreover, the Judge’s whole-person analysis merely
cites to Applicant’s evidence of performance awards from his job, but it does not otherwise provide
additional analysis supporting the favorable decision.    
  
To sum up, the record contains evidence that Applicant used marijuana with varying degrees
of frequency from 1989 to 2010.  Some of this use occurred after Applicant had promised to avoid
subsequent drug misconduct and while he held a security clearance.  Moreover, the record contains
evidence of inconsistent statements by Applicant that undermine his credibility.  The record as a
whole does not support the Judge’s favorable decision, in light of the Egan standard.  
Order
The Judge’s decision is REVERSED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan            
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                 
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
