 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08789 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant incurred delinquent debt 
after his wife became unable to work because of injuries from a 2007 car accident. He 
has made a good-faith effort to repay his creditors and has established a track record of 
repayment. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive,1 on August 3, 2012, DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. DoD adjudicators could 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to me on October 9, 2012. At the hearing convened on December 6, 2012, I 
admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through G, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted AE H through 
M, which I admitted without objection. The Government’s memorandum regarding the 
post-hearing submission is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. I received 
the transcript (Tr.) on December 14, 2012. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Without objection from the Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion at 
hearing to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 1.e2 and 1.i,3 and to change ¶ 1.h to correct a clerical 
error.4 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant, 50, has been employed by a federal contractor as a field engineer 
since June 2010. Married for 22 years, he is the father of three adult children between 
the ages of 21 and 27. Applicant continues to provide financial support for one daughter 
and her four-year-old child.5   
 
 The amended SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to eight creditors for 
approximately $23,000. Applicant denies the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, 
claiming that he is not responsible for the accounts. He provided documentation 
showing that the three accounts were erroneously reported on his credit report and that 
the issues have been resolved by the respective creditors. He also denies ¶ 1.h, a credit 
card, which he believes is a duplicate of another account. According to Applicant, the 
creditor does not have any record of the alleged account. The credit reports in the 
record show conflicting information being reported by the same agency. Applicant has 
filed at least two disputes with the credit bureau regarding the account.  Both are 
unresolved. Applicant admits the four delinquent debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 
1.j.6 
 
                                                          
2 The account is a duplicate of the account alleged in ¶ 1.f. 
 
3 At the time the SOR was issued, this student loan account was not delinquent. The account remains in 
good standing. See AE C. 
 
4 Tr. 10-12. 
 
5 Tr. 45-47; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. 48-53; 65-69; GE 2, 5; AE G, L. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began when his wife was seriously injured in a car 
accident in 2007. The injury aggravated a pre-existing condition and required significant 
medical intervention. Before the accident, the couple earned a joint income of 
approximately $90,000. Even though Applicant earned sporadic income as an 
independent consultant, they were able to meet all of their financial obligations. After 
her third accident-related surgery in late 2008, Applicant’s wife was out of work for six 
months without pay. She attempted to return to work full-time, but her medical issues 
forced her to reduce her hours to part-time after four months. She worked part-time for 
one month before she qualified for her employer’s short-term disability program in 
December 2009. For the next six months, Applicant’s wife received short-term disability 
at less than half of her base pay. As Applicant’s wife’s income vacillated and the couple 
paid mounting medical bills (Applicant believes he has paid $26,000 in medical bills 
related to his wife’s care), the couple fell behind on their bills as alleged in the SOR. 
They relied on credit cards and on help from family members and friends, borrowing 
almost $4,000 dollars, to meet their financial obligations. When Applicant’s wife began 
to collect long-term disability payments from her employer at her full salary, Applicant’s 
household income returned to its pre-accident rate and the couple began to address the 
delinquent debts.7  
 
 Initially, Applicant consulted a debt-consolidation program, but declined to 
participate, citing the high cost. Instead, he and his wife started working with their 
creditors directly. The couple first focused on rehabilitating the mortgage on their home, 
saving it from foreclosure. Applicant depleted his savings, paying $9,000 to the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) after the agency audited Applicant’s 2009 tax return. Once their 
mortgage returned to current status and they secured a payment plan with the IRS, the 
couple began addressing their other delinquent debts by entering into payment plans 
with their creditors. In June 2010, Applicant started his current job, earning $85,000. In 
doing so, he began receiving a steady paycheck and became a geographical bachelor 
as the new job is 200 miles from his home. Since then, Applicant has supported two 
households.8  
   
 In September 2012, Applicant’s wife’s employer terminated her long-term 
disability payments after the employer’s insurer opined that she could return to work 
under certain circumstances.  Unsure of her rights, Applicant’s wife has not appealed 
this decision. Her primary care physician and her treating orthopedic surgeon believe 
that she is permanently disabled and unable to return to work. She has applied for 
disability benefits from the Social Security Administration. Her claim is under review.9  
 
 Despite the loss of his wife’s disability income and the increase in his expenses 
associated with maintaining a second residence, Applicant is continuing to make 
progress on resolving his delinquent debts. He has been participating in payment plans 
for the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.j.  Since May 2012, he has paid $2,900 
                                                          
7 Tr. 20-29, 37-38, 78, 80-81, 88-90. 
 
8 Tr. 36-37, 72-76, 78-79, 84-87. 
 
9  Tr. 30-36; AE F. 
 
4 
 
towards his four delinquent accounts.  He has also repaid $3,000 of the personal loans 
he received from friends and family. Applicant lives within his means and is current on 
his recurring financial obligations.10 
                                    
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
10 Tr. 78; GE 2; AE A-B, D-E, I-K, M. 
 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”11 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information within the defense industry.  
 
The SOR, as amended, alleges that Applicant is indebted to eight creditors for 
approximately $23,000. Applicant demonstrated that he is not responsible for the debts 
alleged in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. Based on the conflicting information regarding 1.h and 
Applicant’s efforts to resolve the issue, I find ¶ 1.h in his favor. However, Applicant 
admits and the record supports a finding that he is responsible for the delinquent debts 
alleged in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.j. These delinquent debts are sufficient evidence to 
establish Applicant’s “inability to satisfy debts”12 and his “history of not meeting financial 
obligations.”13  
 
Events beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his financial difficulties.14 His 
wife’s 2007 car accident and her resulting medical issues created financial instability 
and irregularity that resulted in the accumulation of delinquent debt. Applicant has 
demonstrated that he has acted responsibly in light of his financial situation. As soon as 
his finances began to stabilize, he began rehabilitating his mortgage and entering into 
payment plans for his delinquent debt. Applicant has also established that he has made 
a good-faith effort to repay his creditors by showing a track record of repayment.15 
Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations concerns alleged in the SOR.  
 
I have no doubts or reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant’s financial 
problems and resulting delinquent debt are not the result of irresponsible, reckless, or 
negligent behavior. The debt is reasonable given the severity of his wife’s medical 
issues and the impact on her ability to earn an income. Even with the loss of his wife’s 
                                                          
11  AG ¶ 18. 
 
12 AG ¶ 19(a). 
 
13  AG ¶19(c). 
 
14  See AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
15  See AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
6 
 
disability income, he has demonstrated a commitment to resolving his SOR and non-
SOR debts. Applicant’s request for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.e:     Withdrawn 
 
Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.i:     Withdrawn 
 
Subparagraph 1.j:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
