 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-04936 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Terry McCracken, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Between January and September 
2006, Applicant incurred over $1.2 million in debt to provide a luxurious lifestyle for his 
wife. The 30 accounts alleged in the SOR, totaling $172,000, remain unresolved. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive,1 on May 30, 2012, DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. DoD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR in June 2012 and requested a hearing. 
Between July and October 2012, the Government made several efforts to schedule a 
hearing by video teleconference (VTC) near his overseas duty station, but Applicant did 
not have access to any VTC facilities. The case was assigned to me on October 2, 
2012. I have appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 the correspondence 
related to the scheduling of this case. At the hearing convened on December 7, 2012, I 
admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, without objection. Applicant did not 
submit any documents. I received the transcript (Tr.) on December 19, 2012. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Notice Issue 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant’s personal representative indicated that he did not have 
sufficient time to prepare because he did not receive the Notice of Hearing until 
December 6, 2012, the day before the hearing. I took the personal representative’s 
statements as raising a notice issue under Directive ¶ E.3.1.8.2  
 
After difficulty scheduling Applicant’s hearing between July and October 2012, I 
contacted his facility security officer (FSO) on October 4, 2012 to request help securing 
Applicant’s appearance at an in-person hearing. The same day, I sent an e-mail to 
Applicant and his FSO indicating I scheduled the hearing for December 7, 2012.3  
 
The DOHA Hearing Office issued, by e-mail, the Notice of Hearing and the Pre-
Hearing Guidance memorandum on November 19, 2012. Applicant responded to the e-
mail, acknowledging receipt of the documents and indicated that he would be present at 
the December 7, 2012 hearing. He did not forward these e-mails to his personal 
representative, whom he had asked in June 2012 to accompany him to his future 
hearing. The Government learned about the personal representative minutes before the 
hearing. Applicant received the hard copy of the Notice of Hearing, mailed to his 
employer on November 19, 2012, when he returned to the United States on December 
6, 2012.4 
 
Based on these facts, I find that Applicant received proper notice of the date, 
time, and place of the hearing, as required. Applicant failed to give his personal 
representative proper time to prepare. Without objection from Department Counsel, I left 
                                                          
2 Tr. 14. 
 
3 HE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 16-18; HE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
the record open until January 4, 2013 to allow Applicant to submit any documentation 
he wished me to consider. Applicant did not submit any documentation.5  
 
SOR Amendments 
 
 Without objection from Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion at 
hearing to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 1.n6 and 1.o.7  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 53, has worked as an employee of a federal contractor since February 
2010. This is first application for a security clearance. Currently, he is a field service 
engineer. He has worked overseas continuously since November 2011, earning an 
annual salary of $150,000.8  
 
 The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he filed petitions for Chapter 7 and 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in March 2006 and September 2006, respectively. 
The court dismissed both petitions. The SOR also alleges that Applicant is indebted to 
30 creditors for approximately $172,000, including $85,000 in state and federal tax 
liens. He denies the tax liens, claiming that they were levied against him in error. He 
also denies all of the other alleged debts with the exception of four accounts, which total 
approximately $71,000.  He claims that the majority of the SOR debts were incurred by 
his ex-wife. She divorced Applicant in September 2011.9  
 
 Applicant met his ex-wife in the fall of 2005. The two decided to marry shortly 
thereafter. In January 2006, Applicant, who was earning $70,000 annually, agreed to 
purchase a home for his wife-to-be. With only a $500 down payment, he purchased a 
$1,000,000 home, knowing he could not afford it.  His fiancée, who earned between 
$120,000 and $240,000 annually as a loan officer, convinced Applicant they could 
afford the house together. Applicant’s fiancée was unable to qualify for the mortgage 
loan. Just before the wedding, Applicant bought her a $64,000 luxury sports utility 
vehicle (SUV). The couple married in a small ceremony on February 2006 and took a 
$28,000 honeymoon to Bora Bora. Applicant paid for the trip using a credit card. Soon 
after the wedding, Applicant’s wife lost her job. Applicant depleted his savings and 
retirement accounts to pay his financial obligations. Soon, he began using credit cards 
to pay the household bills.10  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 18-19; HE 1. 
 
6 The account is a duplicate of the account alleged in ¶ 1.q. 
 
7 The account is a duplicate of the account alleged in ¶ 1.r. 
 
8 Tr. 50-52, 103; GE 1. 
 
9 Tr. 52-53, 93; Answer. 
 
10 Tr. 54, 60-70, 15. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in March 2006, claiming over 
$1,000,000 in secured debt and $119,000 in unsecured debt. The secured debt 
included the home Applicant purchased as well as three vehicles: his wife’s SUV, a 
Mercedes he had purchased for his mother, and a car that he co-signed for his wife’s 
daughter. The court granted Applicant’s motion to dismiss the petition because he was 
unable to file a proper credit counseling certificate. He also failed to attend the creditors 
meeting. Six months later, in September 2006, Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy protection. He claimed $290,000 in unsecured debt, which included the 
debts alleged in the Chapter 7 petition and a $170,000 personal loan from a family 
member. In April 2009, the court dismissed the Chapter 13 petition for failure to make 
plan payments. Applicant paid $22,000 under the plan, but claims that his wife stopped 
making payments while he was working overseas. He filed a motion asking the court to 
reinstate the plan, but he withdrew the motion in July 2009.11 
 
 Citing the difficulties associated with working overseas in remote areas and his 
infrequent trips home, Applicant testified that he has tried, unsuccessfully, to resolve his 
delinquent debts with the help of an attorney and the tax liens with the help of an 
accountant. He provided no documentation to corroborate these claims. Before the 
marriage, Applicant says he maintained a positive credit history, never accumulating 
more than $10,000 in debt on his two credit cards. He never paid bills late or allowed 
them to become delinquent. After their marriage, Applicant claims that his wife opened 
credit accounts in his name, without his knowledge while he worked overseas.12 In his 
April 2011 response to DoD interrogatories, Applicant explained: 
 
I am a victim of marrying an untrustworthy women [sic] who married me 
for my money and the credit that I had. This[,] coupled with my going 
overseas to work to feed her habit of spending my money was the 
downfall of my creditworthiness. . . .Since all of this has occurred[,] I am 
legally divorced and all the appropriate steps have been taken to clear up 
this array [sic] of one time indebtedness.13 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant reiterates: 
 
I got married . . . to someone who destroyed my life and my credit for a 
short period of time. That is over . . . . 
 
 The couple remarried in May 2012.  Because he has few expenses while working 
overseas, Applicant sends his wife, who has been unemployed since 2006, $9,500 each 
month. None of the debts alleged in the SOR have been resolved.14 
 
                                                          
11 Tr. 74-80; GE 5-6. 
 
12 Tr. 83, 89-93; Answer. 
 
13 GE 2. 
 
14 Tr. 87-88, 94, 96-97. 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”15 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information within the defense industry.  
 
Applicant’s indebtedness was caused by frivolous and irresponsible spending, 
with no possible ability to repay the massive amount of debt he incurred.16 In order to 
please his wife, Applicant used credit to create a lifestyle he knew he could not afford.  
He consistently spent beyond his means.17 According to Applicant’s timeline, he 
incurred over $1,000,000 in secured debt and $290,000 in unsecured debt in less than 
six months while earning $70,000 annually. He incurred the overwhelming majority of 
the debt to obtain luxury items. Despite having the means to do, Applicant has not 
resolved a single delinquent debt alleged in the SOR, thus demonstrating his 
“unwillingness to satisfy his debts”18 and a “history of not meeting his financial 
obligations.”19 
 
  Applicant correctly points out that his wife’s spending habits are problematic; 
however, the lion’s share of responsibility falls squarely on his shoulders. He is a victim 
of his own bad choices. He has failed to take control of his finances and continues to 
enable his wife’s financially-destructive behavior towards him. While living in a war-torn 
country with sporadic access to the internet and infrequent trips home are 
understandable hurdles in resolving financial issues, Applicant has used his 
circumstances as an insurmountable obstacle to doing so. This is no excuse for the lack 
of action Applicant has taken to resolve his financial issues given his significant amount 
of disposable income. Accordingly, none of the financial considerations mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
  The evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan20 and the clearly-consistent standard, I 
resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, 
                                                          
15  AG ¶ 18. 
 
16 AG ¶ 19(b). 
 
17 AG ¶ 19(e). 
 
18 AG ¶ 19(a). 
 
19 AG ¶ 19(c). 
 
20 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 
 
I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. Instead of paying his legitimate 
debts, Applicant sends $9,500 each month to his wife, the same person he claims 
destroyed his life. Applicant has shown that he either does not understand the security 
concerns raised by his delinquent debt and history of poor judgment or that he does not 
care. Either way, a person who does not satisfy his financial obligations does not 
possess the good judgment or reliability required of persons who have access to 
classified information. Clearance is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.hh:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.n. and 1.o:   Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
