 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX          )  ADP Case No. 11-11537 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Bulgaria. In 2009, she became a U.S. citizen. Her parents 
are citizens and residents of Bulgaria, and she frequently communicates with them. Her 
spouse is a citizen of Slovakia. She said she might renew her Bulgarian passport. Over 
the last seven years, she spent a substantial amount of time in Bulgaria. She said she 
maintained some allegiance to Bulgaria. Although there are also important mitigating 
factors, they are insufficient to fully mitigate foreign influence and preference concerns. 
Access to sensitive information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 6, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 4) On August 27, 2012, DOD issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her (Item 1), pursuant to Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised; Department of 
Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as 
amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005.  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Regulation that it is clearly 
consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a 
public trust position, which entails access to sensitive information. (Item 1) DOD 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether such access to 
sensitive information should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On September 22, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a decision without a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated November 13, 2012, was provided to her on November 21, 
2012. She was afforded an opportunity to file objections and to submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 On December 26, 2012, DOHA received 
Applicant’s response to the FORM. Department Counsel did not object to my 
consideration of the FORM response. The case was assigned to me on January 4, 
2013. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel did not request administrative notice of facts concerning 
Bulgaria or Slovenia. Applicant requested admission of certain facts concerning 
Bulgaria. (FORM response) Department Counsel did not object, and I have taken 
Administrative notice of the facts concerning Bulgaria, as indicated under the caption 
Bulgaria in the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ADP 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted the underlying facts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 2.a, 2.c, and 
2.d with explanations. (Item 3) She denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b. (Item 3) After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.   
 
                                            
1
The DOHA transmittal letter is dated November 13, 2012, and Applicant’s receipt is dated 
November 21, 2012. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 days after her 
receipt to submit information.  
 
2
To protect Applicant’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, 
names of witnesses or locations. The cited sources contain more specific information.   
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant is a 33-year-old associate applications director, who is an employee of 
a defense contractor.3 She was born in Bulgaria in 1979. In 2004, she earned a master 
of arts degree in economics from a U.S. university. In 2009, she married. She has never 
served in the U.S. military. 
  
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant’s father and mother are citizens and residents of Bulgaria. (SOR ¶ 1.a; 
Items 3, 6) She communicates with her father and mother on a weekly basis. (Item 5) 
Her father and mother are not affiliated with the Bulgarian Government. (Item 5) 
 
Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of the Slovak Republic. (SOR ¶ 1.b; Items 3, 6) He 
is a permanent resident of the United States, who has lived in the United States for 14 
years. (Item 3) Applicant lives with her spouse. (Item 5) He intends to apply for U.S. 
citizenship as soon as he is eligible to do so. (Item 3) She believes he will become a 
U.S. citizen in 2013. (FORM response) He is self-employed as a consultant. (Item 5)   
 
From October 2004 to February 2005, June to July 2006, March to June 2008, 
August to September 2008, and July to September 2010, Applicant visited Bulgaria. 
(Item 4) In 2004, 2005, June 2008, and June 2010, she visited Slovakia. (Item 4) She 
visited her parents when she went to Bulgaria.    
 
In April 2009, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. (Item 5; FORM response) Her 
three-year-old daughter was born in the United States and lives with Applicant and her 
husband. (Items 3, 5) Applicant emphasized that Bulgaria is an ally of the United States 
and a responsible member of the international and European community. (Item 3; 
FORM response) 
  
Foreign Preference 
  
Applicant has dual citizenship with Bulgaria and the United States. (SOR ¶ 2.a; 
Items 3, 5, 6) She traveled to Bulgaria using her Bulgarian passport in 2004, 2005, 
2006, and 2008. (Item 5) Applicant’s Bulgarian passport expired and she could not find 
it. (SOR ¶ 2.b; FORM response) However, she said, “I might renew it in the future.” 
(Item 3) In 2009, she obtained a U.S. passport. (Item 4) 
 
In her August 3, 2011 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject 
interview (PSI), Applicant said she had a “small allegiance” to the country of Bulgaria. 
(SOR ¶ 2.c; Items 3, 5, 6) She explained: 
 
I do admit to small allegiance to the country of Bulgaria because that is 
where I grew up and where my family is but I want to re-assert that I give 
priority to the USA and that Bulgaria is an ally of the USA. . . I give my US 
citizenship a priority. I have sworn to have a primary allegiance with the 
USA and that is important to me. (Item 3)  
                                            
3
The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s April 6, 2011 e-QIP. (Item 4) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant voted in a Bulgarian parliamentary election in 2005 before she became 
a U.S. citizen. (SOR ¶ 2.d; Items 3, 5, 6) She did not serve in the Bulgarian military. 
(Item 5) She is registered to vote in the United States, and she intends to vote in U.S. 
elections. (Item 3)  She is willing to renounce her Bulgarian citizenship if required to do 
so for work. (Item 5)  
 
There is no derogatory information concerning Applicant’s police or financial 
records. There is no evidence of record showing any U.S. arrests, illegal drug 
possession or use, or alcohol-related incidents. She did not provide any evidence from 
character witnesses about her dedication, diligence, trustworthiness, or responsibility. 
She is loyal to the United States and she considers the United States to be her home.  
 
Bulgaria4 
 
Bulgaria has generally good foreign relations with its neighbors. In 2004, Bulgaria 
became a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). In 2007, Bulgaria 
became a member of the European Union. Bulgaria, the United Kingdom, and Spain 
were primary allies of the United States in the war in Iraq. Bulgaria has hosted several 
important international conferences in the last ten years. The United States and 
Bulgaria established joint military facilities in Bulgaria after April 2006. U.S. forces train 
at these facilities, which remain under Bulgarian command.  
   
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
                                            
4
The source for the information in this section is Applicant’s FORM response. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
“[S]ecurity clearance [or trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). The protection of the national 
security and sensitive records is of paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that 
“[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] information 
will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Analysis 
   
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant has a close relationship with her parents who are citizens and residents 
of Bulgaria. Applicant’s communications with her parents are frequent. She was born in 
Bulgaria, and she traveled to Bulgaria from October 2004 to February 2005, June to 
July 2006, March to June 2008, August to September 2008, and July to September 
2010. Her husband is a citizen of Slovakia, and in 2004, 2005, June 2008, and June 
2010, she visited Slovakia.        
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has not rebutted this 
presumption. Applicant’s relationships with her parents living in Bulgaria are sufficient to 
create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.” Her relationship with her parents creates a concern about Applicant’s 
“obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and her desire to help her 
parents who are in Bulgaria. For example, if the Bulgaria Government or terrorists in 
Bulgaria wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, it could exert pressure on her parents. 
Applicant would then be subject to indirect coercion through her relationship with her 
parents and sensitive information could potentially be compromised. Similarly, Applicant 
has a close relationship with her spouse, who is a citizen of Slovakia, and a permanent 
resident of the United States. There is no evidence about his familial or other 
relationships with citizens and residents of Slovakia.    
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in a foreign 
country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of sensitive or classified information. See Generally ISCR 
Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government or terrorist coercion or inducement. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against 
the United States or terrorist activity causes widespread fear or destruction. The 
relationship of Bulgaria with the United States, the absence of evidence of terrorist 
activity in Bulgaria, and the absence of evidence that her parents are associated with 
the Bulgarian Government places a reduced or lesser burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that her relationships with her parents living in Bulgaria does 
not pose a security risk.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding sensitive or classified 
information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have 
access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests 
inimical to those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 
2004). Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists in Bulgaria or 
Slovakia seek or have sought classified, sensitive, or economic information from or 
through Applicant, her spouse, or her parents living in Bulgaria, it is not possible to rule 
out such a possibility in the future. Applicant’s communications with her parents living in 
Bulgaria are frequent, and she continues to feel an obligation and affection for her 
parents and spouse. Applicant’s concern for her parents and spouse is a positive 
character trait that increases her trustworthiness; however, it also increases the concern 
about potential foreign influence. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence 
and raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 
7(b), and 7(d) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any 
mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), 8(c), and 8(f) have limited applicability. Applicant was born in 
Bulgaria, and she traveled to Bulgaria from October 2004 to February 2005, June to 
July 2006, March to June 2008, August to September 2008, and July to September 
2010. Her husband is a citizen of Slovakia, and in 2004, 2005, June 2008, and June 
2010, she visited Slovakia. Applicant has frequent contacts with her parents in Bulgaria 
and husband, who is a citizen of Slovakia and a permanent resident of the United 
States. The amount of contacts between an applicant and relatives living in a foreign 
country are not the only test for determining whether someone could be coerced or 
improperly influenced through their relatives. Because of her connections to her 
parents, Applicant is not able to fully meet her burden of showing there is “little 
likelihood that [her relationships with her parents, who is living in Bulgaria and her 
husband, who lives with her] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” It is 
evident that Applicant is close to her parents and her husband.  
    
Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” She 
has strong family connections to the United States. Her spouse and daughter are either 
U.S. citizens or live in the United States or both. The extent of Applicant’s property 
interests in the United States is unknown.    
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by her relationship with her parents, who live in 
Bulgaria, and her relationship with husband, who is a citizen of Slovakia. There is no 
evidence that terrorists, criminals, the Bulgaria Government, the Slovakian Government, 
or those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, her husband, 
any family her husband may have in Slovakia, or her family in Bulgaria to coerce 
Applicant to obtain classified or sensitive information. While the Government does not 
have any burden to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence was 
present, Applicant would have a heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate 
foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ 
recent relationship with Bulgaria, and especially Bulgaria’s NATO membership, support 
of the U.S. combat mission in Iraq, and joint U.S. and Bulgarian facilities.      
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶¶ 8(d), 8(e), and 8(f) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not 
encouraged Applicant’s involvement with her parents living in Bulgaria or her 
relationship with her husband. Applicant is not required to report her contacts with 
foreign citizens, as she does not have a security clearance. AG ¶ 8(f) does not apply 
because there is no allegation that she or her husband own property or have financial 
investments in Bulgaria or Slovakia.  
 
In sum, the primary security concerns are Applicant’s parents living in Bulgaria, 
her husband’s foreign citizenship, her frequent contacts with her parents, and her 
extensive travel to Bulgaria. Her parents are readily available for coercion or improper 
influence. The Bulgarian Government’s positive relationship with the U.S. Government 
decreases the risk of coercion. Still, her connections to Bulgaria continue to raise 
foreign influence concerns, and Applicant is not eligible for a public trust position at this 
time.   
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference security concern stating, “when an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in Applicant’s case: 
  
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other 
such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
Applicant has dual citizenship with Bulgaria and the United States. (SOR ¶ 2.a) 
She has continued to maintain her citizenship with Bulgaria and might renew her 
Bulgarian passport in the future. 
 
Applicant traveled to Bulgaria using her Bulgarian passport in 2004, 2005, 2006, 
and 2008; however, she did not use her Bulgarian passport after she became a U.S. 
citizen. She cannot find her Bulgarian passport, and SOR ¶ 2.b is refuted as a security 
concern.  
 
In her August 3, 2011 OPM PSI, Applicant said she had a “small allegiance” to 
the country of Bulgaria. (SOR ¶ 2.c) Applicant said: 
 
I do admit to small allegiance to the country of Bulgaria because that is 
where I grew up and where my family is but I want to re-assert that I give 
priority to the USA and that Bulgaria is an ally of the USA. . . I give my US 
citizenship a priority. I have sworn to have a primary allegiance with the 
USA and that is important to me. (Item 3)  
 
Applicant voted in a Bulgarian election in 2005; however, she has not voted in a 
Bulgarian election after she became a U.S. citizen in 2009. SOR ¶ 2.d is refuted as a 
security concern.   
 
AG ¶ 10(d) applies, and SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.c considered together raise a foreign 
preference concern.   
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
Applicant’s statement about having some “allegiance and loyalty” to Bulgaria was 
primarily an expression of sympathy or empathy towards her Bulgarian heritage and to 
a lesser extent was not an expression of loyalty or allegiance to the Bulgaria. She 
offered to renounce her Bulgarian citizenship if required to do so for work; however, she 
did not do so. Her suggestion that she might renew her Bulgarian passport is 
problematic. Foreign preference concerns are not fully mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under these guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns. Applicant has 
strong connections to the United States. She earned her master’s degree in the United 
States. In 2009, she became a U.S. citizen. She swore an oath of allegiance to the 
United States. She said she is willing to renounce her Bulgarian citizenship if necessary 
to retain her employment. Her spouse and daughter live in the United States. There is 
no derogatory information concerning Applicant’s police or financial records, U.S. 
arrests, illegal drug possession or use, or alcohol-related incidents. She is loyal to the 
United States and considers the United States to be her home.  
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
A Guideline B decision must take into consideration the geopolitical situation in 
the pertinent foreign country, as well as the dangers existing in that country.5 The 
dangers of coercion and improper influences from terrorists and criminals must be 
considered. There is no evidence that the activities of terrorists or criminals present a 
security concern in Bulgaria and Slovakia. Bulgaria and the United States are allied 
militarily, diplomatically, and through trade. This positive relationship reduces the 
possibility of improper attempts to influence Applicant through her parents living in 
Bulgaria.         
 
The circumstances tending to support denial of Applicant’s clearance are more 
significant than the factors weighing towards approval of her clearance at this time. 
Applicant had frequent contact with her parents living in Bulgaria and her husband, who 
lives with her and is a citizen of Slovakia. She was born in Bulgaria, and she traveled to 
Bulgaria from October 2004 to February 2005, June to July 2006, March to June 2008, 
August to September 2008, and July to September 2010. Her husband is a citizen of 
Slovakia, and in 2004, 2005, June 2008, and June 2010, she visited Slovakia. She said 
she might renew her Bulgarian passport, and she said she has some allegiance to 
Bulgaria.       
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the 
context of the whole-person. I conclude Applicant has not fully mitigated the foreign 
influence and foreign preference trustworthiness concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    Against APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    Against APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
                                            
5
 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
