 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12187 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esq. 
 
 
January 31, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of both the United States and Iran. She exercised her 
Iranian citizenship by using her Iranian passport to travel to Iran on three trips between 
2005 and 2008, and by voting in the 2008 Iranian parliamentary election. She has two 
sisters, a mother-in-law, and father-in-law, who are presently Iranian citizens and reside 
in Iran. Her husband and youngest sister reside with her in the United States, and are 
Iranian citizens. Her mother is a dual citizen of both Iran and the United States, residing 
with Applicant in the United States. Applicant’s Iranian passport has been destroyed, 
she is willing to renounce her Iranian citizenship, and she has ceased almost all 
communication with her family still in Iran. Security concerns raised under Foreign 
Preference and Foreign Influence are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 22, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the Guidelines for Foreign 
Preference and Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
 
2 
 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on July 31, 2012, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on December 3, 2012. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on December 3, 2012, scheduling the hearing for January 8, 2013. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 
2, which were admitted without objection. The Government also offered documents 
pertaining to Iran, marked GE 3, for administrative notice. Applicant offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through J, which were admitted without objection. Applicant called three 
witnesses, and testified on her own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on January 18, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c. She 
denied allegation 1.b. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 33 years old. She has been employed by a defense contractor since 
June 2011 and seeks a clearance in connection with her employment. She graduated 
with a Doctorate of Science and Mechanics awarded to her by a prestigious American 
university in May 2011. (GE 1; Tr. 50-57.) 
 
Applicant was born in February 1979 in the United States.1 Her parents were 
Iranian citizens studying in the United States on student visas at the time of her birth. 
Applicant acquired U.S. citizenship through her birth in the United States. However, 
because she was the child of Iranian citizens, she also acquired Iranian citizenship 
through her parents. Before her first birthday, Applicant’s parents returned to Iran 
because their visa expired. Applicant, an infant at the time, accompanied her parents to 
Iran. In order to facilitate travel to Iran, her parents obtained an Iranian passport for her. 
Applicant, through the help of the Swiss embassy in Iran, maintained her American 
passport while living in Iran. She also renewed her Iranian passport to facilitate travel 
into and out of Iran. She lived in Iran from the age of six-months to 23. During that time, 
she never left Iran. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 58-60, 74-77.) 
 
Applicant always intended to return to the United States to live. As she grew up, 
she requested to be permitted to return, but her father would not permit her to go alone. 
She testified: 
 
                                                          
1 The month and date of her birth is relevant because on “February 1, 1979, exiled leader Ayatollah Ruhollah 
Khomeini returned from France to assume control of the revolution and established himself as Supreme Leader of a 
new, theocratic republic guided by Islamic principles.” (GE 3, Item I at page 5.) 
 
3 
 
I love this country because only a woman that has independence, modern 
mentality is what I am saying, because you don't have human rights over 
there, and it is very important for an educated woman to, you know, make 
sure that she has equal, you know, rights as men and can work in that 
country and continue the major that she loves.  For example, I wanted to be 
Engineer.  I couldn’t continue my major there.  Women cannot do 
Mechanical Engineer [sic], for example.  So, I love the United States 
because it gives me the opportunity that I never could have in Iran. (Tr. 67-
68.) 
 
Finally, in 2002, Applicant married a medical doctor in Iran who intended to move 
to the United States. At the age of 23, Applicant moved back to the United States in 
approximately 2003. Applicant and her husband divorced shortly thereafter. (GE 1; GE 
2; Tr. 96-99.) 
 
In 2006, Applicant married her current husband. He was born in Iran and sought 
political asylum in the United States because he was opposed to the Iranian regime. He 
was granted asylum on April 9, 2004. He maintains his status as a citizen of Iran but 
resides permanently in the United States. His parents, Applicant’s mother-in-law and 
father-in-law, still reside in Iran and are Iranian citizens. His father is a retired banker 
who now does farming work. Neither of his parents have ever had a connection to the 
military or government of Iran. Applicant has not communicated with her in-laws in the 
past four months now that she is aware of the Government’s security concerns. Prior to 
that, she spoke to them once per month. They have never visited Applicant in the 
United States. (GE 1; GE 2; AE I; Tr. 66-67, 91-92.) 
 
Applicant’s father is deceased. Her mother is now a naturalized U.S. citizen and 
an Iranian citizen. She worked as a public school teacher in Iran, but is retired. She may 
be entitled to a small pension in Iran, but does not plan to utilize it. Applicant’s mother 
holds an American passport issued April 6, 2012. She resides with Applicant in the 
United States. She owns an apartment in Iran valued at approximately $100,000, in 
which two of Applicant’s sisters currently reside. (GE 1; GE 2; AE C; Tr. 60-61, 77-79.) 
 
Applicant has three sisters. Her youngest sister is a legal permanent resident of 
the United States and currently resides with Applicant. She is a citizen of Iran. She has 
been a resident of the United States since December 29, 2011. She attends high school 
in the United States. (GE 1; GE 2; AE C; Tr. 61-62, 84.) 
 
Applicant’s middle sister is also a legal permanent resident of the United States. 
She obtained permanent resident status on February 17, 2012. However, after living in 
the United States for approximately a month-and-a-half to obtain her residency status, 
she returned to Iran to finish her studies at an Iranian university. She has recently 
completed her coursework and intends to return to the United States permanently within 
two-to-three months. She has supported herself while attending school through work at 
a local coffee shop. She maintains Iranian citizenship. Applicant used to maintain 
monthly communication with this sister, but Applicant has not spoken to this sister in the 
 
4 
 
past three months because she is angry that her sister has not yet returned to live 
permanently in the United States. (GE 1; GE 2; AE C; Tr. 62-63, 85-88.) 
 
Applicant’s oldest sister is a citizen and resident of Iran. Applicant petitioned for 
this sister to be granted permanent residency in the United States. The petition was 
approved on November 2, 2009. She is now on a waiting list for a visa to immigrate to 
the United States. Applicant expects the visa process to take a few more years. 
Applicant testified that her sister intends to move to the United States once the visa is 
granted. This sister is also employed in a coffee shop and is self-sufficient. She is not 
married and has no children. Applicant has only had communications once in the past 
three months, via email, with this sister. (GE 1; GE 2; AE B; Tr. 63-65, 86-90.) 
 
Applicant traveled to Iran, using her Iranian passport, in May 2005, August 2006, 
and May 2008. Each trip was to visit family. In April 2011, she chose to forgo traveling 
to Iran to visit her family and instead had her sisters meet her in Turkey because it was 
safer. She did not want to travel back into Iran. Applicant’s Iranian passport was 
destroyed by her facility security officer on June 20, 2011. Applicant has no intent to 
travel to Iran again. She testified that she is willing to renounce her Iranian citizenship. 
However, she indicated that formal renunciation would require her to travel to Iran and 
petition the Iranian Supreme Court in person. She provided documentation of this 
requirement to support her claim. She does not want to return to Iran and has no other 
legally available method to perfect her renunciation. (GE 1; GE 2; AE D; AE E; Tr. 69-
71.) 
 
In 2008, the Iranian government held parliamentary elections.2 Applicant learned 
of the election from watching American new programs and voted in the election from the 
United States. She hoped the election would bring positive changes to Iran. At the time 
she voted, she was a student at an American university and was not aware of her future 
need for a security clearance. She testified that she will not vote in any subsequent 
Iranian elections. (GE 2; Tr. 72-74.) 
 
Applicant has no assets in Iran. However, she and her husband have amassed 
$16,000 in bank accounts and $30,622 in a retirement savings account in the United 
States. She does not financially support anyone in Iran. She has not told any of her 
Iranian relatives of her work as a government contractor.  If Applicant were ever 
threatened through her Iranian relatives, she testified that she would inform the Federal 
Bureau of Investigations and her facility security officer. She indicated that she does not 
support the current Iranian government. (AE H; Tr. 66-68, 93-95.) 
 
Applicant has only been working for the government contractor for a year-and-a-
half. However, during that time she has impressed her colleagues who testified on her 
behalf. Two witnesses from her company testified that Applicant is reliable, trustworthy, 
and had no reservations recommending her for a security clearance. Her performance 
evaluation from her first year indicates she was “outstanding” and she was 
recommended for a performance award. A friend that has known Applicant and her 
                                                          
2 GE 3, Item I at page 5-6. 
 
5 
 
family also testified that she exercises good judgment. In addition, she presented four 
letters of support all attesting to her honesty and good character. (AE F; AE G; AE J; Tr. 
12-33.)  
 
Iran3 
 
The United States has not had diplomatic relations with Iran since 1980, and nearly 
all trade and investment with Iran has been prohibited. Iran has sought to illegally obtain 
U.S. military equipment and other sensitive technology. The United States has defined 
the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
 
 Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD); 
 Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
 Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and 
 Its dismal human rights record. 
 
The United States has designated and characterized Iran as the world’s leading 
state sponsor of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. 
Iran has sought to make the United States suffer political, economic, and human costs. 
Further, Iran has engaged in efforts to sow violence and undermine stability in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, including lethal support for groups that are directly responsible for U.S. 
casualties.  
 
The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include politically motivated violence and repression, 
including torture, beatings and rape; severe officially sanctioned punishments, including 
amputation and flogging; arbitrary arrests and detentions, often holding individuals 
incommunicado; little judicial independence and few fair public trials; severe restrictions 
on right to privacy and civil liberties, including freedoms of speech and the press, 
assembly, association, and movement; and monitoring the social activities of citizens, 
entering homes and offices, monitoring telephone conversations and internet 
communications, and opening mail without court authorization. 
 
The Iranian government does not recognize dual nationality and will treat U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals solely as Iranian citizens. Iranian authorities have prevented a 
number of U.S. citizen academics, scientists, journalists, and others who travel to Iran 
for personal, cultural, or business reasons from leaving the country and in some cases 
have detained, interrogated, and imprisoned them. Iranian security personnel may at 
times: place foreign visitors under surveillance; monitor hotel rooms, telephones and fax 
machines; and search personal possessions in hotel rooms.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 GE 3. 
 
6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
creates a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
  Applicant’s two sisters and her parents-in-laws are citizens and residents of Iran. 
Her husband and youngest sister are also citizens of Iran, residing in the United States 
with Applicant. Applicant’s mother is a dual citizen of both Iran and the United States, 
and resides with Applicant. Iran is a country that is clearly hostile to the United States.4 
Iran is considered the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism; it commits espionage 
against the United States; and the government of Iran has committed numerous, 
serious human rights abuses against its people and citizens of the United States 
traveling to Iran. Applicant’s significant familial contacts with Iran and her cohabitation 
with others who have ties to Iran create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
                                                          
4 See ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007.) 
 
8 
 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of 
interest. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests. 
 
 Applicant was born in the United States and has always identified herself as an 
American. Growing up in Iran, she was anxious to return to the United States, but her 
father prohibited her. She married with the intent of finally being permitted to leave Iran. 
When she moved back to the United States, she did so permanently. She loves the 
freedoms the United States represents and has taken advantage of its opportunities to 
study in her chosen field of interest and obtain a doctorate degree here. After 
graduating with her doctorate, she was hired by a government contractor. Prior to being 
hired, she had no knowledge of security rules and regulations.  
 
 Applicant traveled three times between May 2005 and May 2008 to visit her 
family in Iran. However, in April 2011, she determined it was dangerous to visit Iran and 
met her sisters in Turkey. This decision shows that even prior to working for a 
government contractor, Applicant was cautious and prudent in her dealings with Iran. 
Her husband, mother, and youngest sister all reside in the United States and are safely 
outside of the Iranian government’s influence. They have no plans to return to Iran. In 
fact, her husband has little love of Iran after being forced to seek refuge in the United 
States due to his beliefs.  
 
 Once Applicant started work with the government contractor, she immediately 
presented her Iranian passport for destruction to her facility security officer. She does 
not plan to return to Iran. Her siblings, like Applicant, are educated and seek the 
freedoms available in the United States that are not available in Iran. Her oldest sister 
already has been granted permanent residency status and plans to move to the United 
States once she is granted a visa. Her other sister still in Iran has obtained a permanent 
residency card and will return to the United States permanently in a few months, after 
she graduates. Applicant has eliminated almost all contact with her siblings and in-laws 
in Iran in the past four months. None of Applicant’s foreign family members have any 
connection with the Iranian government. She explained that if her foreign family 
members were threatened, she would immediately notify the proper authorities. She 
 
9 
 
understands the nature of the Iranian government and finds it repugnant. She would do 
nothing to aide such a regime.  
 
 I find that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of the United States and the interests of the Iranian government, 
a terrorist organization, or her Iranian family members. I further find there is no conflict 
of interest, because Applicant has such deep longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
America that she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States. AG ¶ 8(a) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
  Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Iran. She possessed a valid 
Iranian passport that she used to travel to Iran three times between 2005 and 2008, 
despite that fact that she was a United States citizen by birth and had a U.S. passport. 
She also voted in a 2008 Iranian election. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 11. Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
 
10 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant’s dual citizenship is based solely on her parent’s Iranian citizenship. 
She was a U.S. citizen by birth. She returned to Iran as an infant and her parents 
obtained an Iranian passport for her to facilitate their travel. As soon as she was able, 
she left Iran. While she exercised her Iranian citizenship in 2005 to 2008 by using her 
Iranian passport on her trips to Iran, she has no future interest in returning to Iran, as 
demonstrated by her 2011 trip to Turkey. That decision was made before she applied 
for a security clearance. Now that she is aware of security regulations, she is even more 
adamant about avoiding future exercise of her Iranian citizenship. She will not vote in 
future Iranian elections. Applicant expressed a willingness to renounce her Iranian 
citizenship. She has not formally done so because she does not want to return to Iran, 
which is a requirement. However, she does not intend to utilize her Iranian citizenship 
again. Her Iranian passport was surrendered to her facility security officer and it was 
destroyed. AG ¶ ¶ 11(a), 11(b) and 11(e) are mitigating. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is well respected by her colleagues and friends who testified and wrote 
letters on her behalf. She performs well at her job. She is an American by birth and 
showed through her testimony that her allegiances are solely to that of the United 
States. She would not do anything to jeopardize the freedoms and opportunities that 
she has found here. She no longer has an Iranian passport and verbally renounced her 
 
11 
 
citizenship with Iran. All of her decisions to exercise Iranian citizenship occurred before 
applying for a clearance and do not reflect poorly on her character. She has done all 
that she is capable of to bring her family out of Iran. She has no more involvement with 
the immigration process, as the permanent residency petitions have all been granted. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without serious questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:     For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
