                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
        --------------------------------------                )         ADP  Case No.  11-13005        
                                                                 )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Greg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated the trust concerns regarding her finances. Eligibility to hold
a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case
On July 25, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for holding a public trust position, and
DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether eligibility
to hold a public trust position should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. This
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, Department of Defense Regulation
5200.2-R (Regulation), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 28, 2012, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned initially to another judge, and to me on November 26, 2012. The
case was scheduled for hearing on December 4, 2012. The hearing was convened on
that date. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of six exhibits (GEs 1-6).
Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and no exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on December 12, 2012. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated one adverse judgment for
$7,611 and seven consumer debts exceeding $11,000. In her answer to the SOR,
Applicant admitted the judgment and the remaining seven debts.  
Applicant claimed she is a single mother who was left with numerous debts by
her ex-husband.  She attributed responsibility for her debts to her ex-husband who ran
up her credit cards and consistently refused to help her with paying off the credit cards.
Applicant claimed her divorce petition has dragged on for three years (with more legal
fees) and left her unable to address her old debts. She claimed she receives no child or
spousal support from her ex-husband. And she claimed her ex-husband took all of their
savings and tax return money and left her with nothing.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 42-year-old logistics specialist and load planner for a defense
contractor who seeks eligibility to hold a public trust position. The SOR allegations
admitted by Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married her husband in June 2006 and separated from him in
September 2009. (GE 1) Her divorce was finalized in November 2012. (Tr. 28-29)
Applicant has one child from a previous marriage and one five-year-old son from her
most recent marriage. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 26) She claims no college  schooling or military
service. (GEs 1 and 2)
Finances
Following her marriage in 2006, Applicant and her husband purchased a home
for $94,500. (Tr. 40-41) She currently owes $89,000 on her first mortgage, which she
maintains in current status, and has very little equity in the home (estimated to be
around $11,000). (Tr. 27-28, 41) 
Records show that an adverse judgment was taken against Applicant in 2003 in
the amount of $7,610. (GEs 2-6) She accumulated additional medical and credit card
debts (exceeding $11,000) between 2006 and 2009 while married to her second
3
husband. She attributed these debts to her ex-husband. (Tr. 36) In her divorce decree,
she accepted responsibility for these debts in return for her husband’s relinquishment of
his interest in her home. (GE 2; Tr. 20-21, 28, 31)
Before their separation in 2008, Applicant’s husband exercised little financial
responsibility over their marital affairs.  He seized monies in Applicant’s savings and
checking accounts worth in excess of $9,000 and cashed her tax refunds at various
intervals without her permission. (Tr. 32-35) Most of her ex-husband’s misappropriations
of her capital accounts and tax refunds occurred in the year prior to their 2008
separation. (Tr. 35-36).  Since their separation and divorce, Applicant’s ex-husband has
declined to pay any child support for their five-year-old son, or any of the listed debts.
(Tr. 26) Applicant and her ex-husband have joint custody over their child. (Tr. 26) With
her limited income and mortgage to maintain, she has been unable to address any of
these debts. (GE 2; Tr. 21) Although she contacted a debt consolidation firm, she has
never followed up with either financial counseling or debt consolidation services. (Tr. 23-
24) 
Following her separation, Applicant’s father lived with her for awhile and helped
her with her bills. (GE 2) Currently, Applicant is a full-time employee of her defense
contractor and makes $19 an hour. (Tr. 21) She nets around $1,400 a month and has
monthly expenses of $2,021. This leaves her with a negative monthly balance of $621
and no financial resources to cover her listed debts. (GE 2) 
Effective January 1, 2013, Applicant will lose her full-time employment status, if
she does not have approved public trust eligibility. (Tr. 43-44) In part-time status, her
hourly rate will be reduced to just $12 an hour. (Tr. 23-24) Should this employment
change transpire, she plans to enroll in a local community college and study dental
hygiene. (Tr. 46-47) Anticipating her change to part-time status, she has no plans to
address any of her old debts at this time. (Tr. 22, 37-38)
Endorsements
Applicant did not provide any endorsements or performance evaluations. She
made no requests to supplement the record.  
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
Positions designated as ADP 1 and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
See Regulation ¶¶ C3. 1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.21.2.3. “The standard must be met for . . .
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s
4
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶
C6.1.1.1) Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination
may be made. See Regulation ¶¶ C8.2.1.
These guidelines include conditions that could raise a security or trust concern
and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security or trust concerns. They must be considered before deciding
whether or not a security clearance or public trust eligibility determination should be
granted, continued, revoked, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
Administrative judges must also consider the pertinent considerations for
assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of the AGs. AG ¶ 2(a) is
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial commonsense decision
based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the context of the
whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security or trust risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
5
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by
known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.” 
Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's access to sensitive information may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility
to access sensitive information depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality
of that evidence. See United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
access to sensitive information. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused sensitive information before it can deny or revoke eligibility to
access sensitive information. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable
risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive
information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all determinations of
access to sensitive information be clearly consistent with the national interest, the
applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her trustworthiness to access
sensitive information eligibility. See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531
(1988).  And because all assignments to a sensitive position determinations must be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with
the Applicant.
Analysis  
Applicant is a logistics specialist and load planner whose credit reports list an
unsatisfied judgment that predates her latest marriage and a number of medical and
6
consumer debts accumulated during this marriage. These accrued debts remain
outstanding without any offered plan to pay or otherwise resolve them. 
Trust concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the AGs
when an individual Applicant is so financially overextended as to indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which can
raise questions about the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified and sensitive information, and place the person at risk of having to engage in
illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts (based on
produced credit reports and Applicant admissions) and her past inability to resolve these
debts, either by payment, successful dispute, or a combination thereof, warrant  the
application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: ¶ DC 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Holding a public trust position involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access sensitive information is required precisely to
inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a public trust position. While the principal
concern about a person’s holding a public trust position without demonstrated financial
stability is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are
implicit in financial cases.
Extenuating circumstances are associated with most of Applicant’s delinquent
medical and consumer debts. Applicant and her ex-husband accumulated numerous
medical and consumer debts during their brief marriage that her ex-husband has
declined to address. Under the terms of their divorce decree, Applicant was assigned
primary responsibility for these debts in return for her ex-husband’s relinquishing any
financial interest in Applicant’s home. 
Anticipating a reduction of her hours of employment, Applicant cannot foresee any
ability to address her old debts in the immediate future.  MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce,
or separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” has limited
application to Applicant’s situation.  
Follow-up measures with her creditors were required of Applicant to satisfy the
good-faith and due diligence repayment requirements of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” and
the counseling/control requirements of MC ¶ 20(c), “the person has received counseling
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control.” By the proofs presented, Applicant has no established plan in effect to
resolve her debts or identified counseling that can assist her in developing a practical
budget that can help her to facilitate a workable payment plan for her creditors.
7
So, under the circumstances of this case, Applicant can take very little advantage
of either MC ¶ 20(d) or MC ¶ 20(c). For while an applicant need not have paid or
resolved every one of her proven debts or addressed all of his debts simultaneously, she
needs a credible plan to resolve her financial problems, accompanied by implementing
actions. See ISCR Case No. 07-06488 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)  
Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to
circumstances beyond her control, she could still be expected to maintain contact with
her creditors and attempt to negotiate partial payments to bring her accounts current.
See ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No.
03-13096 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25,
2000); and ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)).  By contrast, Applicant
has undertaken no substantive measures to address her delinquent debts or develop a
plan for resolving them.   
Consideration of Applicant’s background and circumstances surrounding her debt
accumulations, her ex-husband’s declination to help her with any of the debts that arose
during their marriage, her limited income sources, and her unwillingness to address any
of her listed creditor to date, provides too little evidentiary support to credit Applicant with
the degree of good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness necessary to mitigate
security concerns about her finances at this time. Applicant’s efforts to date to address
her debts are insufficient to enable her to meet her evidentiary burden of mitigating the
covered debts. 
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is insufficient to demonstrate that
Applicant has mounted sufficient good-faith efforts to resolve her debts. Since she did
not provide any endorsements or documentation of her work-related evaluations and
civic contributions, whole-person assessment lacks sufficient information to provide any
material countervailing considerations to take into account in making an overall trust
assessment of Applicant’s eligibility to hold a public trust position. 
In making a whole-person assessment, careful consideration was given to the
respective burdens of proof established in Egan (supra), the Regulation, the AGs, and
the facts and circumstances of this case in the context of the whole person. Unfavorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a
through 1.h of the SOR.
       
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h: Against Applicant
8
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Eligibility to hold a public trust position is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
