 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-15261 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence. Eligibility 
for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 14, 2011, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to him on August 16, 2012, under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to 
Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR 
alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and detailed reasons 
                                                          
1
 Item 10 (SF 86), dated February 14, 2011). 
 
2 
                                      
 
why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The DOD adjudicators 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 20, 2012. In a sworn statement, dated 
September 21, 2012, Applicant elected to have his case decided on the written record in 
lieu of a hearing.2 A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant on December 6, 2012, and he was afforded an opportunity, 
within 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on December 23, 
2012, and timely submitted additional documents to which Department Counsel had no 
objections. The case was assigned to me on January 4, 2013. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (Afghanistan), 
appearing in ten U.S. Government publications. He also requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain enumerated facts pertaining to the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan (Pakistan), appearing in ten U.S. Government publications. Facts are proper 
for administrative notice when they are easily verifiable by an authorized source and 
relevant and material to the case. In this instance, the Government relied on source 
information regarding Afghanistan in publications of the U.S. Department of State,3 the 
Director of National Intelligence,4 and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.5 In 
addition, the Government relied on source information regarding Pakistan in 
                                                          
2
 Department Counsel initially invoked &3.1.7, Additional Procedural Guidance, Encl. 3, of the Directive, and 
requested a hearing. See Item 4 (Letters, dated October 18, 2012); Item 5 (E-mail, dated October 19, 2012); Item 6a 
(Letter, dated November 19, 2012). The request was subsequently withdrawn. See Item 9 (E-mail, dated December 
6, 2012). 
 
3
 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs, Background Note: Afghanistan, 
dated November 28, 2011; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Country Specific Information: 
Afghanistan, dated February 7, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 
2010 Human Rights Report: Afghanistan, dated April 8, 2011; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, 
Human Rights, and Labor, 2011 Human Rights Report: Afghanistan, undated; U.S. Department of State, Office of the 
Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 2010, dated August 18, 2011; U.S. Department of 
State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Afghanistan, dated June 27, 2012; U.S. Department of State, 
Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 2010, Chapter 5: Terrorist Safe Havens, 
dated August 18, 2011; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country Reports on 
Terrorism 2011, Chapter 2. Country Reports: South and Central Asia Overview (Extract), and Chapter 5: Terrorist 
Safe Havens (Extract), dated July 21, 2012 (two copies); and U.S. Department of State, Bureau of International 
Information Programs (IIP) Article, U.S. Declares Haqqani Network a Terrorist Organization, dated September 7, 
2012. 
 
4
 Director of National Intelligence, Unclassified Statement for the Record on the Worldwide Threat 
Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community for the House Permanent Select Committee of Intelligence, dated 
February 2, 2012. 
 
5
 Statement of Admiral Michael Mullen, U.S. Navy, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff before the Senate Armed 
Services Committee on Afghanistan and Iraq, dated September 22, 2011. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
publications of The White House,6 the U.S. Department of State,7 the Director of 
National Intelligence,8 and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.9  
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,10 as set 
forth below under the Afghanistan and Pakistan subsections. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, three of the 
factual allegations pertaining to foreign influence (¶¶ 1.c. through 1.e.). Although the two 
remaining factual allegations (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.) were denied, Applicant actually admitted, 
with explanations, portions of both allegations. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the 
record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since February 
2011, has served as a linguist.11 He previously owned several food marts and 
                                                          
6
 The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Press Briefing by Senior Administration Officials on the 
Killing of Osama bin Laden, dated May 2, 2011. 
 
7
 U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 
2011, Terrorist Safe Havens, Chapter 5, dated July 31, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for 
Counterterrorism, Country Reports: South and Central Asia Overview, dated July 31, 2012; U.S. Department of State, 
Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Pakistan, dated September 19, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Country 
Specific Information: Pakistan, dated August 31, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human 
Rights, and Labor, 2011 Human Rights Report: Pakistan, dated May 24, 2012; and U.S. Department of State, Bureau 
of International Information Programs (IIP) Article, U.S. Declares Haqqani Network a Terrorist Organization, dated 
September 7, 2012 – the same document cited by Department Counsel regarding Afghanistan. 
 
8
 Director of National Intelligence, Unclassified Statement for the Record on the Worldwide Threat 
Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community for the House Permanent Select Committee of Intelligence, dated 
February 2, 2012 – the same document cited by Department Counsel regarding Afghanistan. 
 
9
 Statement of Admiral Michael Mullen, U.S. Navy, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, before the Senate Armed 
Services Committee on Afghanistan and Iraq, dated September 22, 2011; Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
National Public Radio “All Things Considered” Interview, dated March 27, 2009  – the same documents cited by 
Department Counsel regarding Afghanistan. 
 
10
 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & 
Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize 
authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing 
internet sources for numerous documents).  
 
11
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 12; Item 6e (Counterintelligence-Focused Security Screening Questionnaire, 
dated February 24, 2011), at 1; Item 8 (Stipulation Regarding Adoption and Admission of Government Evidence, 
dated November 27, 2012 (by Applicant), with attached copy of Item 6e. Henceforth, all references will be made to 
Item 6e, rather than to the attachment of Item 8. 
 
4 
                                      
 
convenience stores. Applicant has never served in the U.S. military,12 and he has never 
held a security clearance.13 He currently serves as a civilian linguist for the U.S. Army in 
support of Operation Enduring Freedom at or near a military facility in Afghanistan. He 
previously served as a civilian linguist and cultural consultant with a U.S. Marine Corps 
(USMC) intelligence-gathering unit in Afghanistan.14  
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
 In recognition of Applicant’s exceptional performance while stationed in 
Afghanistan from July 2011 until July 2012, he was awarded a certificate of merit and 
appreciation from his employer.15 The commanding officer of the USMC unit in 
Afghanistan awarded Applicant a Meritorious Mast for his exceptional performance in 
direct support of U.S. military operations in Afghanistan.16 Applicant was recognized as 
one of the USMC’s primary linguists who provided “timely, substantive interpretation 
services to all aspects of our operations. . . His willingness to work no matter what the 
conditions was what prompted our team to hand select him for our specific mission.”17 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan.18 Both of his parents (his father is a farmer 
and his mother, a housewife)19 were born in Afghanistan, and they currently reside 
primarily in Afghanistan, but spend the winter months in Pakistan.20 Applicant is a 1983 
high school graduate. Along with his father and two brothers, Applicant immigrated as 
church-sponsored refugees, first to Pakistan in 1986, and then to the United States in 
1988.21 He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1994.22  
 
Applicant was married in June 1995,23 and he and his wife have four children, all 
of whom were born in the United States.24 Applicant’s wife was born in Afghanistan in 
                                                          
12
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 16. 
 
13
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 35-36. 
 
14
 Response to FORM, dated December 24, 2012; Letter, dated December 16, 2012, attached to Response 
to FORM. 
 
15
 Certificate of Merit and Appreciation, dated July 3, 2012, attached to Item 3. 
 
16
 Meritorious Mast, dated March 26, 2012, attached to Item 3. 
 
17
 Letter, supra note 14. 
 
18
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 5. 
 
19
 Item 11 (Relatives and Associates chart, dated February 24, 2011), at 1. 
 
20
 Item 11, supra note 19, at 1; Item 3 (Answer to the SOR, dated September 21, 2012, at 4. 
 
21
 Item 12 (Foreign Travel chart, dated February 24, 2011), at 1;  
 
22
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 7. 
 
23
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 18. 
 
5 
                                      
 
1977.25 She immigrated to the United States in 1995, and became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 2000.26 The family resides in the United States,27 where the three oldest 
children are students.28 Applicant’s father, a permanent resident alien, resided in the 
United States for about 20 years before returning to Afghanistan.29 His two brothers, 
both of whom were initially permanent resident aliens, but now naturalized U.S. citizens, 
have resided in the United States since their arrival in 1988.30 Two other brothers 
immigrated to the United States in 2000, and they are Afghan citizens who are 
permanent resident aliens.31 Another brother, a student, remains a citizen-resident of 
Afghanistan.32 Applicant also has two sisters. They are both citizen-residents of 
Afghanistan where they are housewives.33 Applicant speaks with his parents by 
telephone one or two times per year; and his brothers in the United States once each 
week.34 In 2009, Applicant traveled to Afghanistan and visited with his family for about a 
week.35 He has not had any contact with his sisters or brother in Afghanistan since 
2009.36 There is no evidence that any member of Applicant’s immediate or extended 
family has ever been associated with the Afghan or Pakistani military or intelligence 
service.37 
 
Applicant has no financial interests in Afghanistan, and does not own any 
investments or property there.38 He does not financially support any relatives in 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
24
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 20-22; Item 11, supra note 16, at 1. 
 
25
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 18; Item 11, supra note 16, at 1; Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview, dated March 
3, 2011), at 1; Item 7 (Stipulation Regarding Adoption and Admission of Government Evidence, dated November 27, 
2012 (by Applicant), with attached copy of Item 6c. Henceforth, all references will be made to Item 6c, rather than to 
the attachment of Item 7. 
 
26
 Item 6c, supra note 25, at 1. 
 
27
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 20-22; Item 11, supra note 16, at 2. 
 
28
 Item 11, supra note 19, at 2. 
 
29
 Item 6c, supra note 25, at 1; Item 3, supra note 20, at 4. 
 
30
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 24-25; Item 6c, supra note 25, at 1; Item 12, supra note 21, at 1. 
 
31
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 23; Item 6c, supra note 25, at 1; Item 3, supra note 20, at 4. 
 
32
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 25; Item 3, supra note 20, at 4. 
 
33
 Item 10, supra note 1, at 25-26; Item 6c, supra note 25, at 1; Item 3, supra note 20, at 4. 
 
34
 Item 11, supra note 19, at 1. 
 
35
 Item 12, supra note 21, at 2. 
 
36
 Item 11, supra note 19, at 1. 
 
37
 Item 6c, supra note 25, at 2. 
 
38
 Item 6c, supra note 25, at 2. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
Afghanistan.39 He considers himself to be a loyal American, and intends to retire in the 
United States.40 
 
Afghanistan  
 
Formerly under the control of the United Kingdom, Afghanistan received 
independence in August 1919. It has common borders with Pakistan on the east and 
the south, Iran on the west, and Russia on the north. Afghanistan has had a turbulent 
political history, including an invasion by the Soviet Union in 1979, occupation by the 
Soviet Union until 1989, and civil war between the occupiers and home-grown freedom 
fighters, known as mujaheddin. Anarchy ensued, and fighting continued among the 
various ethnic, clan, and religious warlords and their respective militias even after the 
Soviet Union withdrew from the country. By the mid-1990s, the Taliban rose to power 
and controlled significant portions of the country, imposing repressive policies and 
Sharia law, guiding all aspects of Muslim life. Afghanistan became a sanctuary for 
terrorist groups. 
 
After the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, United States demands that 
Afghanistan expel Osama Bin-Laden and his followers were rejected by the Taliban. In 
October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the country, 
forcing the Taliban out of power. Following a few years of governance by an interim 
government, a democratic presidential election took place in October 2004, and a new 
democratic government took power. Despite the election, many daunting challenges 
remained largely because terrorists including al-Qaida and the Taliban continue to 
assert power and intimidation within the country. Terrorists continue to target United 
States and Afghan interests through suicide bombings, assassinations, and hostage 
taking.  
 
Afghanistan’s human rights record remains poor, for there are continuing 
extrajudicial killings; torture and other abuse; widespread official corruption and 
impunity; ineffective government investigations of abuses by local security forces; 
arbitrary arrest and detention; judicial corruption; violations of privacy rights; violence 
and societal discrimination against women; sexual abuse of children; trafficking in 
persons; and restrictions on freedoms of religion, the press, assembly, and movement. 
 
Taliban insurgents retain the capability and intent to conduct attacks and 
kidnappings of Americans, other Western nationals, and members of the local populace. 
The United States has made a long-term commitment to help Afghanistan rebuild itself 
after decades of war, and along with others in the international community, provides 
substantial assistance, focusing on reintegration, economic development, improving 
relations with Afghanistan regional partners, and steadily increasing the security 
responsibilities of the Afghan security forces. Furthermore, there is increased terrorist 
support coming into Afghanistan from Pakistan and Iran. Not only has the security 
                                                          
39
 Item 6c, supra note 25, at 2. 
 
40
 Item 6c, supra note 25, at 2. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
situation remained volatile and unpredictable throughout Afghanistan, but there are also 
tensions with Afghanistan over limiting U.S. military operations. 
  
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic in South Asia. It has a coalition 
government. Pakistan was one of only three countries to recognize the Taliban regime 
of Afghanistan, after September 11, 2001. However, Pakistan reassessed its relations 
with the Taliban and pledged support to the United States and the international coalition 
in Operation Enduring Freedom, which aimed at removing the Taliban from power. 
Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in the Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan and in the Balochistan Province, which 
borders Iran and Afghanistan. The Taliban operates openly in Pakistan, as do 
extremists from the Pakistani Taliban and al-Qaida. Taliban financing has been traced 
from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to strengthen its 
military and technical capabilities. Pakistan has intensified its counterinsurgency efforts, 
but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed. 
  
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be 
terrorist safe havens. Those safe havens have been defined as:41 
 
ungoverned, under-governed, or ill-governed physical areas where 
terrorists are able to organize, plan, raise funds, communicate, recruit, 
train, transit, and operate in relative security because of inadequate 
governance capacity, political will, or both. 
 
 The security situation in Afghanistan worsened in 2008, driven in part by 
insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous Afghan-
Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide vital 
sanctuary to al-Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. Al-
Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Afghan insurgency, 
while also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests in Pakistan 
and worldwide. Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremists groups, al-Qaida 
uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare regional and 
transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and supplies. Al-
Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of destabilizing suicide attacks 
throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high profile government, military, and 
western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in 2008 due to such attacks. 
In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan conducted at least 40 
suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed about 600 Pakistani 
civilians and security force personnel. In January 2011, the Governor of Punjab was 
assassinated in a terrorist attack, and in March 2011, the Pakistani Federal Minister for 
Minority Affairs was assassinated in another terrorist attack. 
 
                                                          
 
41
 U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 
2011, Terrorist Safe Havens, Chapter 5, supra note 7, at 1 
 
8 
                                      
 
Pakistan consistently ranks among the most corrupt countries in the world by 
numerous international organizations. The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of 
the risks of traveling to Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several 
American citizens present in Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other 
personal reasons. The human rights situation in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial 
killings, torture, and disappearances occur. Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police 
corruption is widespread, and the Pakistani government maintains several domestic 
intelligence agencies to monitor politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, the 
media, and suspected foreign intelligence agents. Credible reports indicate that 
authorities use wiretaps and monitor mail without the requisite court approval, and also 
monitor phones and electronic messages. In addition, Pakistan continues to develop its 
own nuclear infrastructure, expand nuclear weapon stockpiles, and seek more 
advanced warhead and delivery systems. In the aftermath of Pakistan’s development of 
nuclear weapons, the United States cut-off military aid to Pakistan for several years.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the United States in 
counterterrorism methods. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the 
Pakistan-Afghanistan border and subsequently sent thousands of troops and sustained 
hundreds of casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency 
efforts, and demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The 
United States is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and 
security. In 2003, President Bush announced that the United States would provide 
Pakistan with $3 billion in economic and military aid over the next five years beginning 
in 2005. 
 
On May 1, 2011, U.S. Special Forces personnel raided a large compound 
located in a residential neighborhood in Pakistan and shot and killed Osama bin Laden, 
the leader of al-Qaida.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”42 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”43   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
                                                          
42
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
43
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
9 
                                      
 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”44 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.45  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”46 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”47 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
                                                          
44
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
45
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
46
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
47
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under the Foreign Influence guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.48 Applicant’s varied relationships with his parents 
and three siblings, all of whom are Afghan citizens who still reside in Afghanistan, or 
vacation part of the year in Pakistan, as well as Applicant’s two brothers who are 
Afghan citizens residing in the United States, are current security concerns for the 
Government.  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), it is potentially disqualifying where there is:  
contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if 
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), security concerns may be raised when there are: 
                                                          
48
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
11 
                                      
 
connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create 
a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to help a 
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case. However, the security significance of 
these identified conditions requires further examination of Applicant’s respective 
relationships with his parents and five siblings to determine the degree of “heightened 
risk” or potential conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where: 
the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may apply where the evidence shows:  
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where contact or communication with foreign citizens is 
so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances in light of any 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.49 In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”50 
 
                                                          
49
 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
50
 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
12 
                                      
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly relationship, or the 
existence of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may make it less likely 
that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or 
associates in that foreign country. 
 
As noted above, since October 2001, when U.S. forces and coalition partners led 
military operations in Afghanistan, there has been first an interim government, and then 
a democratic government in Afghanistan. Nevertheless, many daunting challenges 
remained largely because terrorists including al-Qaida and the Taliban continue to 
assert power and intimidation within the country. It is less likely that the Afghan 
government would attempt coercive means to obtain sensitive information. The real 
concern in this instance is not the Afghan government, but rather al-Qaida and Taliban 
terrorists. Applicant’s parents and three siblings still reside in Afghanistan (although his 
parents temporarily reside in Pakistan during the winter months) and there is substantial 
risk – a “heightened risk” – of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, 
or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a security clearance. There is no 
evidence that Applicant’s parents or siblings are or have ever been political activists, 
challenging the policies of the Afghan or Pakistani governments; that terrorists have 
approached or threatened Applicant or his parents or siblings for any reason; that the 
Afghan government, Pakistani government, al-Qaida, or the Taliban have approached 
Applicant; or that his parents or siblings currently engage in activities that would bring 
attention to themselves. As such, there is a reduced possibility that they would be 
targets for coercion or exploitation by the Afghan government, the Pakistani 
government, al-Qaida, or the Taliban, which may seek to quiet those who speak out 
against them. 
 
Also, as noted above, Applicant has two brothers who, although they remain 
Afghan citizens, are permanent U.S. residents, and have been so since 2000. As to 
those two brothers, there is no continuing substantial risk of any kind of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant 
from holding a security clearance.  
 
Applicant has significant connections to the United States, having lived in the 
United States for nearly 25 years. His wife, children, and two brothers are U.S. citizens 
residing in the United States. Two other brothers remain Afghan citizens, but they too 
reside in the United States. His parents, two sisters, and one brother are Afghan citizen-
residents, but the parents spend their winters in Pakistan. Moreover, Applicant wants 
his security clearance so that he can remain in Afghanistan to assist U.S. Armed Forces 
in their combat and intelligence-gathering mission there. This is not a situation where an 
applicant seeks a security clearance so he can simply work with classified information 
and enjoy the comforts of home in the United States. Applicant has offered to continue 
to risk his life to support the United States’ goals in Afghanistan, and has shown his 
patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States. As noted by one of his U.S. military 
combat colleagues, Applicant’s “willingness to work no matter what the conditions was 
 
13 
                                      
 
what prompted our team to hand select him for our specific mission.” Applicant’s 
continuing relationship with his parents and brother is close and his contacts with them, 
though varied, are relatively frequent, too close and frequent to generate more than a 
limited application of AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c). His relationship with his sisters is not as close 
and his contact with them is basically nonexistent. Applicant has met his burden of 
showing there is little likelihood that relationships with his parents, one brother, or his 
two sisters, could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. Furthermore, I am 
persuaded that Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is steadfast and undivided, and 
that he has “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [he] 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 
8(b) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.51       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s situation, because his 
parents, two sisters, and one brother are Afghan citizen-residents, and are at risk from 
al-Qaida and Taliban terrorists.  (See AG & 2(a)(8).) Furthermore, his parents spend 
their winter months in Pakistan.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has offered to continue to risk his life to support the United States’ goals in 
Afghanistan, and has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States. He 
is fully aware of the risks to himself and his parents, brother, and sisters from al-Qaida 
and Taliban terrorists. These circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will 
                                                          
51
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or 
insurgent group to coerce or exploit him.52 Moreover, while the “heightened risk” of 
terrorist activities occurring in Afghanistan and Pakistan are of significance, it should 
also be remembered that terrorists and would-be terrorists are also active in the United 
States, creating a “heightened risk” here as well. With the vast majority of his family 
members residing in the United States, there is a reduced “heightened risk” of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Under the evidence 
presented, I have no questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
52
 See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
