 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14590 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, a 1996 naturalized U.S. citizen, has strong family ties and substantial 
property interests in India. His interests in India could subject him to a risk of foreign 
influence or exploitation. Foreign influence concerns are not mitigated. Access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 20, 2011. On 
September 26, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 11, 2012, and requested a decision without a 
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                             
hearing. The Government requested a hearing before an administrative judge on 
October 23, 2012. (GE 1) The case was assigned to me on November 6, 2012. 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on November 8, 2012, convening a hearing for November 28, 2012. At the hearing, the 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. GE 1 was admitted without objection. GE 2 
was marked for identification and considered for administrative notice purposes, but it 
was not admitted. Applicant testified, and he submitted exhibit (AE) 1, which was 
received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 6, 
2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR factual allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
in the findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, 
and having observed Applicant’s demeanor and considered his testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 66-year-old architect working for a defense contractor. He and his 
wife were born, raised, and educated in India. In 1969, he was awarded his architect 
degree from an Indian university. His father paid for his education. Applicant never 
served in the Indian armed services and did not work for the Indian government. After 
receiving his architect degree at age 23, Applicant worked for an Indian company for 
five years. He then left India and worked for the Nigerian government for a period of 10 
years. He then worked for one-year for the Saudi Arabian government.  
 
In 1987, at age 40, Applicant immigrated to the United States with his wife and 
two daughters. Applicant married his wife in June 1972, and they have been married for 
41 years. Applicant’s wife worked as a teacher in India and Nigeria while Applicant 
worked there. Applicant and his wife became naturalized U.S. citizens in December 
1996. According to Applicant, she is currently a senior employee at a large Government 
agency, and possesses a security clearance. Applicant and his wife have two adult 
daughters. The oldest daughter, age 39, was born in India, and the youngest daughter, 
age 32, was born in Nigeria. Both are naturalized U.S. citizens residing in the United 
States. Both daughters are married to Indian-born naturalized U.S. citizens. The oldest 
daughter has two children, both of whom were born in the United States.  
 
Applicant attended a U.S. university and was awarded a master’s in business 
administration (MBA) degree in June 1987. From December 1997 until March 2008, 
Applicant worked for a state government as an engineer. From June 2008 until October 
2008, Applicant worked for an architectural international company performing a job in 
the Middle East. From November 2008 until March 2011, Applicant worked for another 
international company with officers in the Middle East. In June 2011, he was hired by 
his current employer, a government contractor, to work as an architect overseas. This is 
Applicant’s first security clearance application. 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                             
Applicant’s mother and younger sister are citizens and residents of India. His 
mother is 86 years old, and lives in the family home. She always worked as a 
homemaker. Applicant’s sister lives with his mother, and she is not employed. 
Applicant’s father is deceased. He served in the British army as a commissioned officer. 
He then worked in a senior position for the Indian government. Applicant’s mother 
receives a pension from the Indian government. Applicant supplements her income on a 
regular basis. Applicant has no interest in his parent’s home, and testified that his 
younger brother is entitled to the family home. Applicant’s oldest sister is a citizen of 
India currently residing in South Africa. 
 
Applicant owns a home in India, which he built approximately 35 years ago. He 
estimated the current value of his home is approximately $100,000. Since immigrating 
to the United States in 1987, Applicant has traveled to India on a yearly basis to visit his 
mother and relatives in India. He stays in his home in India whenever he travels to visit 
his family in India. His most recent trip to India was in December 2012. He does not rent 
his home when he is not in India. Applicant has caretakers to oversee the house. 
Applicant has telephonic contact with his mother on a weekly basis. He has contact with 
his sister approximately once every two months. 
 
Applicant has two brothers, both of whom are naturalized U.S. citizens. His 
younger brother is currently residing in India with his wife and daughter. He resided in 
the United States for approximately 12 years, but he has resided in India for the last 
three years. His brother’s daughter is attending a specialized school in India. Applicant 
believes his brother intends to return to live in the United States when his daughter 
graduates from the Indian school. His brother is not working in India. He supports 
himself with the proceeds from the sale of his home in the United States. Applicant has 
telephonic and email contact with brother approximately once every two to three 
months. 
 
Applicant has many extended family members who are citizens and residents in 
India. To his knowledge, none of his extended family members or his friends living in 
India worked for the government of India or are members of the Indian armed forces. 
 
Applicant currently has approximately $61,500 in three bank accounts in India. 
As the oldest male in his family, he is responsible for his family’s wellbeing and he 
maintains his bank accounts to provide financial support to family members living in 
India, for insurance purposes, and to address any possible economic contingencies. In 
the United States, Applicant owns several properties, a residence with an approximate 
value of $350,000; a rental property with a value estimated on $300,000; and an 
apartment with an estimated value of $450,000. These properties have mortgages 
higher than or close to the estimated current value of the properties. Additionally, 
Applicant testified he has approximately $160,000 in two retirement plans.  
 
Applicant considers himself to be a successful architect and engineer. He is 
proud of the good work he performed for a U.S. state agency for over 10 years. He is 
considering retirement in the near future. Before retiring, Applicant would like to pay 
back the United States for all the privileges and benefits he received in the United 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                             
States. He would consider it an honor to share his experience and good work on some 
of the fine buildings the United States is constructing in America or in other countries. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning India and its 
relations with the United States: 
India is a stable multiparty federal, democratic republic with a bicameral 
parliament and a population of about 1.21 billion. The Indian government generally 
respects the rights of its citizens. The country’s May 2009 elections were considered 
free and fair, despite scattered instances of violence. India has a vibrant civil society, a 
free press, and a robust democratic political system. Notwithstanding, corruption in the 
government and police forces, caste-based discrimination, and domestic violence and 
other abuses against women and children persist, despite criminal penalties for 
violations and government efforts to implement programs designed to empower 
members of the lower castes. Police and security forces often act with impunity, and 
serious abuses have been reported in criminal investigations and efforts to suppress 
domestic terrorism. Separatist and terrorist groups remain active in areas of conflict, 
such as Jammu and Kashmir, the Northeastern States, and the Naxalite belt. 
Anti-Western terrorist groups, including Islamic extremist groups on the U.S. 
government's list of foreign terrorist organizations, continue to plan attacks that could 
take place in locations throughout India, including where U.S. citizens or Westerners are 
known to congregate or visit. Recent incidents include bombings in February 2012 of an 
Israeli diplomatic vehicle in New Delhi, in September 2011 at New Delhi's High Court, 
and in July 2011 in crowded areas in Mumbai. Such threats to safety have led the U.S. 
State Department to advise U.S. citizens to practice good security when in India, and to 
avoid travel to areas of domestic conflict and to the India-Pakistan border.  
India is a member of the United Nations with a non-permanent seat on the 
Security Council in 2011-2012, and it seeks a permanent seat on the Council. It has a 
long tradition of participating in U.N. peacekeeping operations, and has committed $1.3 
billion to Afghan reconstruction efforts. The United States welcomes India's role in 
Afghanistan while recognizing Pakistan's security interests in having a friendly western 
neighbor. Three full-scale wars and a constant state of military preparedness on both 
sides of the border have marked more than six decades of bitter rivalry between India 
and Pakistan. The United States strongly encourages an ongoing India-Pakistan peace 
initiative and remains concerned about the potential for conflict over Kashmiri 
sovereignty and “cross-border terrorism.”  
India continues to obtain the bulk of its imported military hardware from Russia, 
which had been India's major benefactor for the first four decades of its independence. 
As of 2000, India was listed as one of many countries actively engaged in economic 
intelligence collection and industrial espionage directed at the United States. As of 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                             
2008, India was identified as one of seven countries involved in criminal espionage and 
in the illegal acquisition of U.S. export-restricted products. There had been several 
incidents of international businesses illegally exporting, or attempting to export, 
restricted, dual-use technology from the United States to India. There is no evidence 
that India then or now tortures or abuses its citizens to extract economic intelligence.  
The United States has also had longstanding economic issues with India 
regarding protection of intellectual property rights and trade in dual-use technology. 
Differences between the United States and India still exist over India's nuclear weapons 
programs; the slow pace of India's economic reforms, bureaucracy, corruption, labor 
market rigidity, and regulatory and foreign investment controls. India's bilateral strategic 
partnership with Iran is also a concern. Between 2004 and 2006, the United States 
sanctioned Indian scientists and chemical companies for transferring nuclear weapons-
related equipment and technology to Iran. India imported about $10 billion worth of 
crude oil from Iran in 2009. 
At the same time, the United States recognizes India as key to U.S. strategic 
interests. Since 2002, the United States and India have held combined exercises 
involving all military services. Both countries are committed to political freedom 
protected by representative government, and share common interests in the free flow of 
commerce, in fighting terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia.  
The United States has been committed to establishing a strong, dynamic 
partnership with India. This is evidenced by the June 2005 ten-year defense pact 
(outlining planned collaboration in multilateral operations, expanded two-way defense 
trade, and increasing technology transfer opportunities); the July 2007 bilateral 
agreement for peaceful nuclear cooperation; the July 2009 “Strategic Dialogue” (calling 
for collaboration on energy, trade, education, and counterterrorism issues); and U.S. 
arms sales to India (In 2009, India signed a $2.1 billion deal to purchase eight 
surveillance aircraft from a U.S. manufacturer.). The United States is India's largest 
investment partner. Foreign assistance was about $3 billion in 2006-2007, with the 
United States providing about $126 million in development assistance. 
India does not permit its citizens to hold dual citizenship. In 2006, India launched 
the Overseas Citizens of India (OCI) program. It is not a dual nationality program and 
does not grant Indian citizenship. A U.S. citizen who obtains an OCI card can travel to 
and from India indefinitely, work in India, study in India, and own property in India 
(except for certain agricultural and plantation properties). An OCI card holder is 
ineligible for an Indian passport or for Indian government employment and cannot vote 
in Indian elections. 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                             
Policies 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or she] may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                             
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant has foreign connections that present a potential risk of divided loyalties 
or undue foreign influence. Applicant's mother and sister are resident citizens of India, 
and he has a brother who is a naturalized U.S. citizen living in India. He also has 
extended family members who are citizens and residents of India. Additionally, he owns 
a home in India, valued at approximately $100,000, and three bank accounts, valued at 
approximately $61,000. Four disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 are potentially 
applicable: 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation; 
Applicant’s relationship with his mother, siblings, and extended family members 
who are citizens and residents in India is sufficient to create “a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” and a potential 
conflict of interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and [his] desire to help” his relatives and friends living in India. He has close 
affection for his mother, siblings, and extended family members living in India. His 
communications with his immediate family members is frequent, and he provides 
financial support to his mother on a regular basis. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with family living in a foreign country is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                             
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States, or the 
country has a significant problem with lawless elements or terrorists.  
 
The United States and India’s governments have improved ties since 2002. They 
have held a series of substantive combined exercises involving all military services, and 
the United States is providing defense technology to India. The relationship between the 
two nations is characterized as strong, strategic, increasingly collaborative, and 
transparent. India also has been a reliable ally of the United States in the fight against 
international terrorism. The country has taken steps since the Mumbai attacks to make it 
more difficult for insurgents or terrorist groups to operate with impunity. Human rights 
abuses in India largely involve harsh treatment of persons suspected of terrorist activity. 
India is not known to coerce its law-abiding citizens. 
 
There is some evidence, however, to show that the relationship of the Indian 
government with the U.S. Government should raise a heightened security concern. 
Indian-U.S. interests are not aligned on several issues involving Pakistan and other 
countries. India relies on Iran and Russia for oil and gas supplies. Russia has 
historically been India's largest supplier of military hardware, and Indian scientists and 
chemical companies have been sanctioned by the United States in the past for 
transferring nuclear weapons-related equipment and technology to Iran. While U.S.-
Russian relations have improved since the end of the Cold War, Russia also has been 
identified as a country that aggressively targets the U.S. for its economic, industrial, 
technological, and military secrets. And, Iran is a state sponsor of terrorism and 
avowedly anti-American. Furthermore, India and commercial entities in India have 
aggressively targeted U.S. economic intelligence in the past, as recently as 2008, 
although the Defense Department does not presently believe that India is exploiting 
U.S. technology. 
 
Notwithstanding, an Applicant should not be placed into a position where he 
might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist 
his family living in India.  
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives from India or terrorists seek or 
have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his family 
living in India. Nevertheless, his relationships with his family living in India create a 
potential conflict of interest. His relationship with them is sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about his desire to assist them by providing sensitive or classified 
information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                             
with his family living in India, raising the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. Furthermore, Applicant has substantial financial and property interests in 
India, which could subject him to an increased risk of foreign influence or exploitation. 
His financial and property interests in India raise a security concern. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 
7(d), and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any 
mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1987, at age 40, and he has lived in 
the United States for 25 years. He has a strong affection and sense of obligation to his 
mother and siblings living in India. He has frequent contact with them, and he travels to 
India on a yearly basis to be with them. He provides his mother with financial support. 
Applicant also owns a home in India, valued at around $100,000, and he has 
approximately $61,500, in three bank accounts in India. Applicant also has extended 
family members in India with whom he has infrequent contact. 
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                             
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant is not able to fully meet his 
burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his relatives, 
friends, and associates who are Indian citizens and living in India] could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) to 8(c), and 8(f) have limited applicability and do not mitigate the 
foreign influence concerns. The governments of India and the United States currently 
have good relations based on similar interests. However, Guideline B is not limited to 
countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family living in India. 
Although there is no evidence that Indian government agents, terrorists or criminals 
have approached or threatened Applicant or his family living in India because of his 
work for the United States, he is nevertheless potentially vulnerable to threats and 
coercion made against his family living in India.  
 
A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is whether Applicant has “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant did well working for a 
state agency for a period of 10 years. He has been providing government contractors 
valuable services since 2008. His wife and two daughters are naturalized U.S. citizens. 
His wife works for a government agency, and according to Applicant, she possesses a 
security clearance. His two daughters are residents of the United States, and married to 
Indian-born, naturalized U.S. citizens. One daughter has two children born in the United 
States. Applicant has property interests in the United States (a home (with a substantial 
mortgage), two investment properties (with substantial mortgages), and two retirement 
plans). He credibly stated that his loyalty is to the United States, and that he intends to 
retire in the United States. To a certain extent, his actions show that “[he] can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” 
Notwithstanding, Applicant was born in India, and he also has substantial financial 
interests in that country.  
 
AG ¶ 8(d) does not apply because Applicant’s contacts and relationships with his 
family in India are not on behalf of the U.S. Government. AG ¶ 8(e) is not raised by the 
facts in this case and it does not apply.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his family living in India remain very significant 
to him. Even though he is a naturalized U.S. citizen and he has been working for U.S. 
contractors, his connections to the United States are insufficient in light of his extensive 
personal, familial, and property interests in India. The mitigating information taken 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                             
together is insufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns under 
Guideline B.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c))  
 
The whole-person factors weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security 
clearance are significant; however, they are insufficient to warrant approval of his 
access to classified information. Applicant, 66 years old, immigrated to the United 
States in 1987, at age 40. He was awarded a master in business administration from a 
U.S. university that same year. He became a U.S. citizen in 1996. He worked for a state 
agency for 10 years. Since 2008, he has provided valuable services to several U.S. 
government contractors while posted in foreign countries. He intends to retire in the 
United States in the near future.  
 
The factors supporting a continuing foreign influence security concern and denial 
of Applicant’s security clearance because of Applicant’s connections to India are more 
significant than the factors weighing towards approval of his access to classified 
information. Applicant was born, raised, and educated in India. Applicant’s mother and 
one sister are citizens and residents of India. Applicant has strong feelings of affection 
and obligation to his family. He communicates with them frequently, and provides them 
with financial support. He owns a home in India, with a value of around $100,000 that 
he built many years ago. He stays in that property whenever he travels to India. 
Applicant also has three bank accounts in India with approximately $61,500.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning India must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in India, as well as the dangers existing in India.2 Since 2002, the 
United States and India have been improving their relations, and both countries are 
committed to establishing a strong partnership. This is evidenced by the 2005 ten-year 
defense pact, the 2007 bilateral agreement for peaceful nuclear cooperation, the 2009 
Strategic dialogue for collaboration on energy, trade, and counterterrorism issues, the 
joint participation in military exercises, the increase in sales of military technology, and 
the fact that the United States is India’s largest investment partner. India is a member of 
the United Nations and participates in peacekeeping operations. The United States and 
India share many interests, such as peace in the region and fighting terrorism.  
 
However, even when all these factors are weighed, there are areas of concern 
such as India’s relationship with Russia and Iran, India’s involvement in criminal 
espionage, its illegal acquisition of U.S. export-restricted products, its lack of protection 
of intellectual property rights, and its trade of dual-use technology. Although there is no 
evidence that India has torture or abused its citizens to extract economic intelligence, 
                                            
2See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
12 
                                                                                                                                             
there continues to be a risk that lawless Indian elements will attempt to coerce family 
members of security clearance holders to obtain classified or sensitive information. On 
balance, Applicant’s immediate family members in India and his substantial property 
interests in that country continue to be a security concern. Applicant has not fully 
mitigated the foreign influence security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
