 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11117 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 6, 2012, the Department of Defense issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On October 24, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On November 8, 2012, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
and it was received on November 28, 2012. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
provided additional information. The case was assigned to me on January 4, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegation ¶ 1.a and denied allegation ¶ 2.a. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He married in 2011 and has no children. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 2002 and a master’s degree in 2011. He has held a Secret security 
clearance since 2003. He has worked for his present employer since 2010. 
 
 Applicant admitted he used marijuana while holding a security clearance. In his 
answer to the SOR he stated:  
 
I admit I used marijuana approximately 15-20 times between August 2007 
and December 2007. I recognize this was a serious breach of trust placed 
in me by the Government, and it is a mistake I am prepared to account for. 
While my intentions were medical and I did not, at the time, recognize 
myself as a security risk, I also recognize that this was not my decision to 
make.1  
 
He explained the circumstances of his marijuana use as follows:  
 
I began experiencing sleep-onset insomnia in 2006. This corresponded 
with the start of my graduate studies, which was in addition to my normal 
full-time work schedule. I was also troubled by the recent suicide of my 
brother. The symptoms were mild and intermittent until mid-2007, at which 
time they became much worse. I tried over-the-counter sleep aids and 
several home remedies, which had no effect. I was also offered Ambien by 
a family member, which I declined.  
 
An acquaintance of mine at school was a homeopathic specialist who also 
suffered from a similar affliction. She recommended small doses of 
medicinal marijuana during a period of relaxation an hour before bedtime, 
and provided me with a small amount and some instructions for use. I was 
warned only to take a small dose; otherwise I would potentially make it 
even more difficult to fall asleep. She had a prescription from her doctor, 
but I did not have a prescription myself, nor did I consult with a doctor at 
                                                          
1
 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
the time. In fact, I did not, at the time, feel comfortable visiting with a 
doctor at all, and had not been to one in many years.  
 
Marijuana proved to be effective relief from my symptoms at first, and I 
used it whenever I had significant difficulty falling asleep. This was up to 
three times a week, although some weeks I went without it entirely. It 
stopped being effective near the end of use. I did not wish to increase the 
dosage. My use was private and at home. 
 
During this period I developed two upper respiratory infections, the last of 
which was the last time I used marijuana. The infection was bad enough 
that I went to see a doctor, who prescribed antibiotics. I admitted I had 
smoked marijuana, but only very small quantities. She warned me that 
even small amounts can cause complications, and that the information I 
received from my acquaintance about marijuana was not in accord with 
most medical opinions.  
 
I have since done research into the medical efficacy and the legality of 
marijuana, and both are highly dubious. There is certainly no federal 
ambiguity as to the legality of marijuana, nor is it ambiguous in any of the 
promises I made when I accepted a position of trust with the Government.  
 
I was recommended a change in diet and exercise, since I do not wish to 
take pharmaceuticals. It took a few months to take effect, but I have not 
had significant issues with insomnia since. I eat a more-nutrient rich diet, 
and have taken up rock climbing, jiu jitsu, hiking, biking and swimming. 
 
My wife [S], who I married in July 2011, admonished me for my use, and 
in our discussion of our future together, has made me promise to seek 
proper medical attention for all future ailments and to never use marijuana 
again.  
 
I have not used marijuana since 2007, nor will I ever do so again. I have 
never used any other illegal drug at any time in my life, nor will I ever do 
so. 
 
* * * 
 
I no longer associate with my homeopathic acquaintance that provided me 
marijuana, or anyone else that abuses drugs or alcohol. 
 
I have never lied to or misled an investigator, nor have I ever lied on a 
questionnaire or form. I have always been honest about my past and my 
intentions. I self-reported my use in June 2011.  
 
* * * 
 
4 
 
 
I had been convinced, at the time that my use for medicinal purposes was 
excusable. This, I believed, exempted me from reporting requirements. I 
now recognize it was a serious mistake to use marijuana while in a 
position of trust, and then to justify not reporting my use directly after. 
Instead, I waited until my next investigation. I believed that the findings of 
that investigation were that I had mitigated the security risk, but I 
understand that I can be held accountable at any time.2  
 
 Applicant has been working in hazardous combat conditions. He provided a 
written statement indicating he has not used marijuana or any other controlled 
substance since 2007. The statement also included his intent not to use marijuana or 
any other controlled substance in the future. If he does, he understands and agrees that 
it will result in the automatic revocation of his security clearance. He provided copies of 
his performance evaluations for 2010 and 2011, which show he exceeds his employer’s 
expectations.  
 
 Applicant also provided character letters. He is described as a person of 
excellent character, solid resolve, and a very ethical person. He has a keen sense of 
right and wrong. He is respected as a fellow employee and as a person. He is a self-
starter, efficient, and highly productive. He is considered a valued team player. He is 
extremely reliable and trustworthy. There is no indication in the letters that were 
provided that the writers were aware of Applicant’s prior illegal drug use while holding a 
security clearance.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
2
 Item 3.  
 
 
5 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and concluded the 
following have been raised: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
Applicant used marijuana approximately 15-20 times between August 2007 and 
December 2007, while he possessed a security clearance. I find both of the above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following 
two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant decided to use marijuana over a five-month period to help him with his 
insomnia. He stated he was convinced at the time that his use for medicinal purposes 
was excusable. He chose not to seek medical treatment, but rather accepted the advice 
of a homeopathic acquaintance. After developing a respiratory infection, he sought 
medical attention and was advised that marijuana was not a treatment for insomnia. He 
later researched the subject and found its medical efficacy was highly dubious. 
Applicant held a security clearance during the time he used marijuana. Applicant’s 
presumption that his use of marijuana was excusable shows poor judgment. It also cast 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find AG ¶ 26(a) does not 
apply.  
 
 Applicant indicated in his answer that he has not abused illegal drugs since 2007 
His stated in his response that he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future, and 
he provided a written statement of intent with automatic revocation should a violation 
occur. He stated that he no longer associates with the homeopathic acquaintance or 
anyone else who abuses drugs. I find AG ¶ 26(b) applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
7 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
I considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 that could raise a security 
concern and concluded the following has been raised: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal , professional or community standing. 
 
Applicant used illegal drugs for five months while holding a security clearance. 
The above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 The same analysis provided under the drug involvement guideline is applicable 
under this guideline. Applicant was granted and entrusted with a security clearance in 
2003. In 2007, he chose to violate that trust and repeatedly use illegal drugs. He 
rationalized his use was for medicinal reasons, but he did not seek medical attention. 
Applicant acknowledges he made a mistake, but his actions cast doubt about his good 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. I find AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
This was not a situation where Applicant used marijuana once or twice while a 
teenager, but rather he used it consistently over a five-month period, while employed 
with a government contractor and holding a security clearance. It is Applicant’s thought 
process and justification for using marijuana that is a concern. He rationalized why his 
actions were excusable and his conduct permissible. In fact, had he sought legitimate 
medical treatment, he might have found appropriate and legal relief. It is the aggravating 
factor that Applicant’s use of marijuana was while he held a security clearance that 
makes his conduct serious. His actions were not minor and his behavior was not 
 
8 
 
 
infrequent. Applicant has acknowledged his behavior and has sought other treatment for 
his ailments. However, his subsequent actions are insufficient to overcome his repeated 
breach of trust while holding a security clearance. AG ¶ 17(d) and ¶ 17(e) partially 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He is an educated person who holds bachelor’s and 
master’s degrees. While holding a security clearance and over a five-month period, he 
repeatedly used marijuana. He was entrusted with a security clearance and each time 
he used marijuana he violated that trust. His explanation that his use was for medicinal 
purposes is not mitigating. Had he truly wanted to use marijuana for medical purposes 
he would have sought it from a doctor. Instead he received it from an acquaintance that 
was a homeopath. Applicant knew it was wrong and illegal, but rationalized his use. 
This is a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline H, drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
    
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
