1
 
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-05514
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On September 14, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) noting security concerns arising under Guideline B (Foreign
Influence) and Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
On October 2, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR. She admitted all of the
allegations except allegation ¶ 1.c, which she wrote was a duplicate entry for the
allegation noted at ¶ 1.b. She elected to have her case decided on the written record in
lieu of a hearing by a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative
judge. On November 13, 2012, Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), which included nine attached items. The FORM also included a
request for administrative notice of certain facts and materials pertaining to the People’s
Republic of China (PRC) and Hong Kong, which were supported by 16 accompanying
documents. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM or object to the request for
2
administrative notice within 30 days after her receipt of those materials. The case was
assigned to me on January 11, 2013. Based on a review of the case file, I find Applicant
failed to meet her burden regarding the security concerns raised under Guideline B and
Guideline F. Security clearance is denied.
Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice regarding
certain facts and materials regarding Hong Kong and the PRC. That request was
contained in the FORM and supported by 16 documents. Administrative or official
notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR
Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2
(App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004);
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)).
The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts
that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law,
Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing 15 types of facts for administrative notice). 
 
Hong Kong became a Special Administrative Region of the PRC on July 1, 1997.
Hong Kong has a population of 6.9 million and 95% of Hong Kong’s population is of
Chinese descent. The PRC has given Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy, except
the PRC has retained responsibility for defense and foreign policy. Recently, the PRC
has taken a more active oversight role of Hong Kong’s control of political developments.
The Hong Kong government generally respects the human rights of its citizens;
however, reported human rights problems include some political restrictions on the
legislature’s power, press self-censorship, violence and discrimination against women,
and restrictions on workers’ rights to organize and bargain collectively. 
The PRC’s Military Intelligence Department, First Bureau, is responsible for
collecting military information about the United States. The PRC’s Ministry of State
Security is the “preeminent civilian intelligence collection agency in [the PRC],” and
maintains intelligence operations in Hong Kong and Macau through a bureau utilizing
PRC nationals with Hong Kong or Macau connections. 
The PRC has an authoritarian, Communist government. It has a poor human
rights record, suppresses political dissent, and practices arbitrary arrest and detention,
forced confessions, torture, and other prisoner mistreatment. In addition, it is a nuclear
power with a large army. It is geographically vast, and has a population of over one
billion people. 
The PRC aggressively competes with the United States in many areas. PRC’s
competitive relationship with the United States exacerbates the risk posed by
Applicant’s Hong Kong connections. It actively collects military, economic, and
proprietary industrial information about the United States because of the following
circumstances: (1) its position as a global superpower; (2) its military, political, and
economic investments in the Pacific Rim and Asia; (3) its leading role in development of
 W ith regard to allegation ¶ 1.c, stating Applicant was 120 past due in the approximate amount of $11,039      1
on a total debt of $57,927, Applicant noted that this allegation is duplicative of allegation ¶ 1.b. Applicant
provided no evidence linking the two attributed debts. Given the ultimate disposition of the case, however, and
given the similar sums reflected for the total debts at issue, I find that this allegation is a duplicate.
3
advanced technology that the PRC desires for economic growth; and (4) the PRC
considers the large number of Americans of Chinese ancestry as intelligence targets.
The PRC’s active intelligence gathering programs focus on sensitive and protected U.S.
technologies. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 60-year-old supervisor who has worked for the same defense
contractor since 1981. She is a college graduate. Applicant was born in Hong Kong,
while the region was still a British colony. She first came to the United States in 1976.
She became a naturalized United States citizen in 1985, years before the July 1997
transfer of governance of Hong Kong from the United Kingdom to the PRC. Applicant is
a widow with two grown children. 
Applicant’s father resides in the United States and her mother is deceased.
Applicant’s two brothers are residents of Hong Kong and citizens of the PRC. One
brother is a retired tour bus driver with no connection to a foreign government. He and
Applicant speak by telephone annually and visit in person about every five years.
Applicant’s other brother is currently a driver for a transportation company with no
discernable connection to a foreign government. He and Applicant also speak by
telephone annually and visit personally about every five years. Applicant last visited the
PRC in 2010.
As of the time Applicant responded to the September 2012 SOR, she had a
delinquent utility bill for approximately $211 that had been placed in collection. (SOR
allegation ¶ 2.a). Applicant wrote that the debt was related to an out-of-state property
that had been sold in 2007, and noted that the balance had been forgotten. She
commented that she would “fix it.” 
Also in that response, Applicant admitted that she was over 120 days past due in
the approximate amount of $2,927 for a total debt of $58,168 (SOR allegation ¶ 1.b).1
No other comment was made. Applicant similarly admitted that she was indebted to a
bank on a mortgage in foreclosure in the approximate amount of $400,000 and to
another bank on a mortgage in foreclosure for about $182,000 (SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.d-
1.e, respectively) without additional comment. Applicant did not respond to the FORM.
Therefore, the current status of the two delinquent debts and the two foreclosure-
related mortgage accounts are unknown. There is no evidence showing Applicant has
received financial counseling.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, § 3.1(b)  and EO 10865 § 7.      4
 Navy v Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      5
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. The AG lists potentially disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under
AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-
person concept. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. It is an applicant’s responsibility to
present  “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is2
something less than a preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion
is on the applicant.  3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
 Egan, supra, note 5.      6
5
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  A security clearance denial does not6
necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is merely an indication that the
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline B – Foreign Influence
The concern under Guideline B is that foreign contacts and interests may be a
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests; may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in a way that is not in U.S. interests; or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest. Consideration should be given to the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to,
such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target U.S. citizens to
obtain protected information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. Conditions
pertaining to this adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate security concerns, are discussed in
the conclusions below. Here, in addition to the administrative region of Hong Kong,
concerns are raised by the Applicant’s brothers’ PRC citizenship. The PRC is a known
collector of U.S. military, economic, and proprietary industrial information. It has been
known to target U.S. citizens of Chinese descent.
Applicant’s relatives of issue are her brothers. They are residents of Hong Kong
and citizens of the PRC. These facts, in conjunction with the information offered
regarding the PRC, are sufficient to raise Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions AG
¶ 7(a) (contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend,
or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates
a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion) and
AG ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a
potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information) apply. With disqualifying conditions thus raised,
the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate security concerns. 
In declining an administrative hearing and relying on the administrative record,
Applicant’s case rests on scant facts. She wrote that one brother is a retired tour bus
operator and that her other brother is presently a bus driver. She wrote that neither
brother has a connection with a foreign government, but provided no additional facts to
flesh out their positions in post-1997 Hong Kong, nor has she provided relevant
information about their family members (i.e., spouses, partners, children, etc.),
contacts, or activities. Moreover, there is little information about the Applicant’s
relationships with her siblings, her life in the United States, her feelings toward Hong
 AG ¶ 18.      7
6
Kong and the PRC, and the like. While on its face, these brothers seem to present little
genuine concern for foreign influence, there are insufficient facts available to properly
analyze whether Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions such as AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature
of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.); AG ¶ 8(b) (to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal,
or the there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty to
or obligation  individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of
the U.S. interest); and ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens is so
casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation) apply.
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
Under Guideline F,failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.7
The burden in these proceedings is placed squarely on an applicant. Here, Applicant
admitted responsibility for two homes now in foreclosure, one collection account, and a
significantly past due account with a total balance of over $50,000. Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to mitigate security concerns. 
Little is known about the properties at issue, and less is known of Applicant’s
efforts, if any, to address associated debts related to those properties. It is unclear what
factors resulted in the creation of these debts and have continued to hinder her ability to
address them in some manner. With regard to SOR allegation ¶ 1.a, Applicant stated in
her October 2012 response to the SOR that she would “fix” her oversight of the debt at
issue, but she provided no evidence of her efforts to address that obligation in response
to the November 2012 FORM. As for the 120-day past due balance ($2,927) at ¶ 1.b
and the two foreclosures ($400,000 and $182,000) noted at ¶¶ 1.d-1.e, there is no
evidence as to their current status, nor did Applicant show that she had the resources
and commitment to honor these debts. She provided no detailed description as to any
proposed methodologies or plans she or a financial counselor may have developed to
effectively address these debts. Also lacking is a current, up-dated description of her
financial situation. In short, without more evidence, progress, if any, on these delinquent
obligations cannot be discerned. Consequently, potential Financial Considerations
Mitigating Conditions such as AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
7
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment);
AG ¶ 20(b) (20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances); AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control); and AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) cannot apply. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden of persuasion is on the
applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
In choosing a decision without a hearing, however, there are scant facts of record upon
which to mitigate security concerns. It is noted that Applicant is a 60-year-old woman
with many years of experience in the area of supervision. She is well educated. She
has been with the same employer for about 30 years. An immigrant to this country from
colonial (pre-1997) Hong Kong, she has spent the majority of her life in the United
States as a U.S. citizen. Here, she married, raised her children, managed a successful
career, and became a part of her community. While it appears her entire life is here in
the United States, she has two brothers who remained in Hong Kong after the transfer
of authority for that region from the United Kingdom to the PRC, a known collector of
U.S. military and industrial information. Little has been disclosed about these siblings.
Without more information, their status as potential sources for foreign influence cannot
be appropriately analyzed.
Of more obvious concern are Applicant’s finances. Applicant has two foreclosed
properties, a modest collection debt, and a significantly past due balance on a large
loan. She was apprised of this situation in the September 2012 SOR. No progress was
shown when she responded to the SOR in October 2012. Similarly, no progress was
shown in response to the November 2012 FORM. Consequently, the record is devoid of
documentary evidence showing that any progress has been made on these obligations.
This process does not require that an applicant satisfy all outstanding debts. It does,
however, demand that an applicant show that a reasonable and workable plan has
been devised to satisfy the debts at issue, and that some efforts have been exerted to
successfully implement that plan. Here, there is no evidence such a plan has been
devised or implemented. 
8
An adverse determination in this case does not necessarily raise any issues
regarding Applicant’s loyalty to the United State. Rather, it simply indicates that she
failed to meet the evidentiary burden this process places on applicants for a security
clearance. In short, there is insufficient evidence of record to mitigate the security
concerns raised in the SOR. The clearly consistent standard indicates that security
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials. Clearance is
denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-1b:  Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-2b:  Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.c:  For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.d-2e:  Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
