 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-00899 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline C, foreign preference, 
but failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 31, 2012, the Department of Defense issued to Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, and 
Guideline C, foreign preference. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On September 1, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On November 2, 2012, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant and it was received on December 22, 2012. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant provided additional information. The case was assigned to me on January 23, 
2013.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel submitted a formal request, included in the FORM, that I 
take administrative notice of certain facts relating to Pakistan. Applicant did not object 
and the request is approved. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations.1 After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He is a high school graduate. He was born in Pakistan. 
He married in 1993 and divorced in 1995. He remarried in 1996. He has a 17-year-old 
son. Applicant has worked for a federal contractor since July 2011. He works and 
resides in Afghanistan as part of his employment.  
 
 In 1991, Applicant left Pakistan and traveled to Ecuador. He attempted to seek 
political asylum there. He was a member of a student organization, and he left Pakistan 
because of political pressure. He chose Ecuador because of its relaxed entrance policy. 
He began the process for asylum in Ecuador, but never followed through. He then 
traveled to the United States and was arrested and detained at the airport by the 
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). His detention continued for two weeks. 
He asked for political asylum in the United States. He was given an I-94 visa which is 
for temporary stays in the United States.2 Applicant overstayed his visa and was illegally 
in the United States from July 1991 to 1995. During a U.S. Government screening he 
told the investigator that he married a U.S. citizen and was granted Permanent Resident 
status. His second wife sponsored him for U.S. citizenship. He became a United States 
citizen in 2009.3 
 
 Applicant was issued a United States passport in February 2011. He has a 
Pakistani passport issued in 2000 that expired in 2005. He has another Pakistani 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Form I-94 is used to record the arrival and departure of all visitors and for temporary stays. 
www.immigrationunitedstates.org. 
 
3 Item 6. 
 
3 
 
 
passport issued in 2007 that expired in October 2012. In his security clearance 
application (SCA), dated July 3, 2011, Applicant responded to questions under Section 
10, Citizenship Information, that he was a citizen of Pakistan and the United States. He 
indicated he had not renounced or attempted to renounce his foreign citizenship. He 
provided a statement in the explanation section of the SCA: “I will be surrendering my 
Passport to the FSO of [A] by the end of my employment process.”4  
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he stated: 
 
The passport I possessed from Islamic Republic of Pakistan was issued to 
me on October 29, 2007, and I became a citizen of the United States of 
America on July 30, 2009! 
 
In his response to the FORM he stated:  
 
The valid passport I possess from Islamic Republic of Pakistan was issued 
to me before I became a citizen of the U.S. I was willing to surrender all 
my valid and expired passports but no ones (sic) asked for it. No I have no 
use no plans to renew my expired Pakistan passport. In the past I done it 
because I needed the passport to travel.5 
 
 There was no additional information provided as to whether Applicant 
surrendered his Pakistani passport to any official. There is no evidence that Applicant 
exercises dual citizenship. 
 
 Applicant’s mother, father, three brothers and nephew are citizens and residents 
of Pakistan. His father owns a house and farm land in Pakistan.6 Applicant traveled to 
Pakistan for family visits in April 2011 to May 2011, October 2008 to December 2008, 
January 2005 to March 2005, February 2003 to April 2003, January 2001 to March 
2001, and October 1997 to January 1998.7 Prior to becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant 
used his Pakistani passport. Once he became a U.S. citizen he used his U.S. passport.8 
Applicant provided his nephew $500 to help the nephew buy a cell phone business. 
Applicant provided no other information about his family in Pakistan. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Item 4.  
 
5 Response to FORM dated December 25, 2012. 
 
6 Item 6. 
 
7 Item 7.  
 
8 Items 5 and 7. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Pakistan 
 
 Pakistan has extensive terrorist networks operating within its borders. Members 
of the Taliban are known to be located in provinces of Pakistan and their senior leaders 
continue to enjoy safe haven there. The leader of the Taliban has operated openly in 
Pakistan.  
 
 The Federally Administered Tribal Area (FATA) of Pakistan continues to be a 
vital sanctuary to al-Qa’ida and other extremist groups. Al-Qa’ida and other Afghan 
extremist groups exploit that operating environment to plan and direct operations. Al-
Qa’ida operatives are balancing support for attacks in Pakistan with guidance to refocus 
the global jihad externally, against U.S. targets. Pakistan military leaders have limited 
success against al-Qa’ida operatives, other foreign fighters, and Pakistani militants who 
pose a threat to Islamabad.  
  
 The U.S. Department of State has defined terrorist safe havens as ungoverned, 
under-governed, or ill-governed physical areas where terrorist groups that constitute a 
threat to U.S. national security interests are able to organize, plan, raise funds, 
communicate, recruit, train, transit, and operate in relative security because of 
inadequate governance capacity, political will, or both. The U.S. Department of State 
has concluded that, despite increased efforts by Pakistani security forces, al-Qa’ida 
terrorists, Afghan militants, foreign insurgents, and Pakistani militants continue to find 
safe haven in portions of Pakistan’s FATA, Khyber Paktunkwa, and Baluchistan, and 
have operated in those areas to organize, train, and plan attacks against the United 
States and its allies in Afghanistan. 
 
The Haqqani Network, an extremist organization operating as a strategic arm of 
Pakistan’s Inter-Service Intelligence Agency, is also operating from Pakistan with 
impunity. U.S. special forces personnel raided a large al-Qa’ida compound located in 
Pakistan and shot and killed their leader Osama bin Laden.  
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens to defer traveling to Pakistan, as 
the presence of al-Qa’ida, Taliban elements, and indigenous militant sectarian groups 
poses a danger to American citizens. In 2011, Pakistan experienced hundreds of bomb 
blasts, suicide attacks, and sectarian violence resulting in thousands of deaths. These 
included attacks that targeted Americans. Terrorists have demonstrated their 
willingness and capability to attack targets where Americans are known to congregate 
or visit.  
 
Pakistan has major human rights problems that include extrajudicial killings, 
torture and disappearances committed by security forces, as well as by militant, terrorist 
and extremist groups. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contacts creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
 
Applicant’s parents, three brothers and a nephew are citizens and residents of 
Pakistan. Applicant takes trips to Pakistan to visit his family there. I find the above 
disqualifying conditions apply. Applicant provided his nephew with a $500 loan to help 
purchase a cell phone business. I find the amount of the loan is minimal and does not 
constitute a disqualifying condition. 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
 
7 
 
 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and  
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
Applicant did not provide any information about his family or his relationship with 
them in Pakistan. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his familial connections 
and the nature of his relationship with them make it unlikely that he would be placed in a 
position of having to choose between their interests and the interests of the United 
States.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government or the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. 
Applicant’s immediate family members are citizens and residents of Pakistan. It is clear 
that Pakistan has numerous terrorist organizations that target U.S. citizens. Pakistan’s 
human rights record is poor. Applicant’s travel history shows he has visited Pakistan 
frequently in the past. No information was provided regarding the nature of the 
relationship between Applicant and his family in Pakistan, or his and his family’s 
relationship with the Pakistani government. Applicant has been a U.S. citizen for three 
years. Applicant failed to establish there is no conflict of interest because of his 
longstanding relationships and loyalties to the United States. Based on the information 
in the record, I conclude AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) do not apply.  
 
Applicant travels to Pakistan regularly. He lists the purpose of his visits is to see 
his family. His relationship with his family cannot be characterized as casual and 
infrequent. Therefore, I am unable to conclude that there is little likelihood that it could 
create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation. I conclude AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
AG ¶ 9 expresses the security concern regarding foreign preference:  
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport... 
Applicant does not have a valid foreign passport. His Pakistani passport expired 
in October 2012, and he does not intend on renewing it. He obtained the Pakistani 
passport prior to becoming a U.S. citizen. He did not use the Pakistani passport once he 
became a U.S. citizen. His explanation that he did not intend on renewing his passport 
shows he does not consider himself a citizen of Pakistan. I find the above disqualifying 
condition does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
9 
 
 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 47 years old. He no longer holds a valid Pakistani passport. He 
obtained his U.S. citizenship in 2009. He has close family members who are citizens 
and residents of Pakistan, a country with serious terrorist and human rights issues. He 
visits them regularly. His family living in Pakistan is a security concern. Insufficient 
mitigating information was provided. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised under 
Guideline C, foreign preference, but failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
    
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
