 
1 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09411 
                                                                      ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits in this case, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence. Her eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                               Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on January 23, 2012. On August 15, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was signed and notarized on September 7, 2012. 
She requested a decision on the record in lieu of a hearing. On September 26, 2012, 
Department Counsel requested a hearing, pursuant to Paragraph E3.1.7 of Enclosure 3 
 
2 
 
 
of DoD Directive 5220.6.1 The case was assigned to me on October 31, 2012. I 
convened a hearing on November 21, 2012, to consider whether it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
Government called no witnesses and introduced two exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 
and Ex. 2 and entered in the record without objection. Additionally, the Government 
requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts about Afghanistan and 
provided, as reference materials, official U.S. documents.2 Applicant did not object to 
the administrative notice documents, and I marked them as Hearing Exhibit (H.E.) I.  
 
Applicant testified and introduced one exhibit, which was marked as Applicant’s 
Ex. A and entered in the record without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on November 30, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations that raise security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.). In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
stated that she “disagreed” with the Guideline B allegations and provided additional 
information. (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 Applicant, who is 39 years old, was born in Afghanistan. She immigrated to the 
United States in 2000, and she became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2005. She is fluent 
in English and three of the languages of the people of Pakistan and Afghanistan. She 
has applied for employment in the United States as a linguist for a government 
contractor, and she seeks a security clearance for the first time. (Ex. 1; Tr. 33-35, 43-44, 
47.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan. Applicant’s father was killed in warfare in Afghanistan in 1984, when 
Applicant was 11 years old. Her mother, a citizen and resident of Afghanistan, then took 
Applicant and her infant brother to Pakistan, where the family lived for two years in a 
refugee camp, along with other extended family members. The family then moved to a 
Pakistani city inhabited primarily by Afghan refugees. (Tr. 33-34, 80-81.) 
 
 In 1989, Applicant’s mother returned to Afghanistan to visit family, and she did 
not return to Pakistan. Applicant learned that her mother remarried and had other 
children. Applicant feels that her mother abandoned her and her brother. She has had 
no contact with her mother since 1989. She has not sought information about her 
mother’s whereabouts because her mother’s abandonment was so hurtful. Applicant 
has no desire to locate her mother or communicate with her in the future. (Tr. 34, 49-50, 
79-80.)   
                                            
1 See H.E. 2. 
 
2 The Government provided nine official U.S. documents and a six-page factual summary containing facts 
about Afghanistan. 
  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant remained in the refugee community in Pakistan and lived in the 
household of an uncle. She raised her brother, who is ten years her junior. (Ex. 1; Tr. 
79-80.) 
 
 While in Pakistan, Applicant advocated rights for women, which caused her to 
become a target of the Taliban. In 2000, Applicant was granted refugee status, and she 
and her brother came to the United States. (Ex. 1; Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 Soon after her arrival in the United States, Applicant acquired a job as an 
administrative assistant in the food service program on the campus of the university 
where she was enrolled. The director of the program and his wife became Applicant’s 
friends and advisors. The director of the program provided a letter of character 
reference for Applicant. In his letter, he stated: “In the 12 ½ years that I have known her, 
I have never witnessed any lapse of judgment or defect in character. I know that 
[Applicant] can be trusted absolutely.” (Ex. 1; Ex. A.) 
 
 Applicant’s brother, now a U.S. citizen, is married and works as a linguist. In the 
United States, Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in political science and women’s 
studies in 2004. In 2008, she also earned a master’s degree in women’s studies. (Ex. 1; 
Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant’s husband is a citizen of Afghanistan 
currently residing in the United States. Applicant met the man who became her husband 
in the United States. He is a citizen of Afghanistan, and he also has refugee status. He 
has applied for U.S. permanent resident status. Applicant and her husband married in 
2003. (Ex. 1; Tr. 35-37.) 
 
 Since immigrating to the United States in 2001, Applicant’s husband has not 
returned to Afghanistan. In 2010, he earned a Master of Business Administration 
degree. He is employed as a financial analyst. Applicant and her husband are the 
parents of two young daughters, who were born in the United States. (Ex. 1; Tr. 35-37.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.c. that Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant has never met her parents-in-law. She 
has spoken briefly on the telephone with them twice since her marriage to her husband. 
Her parents-in-law live in a remote part of Afghanistan, and it is difficult to reach them 
by telephone. Applicant’s husband tries once or twice each year to reach his parents by 
telephone. Applicant’s father-in-law is a retired farmer, and her mother-in-law is a 
housewife. (Ex. 2; Tr.50-53.) 
 
 In 2004, during her university studies, Applicant traveled for two months to 
Afghanistan to conduct research for her master’s thesis. She studied the effects of a 
Taliban massacre of men of the Hazara minority group and the effects of the massacre 
on the women and children who survived. (Tr. 38-41.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 In 2009 and 2010, Applicant worked in the United States as a contract producer, 
interviewer, and broadcaster for a U.S. Government radio network. She worked 
especially on issues involving Afghan women. In that capacity, she conducted 
telephone interviews with individuals with knowledge and expertise on issues affecting 
the women of Afghanistan. She did not travel to Afghanistan to do this work. (Ex. 1; Tr. 
44-46.)    
 
 In her work as a researcher and broadcaster, Applicant became acquainted with 
several individuals who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. One of these 
individuals is the headmaster and founder of a coeducational school in Afghanistan. 
Applicant met and spent about three hours visiting the headmaster and his 
coeducational school in 2004, when she was conducting research for her thesis. In 
2010 when Applicant worked as a broadcaster, the headmaster visited her office in the 
United States once, and she interviewed him and some of his students. (Ex. 2; Tr. 59-
62.) 
 
 In 2011, Applicant was awarded a fellowship to study women’s issues in 
Afghanistan. She traveled to Afghanistan for two weeks to conduct interviews with 
individuals who supported rights for women in Afghanistan. She again visited the 
coeducational school for about three hours and spoke with the headmaster. In 2012, 
when he came to the United States to lecture about a book he wrote on Afghan 
coeducation, Applicant attended the headmaster’s lecture. After the lecture, she left and 
did not speak further with the headmaster. (Tr. 59-66.) 
 
 When Applicant was in Afghanistan in 2011 conducting research, an English-
speaking woman’s rights activist agreed to meet with her to discuss her work. She also 
provided Applicant with access to other women working for women’s emancipation in 
Afghanistan. Applicant met with and interviewed the woman and her colleagues over a 
period of two days during her 2011 trip to Afghanistan. Since leaving Afghanistan, 
Applicant has had no further contact with the woman or her colleagues. (Tr. 55-59.) 
 
 When Applicant completed a list of relatives and associates as a part of her 
security clearance application, she identified the headmaster and the women’s rights 
activist as “friends.” The SOR alleges at SOR ¶ 1.d. that Applicant maintained contact 
with several friends who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. At her hearing, 
Applicant explained that the headmaster and the women’s rights activist were not 
friends but English-speaking individuals with whom she came in contact in the course of 
carrying out her professional duties. She emphasized that she has no ongoing contacts 
with these individuals. (Tr. 56-66, 74-75.) 
 
 When Applicant went to Afghanistan in 2004 to conduct research, she met a 
woman who held a political office in Afghanistan. The official spoke English. Applicant 
interviewed the official, and for two days she observed the work of the official’s office. In 
2009 or 2010, the official came to the U.S. city where Applicant worked to attend an 
international conference. The official called Applicant and asked her to take her 
shopping. Applicant agreed and picked up the official at her hotel. Applicant then drove 
 
5 
 
 
the official to a shopping center, where she purchased some items. Applicant then 
drove the official back to her hotel and left her. (Tr. 66-69.) 
 
 When Applicant went to Afghanistan in 2011 to conduct research, she contacted 
the official, and she invited Applicant to stay at her home. Applicant stayed at the 
official’s house for three days. Since leaving Afghanistan in 2011, Applicant has had no 
further contact with the official. She tried upon her return to telephone the official and 
thank her for her hospitality, but the call could not be completed. She has not tried to 
contact the official since then. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.e. that Applicant maintains close 
and continuing contact with the official. Applicant denied the allegation and stated that 
the official was not a friend but a professional contact. (Tr. 69-75.) 
 
 Applicant stated that she has no intention to return to Afghanistan. She explained 
that as the mother of young children, she does not wish to leave her family and travel 
again to Afghanistan unless her prospective government contractor employer requested 
it. The position she has applied for as a linguist is located in the United States. (Tr. 43-
44, 75-76.) 
 
 Applicant stated that she wishes to use her skills as a linguist to pay a debt she 
believes she owes to the United States for the opportunity she received to pursue a 
formal university education. She also wants to use her knowledge of the languages of 
Pakistan and Afghanistan to make life safer for her children and other Americans. (Tr. 
17.)  
 
  I take administrative notice of the following facts about Afghanistan. The facts in 
the following summary were provided by Department Counsel to Applicant and to me. 
The facts were derived from official U.S. Government documents provided as 
attachments to the summary and are identified in the record as H.E. I.3 
 
Afghanistan has been an independent nation since August 19, 1919, after 
the British relinquished control. Following a Soviet-supported coup in 
1978, a Marxist government emerged. In December 1979, Soviet forces 
invaded and occupied Afghanistan. Afghan freedom fighters, known as 
                                            
3 The following official U.S. Government documents were used to provide the factual summary on 
Afghanistan quoted in this decision: U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, December 
6, 2011 (13 pages); U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2011: 
Afghanistan (47 pages); U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Country Specific 
Information: Afghanistan, February 7, 2012 (9 pages); Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S. 
Intelligence Community for the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Director of National 
Intelligence, February 2, 2012 (30 pages); U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2011, 
Chapter 5 – Terrorist Safe Havens and Tactics and Tools for Disrupting or Eliminating Safe Havens, July 
31, 2012 (2 pages); U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Afghanistan, 
June 27, 2012 (3 pages); U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2011 South and 
Central Asia Overview (4 pages); Statement of Joint Chiefs of Staff Before the Senate Armed Services 
Committee on Afghanistan and Iraq, September 22, 2011; and  U.S. Department of State, U.S. Declares 
Haqqani Network a Terrorist Organization, 07 September 2012, IIP Digital, 3 pages. Footnotes in the 
quoted text were omitted. 
 
6 
 
 
mujaheddin, opposed the communist regime. The resistance movement 
eventually led to an agreement known as the Geneva Accords, signed by 
Pakistan, Afghanistan, the United States, and the Soviet Union, which 
ensured that Soviet forces would withdraw by February 1989. 
 
The mujaheddin were not a party to the negotiations for the Accords and 
refused to accept them. As a result, a civil war continued after the Soviet 
withdrawal. In the mid-1990s, the Taliban rose to power largely due to the 
anarchy and the division of the country among warlords that arose after 
the Soviet withdrawal. The Taliban sought to impose an extreme 
interpretation of Islam on the entire country and committed massive 
human rights violations. The Taliban also provided sanctuary to Osama 
Bin-Laden, to al-Qa’ida generally, and to other terrorist organizations. 
 
After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, U.S. demands that 
Afghanistan expel Bin-Laden and his followers were rejected by the 
Taliban. U.S. forces and a coalition partnership commenced military 
operations in October 2001 that forced the Taliban out of power by 
November 2001.  
 
After a few years of control by an interim government, the first democratic 
election took place in October 2004, and a second round of elections took 
place in 2009. Despite this and other progress made since the Taliban 
was deposed, Afghanistan still faces many daunting challenges, 
principally defeating terrorists and insurgents, recovering from over three 
decades of civil strife; and rebuilding a shattered physical, economic and 
political infrastructure. 
 
Human rights problems included extrajudicial killings; torture and other 
abuse; poor prison conditions; widespread official impunity, ineffective 
government investigations of abuses by local security forces; arbitrary 
arrest and detention; prolonged pretrial detention; judicial corruption; 
violations of privacy rights; restrictions on freedom of the press, limits of 
freedom of assembly; restrictions of freedom of religion, including religious 
conversions; limits on freedom of movement; official corruption; violence 
and societal discrimination against women; sexual abuse of children; 
abuses against minorities; trafficking in persons; abuse of worker rights; 
and child labor. 
 
There were numerous reports that the government – or its agents – 
committed arbitrary or unlawful killings. Additionally, the Taliban-led   
insurgency has become increasingly dangerous and destabilizing. The 
Taliban’s expansion of influence into northern Afghanistan since late 2007 
has made the insurgency a countrywide threat. The insurgency has also 
increased in geographic scope and frequency of attacks and has shown 
greater aggressiveness and lethality. This lack of security in many areas, 
 
7 
 
 
coupled with a generally low governmental capacity and competency, has 
hampered efforts to improve governance and extend development. The 
Taliban has been successful in suppressing voter turnout in elections in 
key parts of the country. 
 
Afghan leaders also continue to face the eroding effects of official 
corruption and the drug trade. Criminal networks and narcotics cultivation 
constitute a source of funding for the insurgency in Afghanistan. Streams 
of Taliban from across the border in Pakistan, along with funds gained 
from narcotics trafficking and kidnapping, have allowed the insurgency to 
strengthen its military and technical capabilities. 
 
In addition to the Taliban, al-Qa’ida and other insurgent groups and anti-
Coalition organizations continue to operate in Afghanistan resulting in 
numerous attacks and deaths.  Insurgents have targeted NGOs, Afghan 
journalists, government workers, and UN workers. Even the Afghan 
capital, Kabul, is considered at high risk for militant attacks, including 
rocket attacks, vehicle-borne IEDS, and suicide bombings. 
 
Instability along the Pakistan-Afghan frontier continued to provide al-
Qa’ida with leadership mobility and the ability to conduct training and 
operational planning, targeting Western Europe and U.S. interests in 
particular.  
 
Overall, the State Department has declared that the security threat to all 
American citizens in Afghanistan remains critical, and travel in all areas of 
Afghanistan remains unsafe, due to military combat operations, 
landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal groups, and 
the possibility of terrorist attacks. 
  
                          Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
 
8 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
                                                         Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
 
9 
 
 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 In Afghanistan, the Afghan-Taliban dominated insurgency has been increasingly 
dangerous and destabilizing, despite International Security Assistance Force and 
Operation Enduring Freedom military operations. In addition to the Taliban, al-Qa’ida, 
other insurgent groups, and anti-Coalition organizations continue to operate in 
Afghanistan resulting in numerous attacks and deaths. The State Department has 
declared that the security threat to all American citizens in Afghanistan remains critical, 
and travel in all areas of Afghanistan remains unsafe, due to military combat operations, 
landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal groups, and the possibility 
of terrorist attacks. 
 
Applicant’s mother, father-in-law, and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan.  Her husband, with whom she shares her home, is a citizen of Afghanistan 
who has refugee status in the United States. In her professional and academic work, 
Applicant has traveled to Afghanistan and met with individuals involved in the education 
and emancipation of women. Such activities are dangerous in Afghanistan because the 
Taliban opposes the education and equality of women. These facts are sufficient to 
raise Guideline B security concerns. 
  
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline.  The facts in this case raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information.” AG ¶ 7(d) reads: “sharing living quarters with a person or persons, 
regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” 
 
 Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
 
10 
 
 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. 
 
 Applicant’s husband, a citizen of Afghanistan, immigrated to the United States in 
2001 and was granted refugee status. He has applied for permanent resident status. 
Since coming to the United States, he has not returned to Afghanistan. His contacts 
with his parents in Afghanistan are minimal and infrequent, thereby making the risk of 
foreign inducement, pressure, or coercion through his family members in Afghanistan 
negligible. Like his wife, he has pursued a new life and an education in the United 
States. He is employed as a financial analyst, and he and Applicant share deep 
connections to the United States, particularly through their two young children and their 
intellectual and professional commitments. 
 
Applicant has three immediate family members who are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan, a country destabilized by war and terrorist activity. However, Applicant has 
had no contact with her mother since 1989, 23 years ago. She has no intention to ever 
be in contact with her mother because she feels her mother abandoned her and her 
younger brother. Applicant has never met her husband’s parents. Since her marriage in 
2003, Applicant has spoken briefly on the telephone with her husband’s parents only 
twice. She has no contact with her mother, and her contacts with her husband’s parents 
are minimal and infrequent. The nature of Applicant’s contacts with her immediate 
family members who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan are such that there is 
little likelihood that they could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant has no intention to travel to Afghanistan in the future. As a parent, she 
wishes to remain in the United States with her children and her husband, and she has 
sought employment as a linguist that will enable her to work in the United States. 
 
As a student researcher and as a professional broadcaster for a U.S. 
Government radio network, Applicant had contact with three English-speaking 
individuals who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. One of the individuals is the 
headmaster of a coeducational school in Afghanistan; one is an activist supporting 
rights for women in Afghanistan; and the third is a woman who holds a governmental 
position in Afghanistan. Applicant testified credibly that her contacts with these 
individuals occurred in the course of carrying out research and her professional 
responsibilities. Her relationships with them were professional and were not based upon 
friendship, nor did they result in friendship. Since completing her work-related 
associations with them, Applicant has had no further contact with the three individuals. It 
is not likely that Applicant’s relationships with these individuals would cause a conflict of 
interest that would result in Applicant choosing their interests over those of the United 
States. It is also not likely that these relationships would create a heightened risk of 
 
11 
 
 
foreign exploitation, pressure, or coercion. After carefully all the record evidence, I 
conclude that AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) apply in mitigation to Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s early life was difficult. In 
1985, her father was killed in Afghanistan. Soon thereafter, her mother took her and her 
infant brother to Pakistan, where they lived in a refugee camp. In 1989, Applicant was 
abandoned by her mother and, as a result, became responsible for raising her younger 
brother. Applicant’s support of women’s rights caused her to be targeted by the Taliban. 
She became a refugee again and immigrated to the United States in 2000. 
 
In 2005, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. She pursued an education in the 
United States and earned a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. She married and 
became the mother of two children. She now seeks to use her language skills as a 
contract linguist to be of service to her adopted country. 
 
Applicant’s contacts with her immediate family members in Afghanistan are 
minimal. She testified credibly that her contacts with three other citizens and residents 
of Afghanistan occurred within the context of her professional work and did not result in 
friendship or ongoing contacts that could cause a conflict of interest.   
 
Overall, the record evidence sustains a conclusion supporting Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant mitigated 
security concerns arising under the foreign influence adjudicative guideline. 
 
  
 
12 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                 Paragraph 1: Guideline B:          FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.e.:           For Applicant 
 
                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
