 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-00567 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn Mackinnon Esquire, Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 22, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Department of Defense (DOD) issued interrogatories to 
Applicant to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying information in his background. 
After reviewing the results of the background investigation and Applicant's responses to 
the interrogatories, DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative 
findings required to issue a security clearance. On July 6, 2012, DOD issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for alcohol 
consumption under Guideline G and psychological conditions under Guideline I. These 
actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
 
2 
 
 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 7, 2012. He denied nine of the ten 
allegations under Guideline G with an explanation. He admitted allegation 1.f with an 
explanation. He admitted allegations 2.a, 2.b, 2.c, and 2.e under Guideline I with 
explanation. He denied allegations 2.d and 2.f with an explanation. Applicant requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on October 4, 2012, and the case was assigned to me on October 15, 2012. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on October 24, 2012, for a hearing on November 14, 2012. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered 16 exhibits which I 
marked and admitted into the record without objections as Government exhibits (Gov. 
Ex.) 1 through 16. Applicant and one witness testified. I received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on November 26, 2012. 
 
SOR Amendments 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend two SOR allegations to conform to the 
evidence. Applicant had no objection to the amendments. SOR 1.b was amended to 
read 1983 rather than 2008. (Tr. 28-30) SOR 2.a was amended to read mood 
disorder/depression syndrome rather than Bipolar Disorder. (Tr. 76-78) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant’s admissions are included in my findings of 
fact.  
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old high school graduate. He served ten years on active 
duty in the Navy and received an honorable discharge. He has worked for the same 
defense contractor for over 27 years. He has been married four times. He married for 
the first time in April 1976, and the marriage ended in divorce in September 1984. He 
married the second time in September 1986, and that marriage ended in divorce in May 
1999. He again married in February 2001, and that marriage ended in divorce in 
September 2007. He married for the fourth time in May 2009. He has four adult step-
children. (Tr. 24-25; Gov. Ex 1, e-QIP, dated June 21, 2010) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has a greater than 40-year history of alcohol 
dependence (SOR 1.a); that he abused alcohol while in the Navy resulting in alcohol-
related discipline and several months of treatment in 1983 (SOR 1.b); that he was 
referred to a psychiatrist in August 2008 and received a diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence (SOR 1.c); that from September 2008 until April 2009 his excessive alcohol 
consumption required additional alcohol rehabilitation treatment and counseling (SOR 
1.d); that in February 2009, he was referred to an alcohol treatment center because 
coworkers smelled alcohol on his person and he received inpatient medication and 
 
3 
 
 
treatment and Antabuse medication on discharge (SOR 1.e); that in mid-2009, he 
stopped taking the Antabuse without consulting mental health providers (SOR 1.f); that 
from April 2009 until June 2011, he received mental health counseling due in part to 
excessive alcohol consumption (SOR 1.g); that despite counseling and inpatient 
treatment, his excessive alcohol consumption required a new inpatient treatment and a 
diagnosis of alcohol dependence in August-September 2011 (SOR 1.h); that in October 
2011 excessive alcohol consumption required additional hospitalizations where he was 
again diagnosed as alcohol dependent (SOR 1.i); and he received treatment for 
excessive alcohol consumption in November 2011 (SOR 1.j).  
 
The psychological conditions security concerns are concomitant with the alcohol 
consumption security concerns. The SOR alleges that in August 2008, Applicant was 
diagnosed with mood disorder/depression syndrome as noted in SOR 1.c (SOR 2.a); 
that from February to March 2009, he was treated at an inpatient facility and diagnosed 
with severe depression and mood disorder as noted in SOR 1.e (SOR 2.b); that from 
April 2009 until June 2011, he received mental health counseling with an intake 
diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder in addition to the diagnosis in SOR 1.g and 
the treatment ended when he failed to keep appointments with the treating doctor (SOR 
2.c); that he received inpatient treatment in August and September 2011 and received 
various mental health medications as noted in SOR 1.h (SOR 2.d); that in October 2011 
Applicant’s mental health required treatment with various medications and his prognosis 
was dependent on continued treatment which he did not continue (SOR 2.e); and he 
was treated in November 2011 for depression and diagnosed with major depressive 
disorder (SOR 2.f). The Government also presented information on the causes and risk 
factors for alcoholism (Gov. Ex. 15, Medical Information, dated March 20, 2011), and 
the link between alcohol dependence and depression. (Gov. Ex. 16, Depression, dated 
March 25, 2012)  
 
Applicant admitted that he is an alcoholic. (Tr. 24) He received non-judicial 
punishment of restriction and extra duty for misconduct after consuming alcohol in 1979 
while on active duty in the Navy. In 1983, he again received non-judicial punishment of 
restriction for fighting and driving after drinking alcohol. He spent approximately 30 days 
in a Navy inpatient alcohol rehabilitation program. (Tr. 29-30; Gov. Ex. 12. Response to 
Interrogatories, July 7, 2010 – August 8, 2010, dated January 7, 2012 at 3-4) 
 
In August 2008, Applicant was referred to a psychiatrist for a medical evaluation 
because of severe anxiety and depression-like syndromes. He was reported to be 
consuming 9 to 30 beers daily. He was diagnosed with general anxiety disorder and 
alcohol dependence. He was prescribed multiple medications. (Tr. 30-31; Gov. Ex. 8, 
Medical Records, dated Jun 7, 2012)  
 
Applicant was admitted to a hospital through the emergency room on May 28, 
2008, and discharged on June 2, 2008. The admission diagnosis was major depression, 
suicidal ideation, and alcohol dependence. (Gov. Ex. 2, Medical Records, dated May 
29. 2008, at 62-81) He was admitted to the same hospital in September 2008 with 
suicidal thoughts and alcohol dependence. He admitted consuming 18 to 30 beers daily, 
 
4 
 
 
and his blood alcohol level at admission was .25. (Gov. Ex. 2, Medical Records, dated 
September 25, 2008, at 40-62) He was admitted to a residential treatment program.  
 
Applicant continued to consume alcohol after being diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent. In February 2009, Applicant was referred for alcohol treatment after 
coworkers smelled alcohol on him. He went through detoxification and spent two weeks 
in an inpatient counseling and treatment program. He was diagnosed with alcohol 
dependence and depressive disorder not otherwise specified. He was discharged on 
February 16, 2009, and was to continue with intensive outpatient counseling to include 
attending Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) meetings. He was prescribed various medications 
for his alcohol abuse and depression. (Tr. 31-34; Gov. Ex. 5, Medical Records, dated 
May 22, 2012)  
 
He was admitted into residential treatment programs for alcohol dependence in 
September 2008, February 2009, and April 2009. On these occasions, he told the 
admission staffs that he was consuming significant amounts of beer a day. He admits to 
drinking at least five beers just prior to the admission in February 2009. His coworkers 
smelled alcohol on his breath, and he drank the beer to gain admission to the treatment 
facility. He was diagnosed with alcohol dependence and severe depression. He 
received multiple medications for his depression and was advised to have intensive 
outpatient counseling. Applicant also admits that he drank beer during a snowstorm in 
March 2010. He also admits to drinking alcohol in April and August 2010. (Tr. 34-42; 
Gov. Ex. 5, Medical Records, dated February 4, 2009; Gov. Ex. 6, Medical Records, 
April 2009 at 20-25)  
 
On August 17, 2011, Applicant was again admitted to a residential treatment 
facility. He admits he drank at least three beers that morning to gain admission to the 
facility. He said he sought admission to the facility because he was having problems 
caused by a reaction to the medicines he was prescribed. He admits telling the 
admission staff that he was drinking 8 to 20 beers daily. He told them his beer intake to 
gain admission to the facility, and the amount of beer consumed referred to what he 
consumed in 2008. He told the medical staff “I realized yesterday morning that I was 
drinking beer before I was going to work.” The admission diagnosis was alcohol 
dependence with major depression disorder, and he was admitted to the rehabilitation 
facility. This was his second admission to that facility, and his fourth rehabilitation 
admission. He was discharged on September 2, 2011 with recommendations for 
continued medication and aftercare programs. (Tr. 42-48; Gov. Ex. 4, Medial Records, 
dated September 2, 2011) 
 
Applicant was taken to the local hospital in October 2011 by police after making 
threatening statements. Applicant attended an AA meeting and argued with and 
threatened another attendee. Applicant left the meeting, purchased beer, and went 
home to drink. He voluntarily drank alcohol on this occasion. He did not drink the beer 
just to gain admission to the residential treatment program. He admitted he was 
intoxicated at the time after consuming nine beers that day and at least 30 beers on the 
prior weekend. His blood alcohol level was .22. An alcohol level chart indicated that it 
 
5 
 
 
takes more than a few beers to reach a blood alcohol level of .22. He was diagnosed 
again with alcohol dependence and depressive disorder. Applicant voluntarily entered 
another treatment program in October 2011 for alcohol dependence and depression. He 
again admitted to still drinking a significant amount of beer a day. (Tr. 48-58, 70-72; 
Gov. Ex. 2, Medical Records, dated May 7, 2012, at 1-39; Gov. Ex. 14, College 
Research Alcohol level chart, dated November 13, 2012) 
 
Applicant initially stated that he has not been intoxicated since March 2009, even 
though he has consumed alcohol after that date. However, he noted that he did not 
drink to the point of inebriation during these times. Later, he admitted that he was last 
intoxicated in October 2011. (Tr. 66-72) 
 
Applicant was admitted to a residential treatment facility about ten days after 
being released from the hospital in October 2011. He consumed alcohol just prior to 
admission to the facility as a prerequisite for admission. He was positive for alcohol 
metabolites at admission. He admits to drinking alcohol just prior to the inpatient 
treatment admissions. (Tr. 58-65, 70-79; Gov. Ex. 7, Medical Records, dated May 14, 
2012)  
 
Applicant admits he has been alcohol dependent for over 40 years. Applicant 
testified that he uses rehabilitation facilities as preventive medicine for his alcohol 
dependence and depression. He notes that you have to be drunk or admit to being 
drunk to be admitted to the rehabilitation programs. Rehabilitation beds are not made 
available to sober people. He admits to telling medical personnel that he drank 9 to 30 
beers a day as a means of getting admitted into the facility. He never drank that much 
beer, but only made the statements to be admitted for treatment. He notes that he 
attends AA meetings, works with jail inmates on AA programs, and talks to others at 
work about the dangers of alcohol abuse. He does breathing and meditation exercises 
to control his stress and anxiety. A lot of the stress in his life is no longer present. He 
will continue to seek treatment for his mood disorders and alcoholism. He notes that he 
has not had a drink of alcohol since he was discharged from the residential 
rehabilitation program in November 2011. (Tr. 24-29, 66-69) 
 
The psychiatrist who treated Applicant in August 2008 did not see Applicant 
again until May 2012. The psychiatrist noted that Applicant has suffered from mood 
disorders and alcohol-related issues. Applicant informed the psychiatrist that he is not 
suffering any mood disorder, attends AA meetings a few times a week, has no 
inclination to drink alcohol, and takes medication to control any mood disorders. The 
psychiatrist noted that Applicant received security clearances in the past, performs his 
duties without impairment, and receives regular medical assistance for his problems. 
Based on these factors, it is the psychiatrist’s opinion that Applicant is not a security 
threat and should be granted access to classified information. (Gov. Ex. 9, Letter, dated 
August 8, 2012) 
 
Applicant’s present supervisor testified that he has known Applicant for over 30 
years. Applicant worked for him until about 2003 on certain projects that he was the 
 
6 
 
 
technical lead. In 2003, he requested that Applicant join his team. Applicant’s 
contribution to the work has always been valuable. He is valued for his technical 
efficiency and his ability to get along with his fellow employees. Applicant’s area of 
expertise is information technology engineering. (Tr. 81-89; Gov. Ex. 10, Letter, dated 
August 13, 2012) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21)  
 
Applicant admitted that he is alcohol dependent and has consumed alcohol after 
receiving a diagnosis of alcohol dependence. Applicant's admissions and the 
information in medical records concerning Applicant’s alcohol consumption are sufficient 
to raise Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or 
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent); AG ¶ 
22(b) (alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting to work or duty in an 
intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent); AG ¶ 22(c) 
(habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless 
of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent); AG ¶ 
22(d) (diagnosis by a duly qualified medical profession (e.g. physician, clinical 
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence); AG ¶ 22(e) 
(evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker 
who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program); and AG ¶ 22(f) 
(relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol 
rehabilitation program). 
 
 Applicant was admitted into residential treatment facilities for alcohol use after 
threatening a person and because coworkers smelled alcohol on him. He was admitted 
to at least four residential treatment facilities for alcohol use, and was diagnosed each 
time as alcohol dependent by either a medical professional or clinical social worker. He 
relapsed into alcohol abuse after being diagnosed at the resident treatment facilities as 
alcohol dependent which required him to be readmitted. Applicant’s excessive alcohol 
consumption may lead to questionable judgment or failure to control impulses and 
raises questions about his reliability and judgment. However, the fact that the excessive 
alcohol consumption led to rehabilitation treatment and counseling does not in itself 
indicate questionable judgment or failure to control impulses and does not question 
Applicant’s reliability and trustworthiness. I find for Applicant as to SOR allegations 1.d, 
1.f, 1.g, and 1.j which allege rehabilitation and counseling.   
 
I considered Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 23(a) (so much 
time has passed or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG ¶ 23(b) (the individual 
acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of 
action taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if 
 
8 
 
 
alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser)); AG ¶ 23(c) (the individual 
is a current employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no 
history of previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress); and AG 
¶ 23 (d) (the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or 
rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and 
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a 
similar organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or licensed social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program).  
 
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a determination whether past conduct 
affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of 
time has passed without evidence of an alcohol issue, there must be an evaluation 
whether that period of time demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation.  
 
 Applicant admits to being alcohol dependent for over 40 years, consuming 
alcohol on various occasions after the diagnosis, and last consuming alcohol and being 
intoxicated in October 2011. He entered at least four inpatient treatment programs for 
alcoholism, had a relapse of his alcohol consumption, and had to be readmitted into the 
same or a different program. He states his last consumption of alcohol was about 15 
months ago in October 2011. He states he participates in AA programs, and assists 
others in the program. He acknowledges that he is alcoholic dependent. In spite of his 
alcohol dependence, his work performance is excellent.  
 
 Applicant has not established a pattern of abstinence or shown sufficient 
evidence of action taken to overcome his alcohol consumption problems. Considering 
Applicant’s over 40 forty years of alcohol dependent and continued consumption of 
alcohol, his 15 months of reported abstinence is not sufficient to show a change of 
circumstance. His abstinence from alcohol consumption does not indicate that he can 
now control his alcohol consumption impulses. His 15 months of abstinence does not 
establish a favorable opinion of his reliability and trustworthiness. The evidence does 
not show that Applicant has been reformed or rehabilitated. Applicant’s history shows 
that he continues to consume alcohol after diagnosis and treatment, so it is likely that 
his alcohol consumption will resume. I find that Applicant has not mitigated security 
concern for alcohol consumption and that he still presents a security concern based on 
his alcohol consumption. 
 
Guideline I, Psychological Conditions 
 
 A security concern is raised because certain emotional, mental, and personality 
conditions can impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a 
disorder is not required for there to be a concern under this guideline, A duly qualified 
 
9 
 
 
mental health professional (e.g. clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) employed by, or 
acceptable to and approved by the U.S, Government, should be consulted when 
evaluating potentially disqualifying or mitigating information under this guideline. (AG ¶ 
27) 
 The Government presented medical records to show that Applicant was treated 
by at least two psychiatrists and at four medical treatment facilities with diagnoses of 
major depression or mood disorder. He was prescribed various medications for his 
condition. However, there is no indication or finding in the medical files that the 
diagnosis and treatment for major depression and mood disorder cast doubt on 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability or trustworthiness. The medical information does not 
raise Psychological Conditions Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 28(a) (behavior that casts 
doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness that is not covered 
under any other guideline, including but not limited to emotionally unstable, 
irresponsible, violent, paranoid, or bizarre behavior); or AG ¶ 28(b) (an opinion by a duly 
qualified mental health professional that the individual has a condition not covered 
under any other guideline but may impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness). I find 
for Applicant as to SOR allegations 2.a, 2.b, 2.d, and 2.f, which allege mental health 
treatment and counseling. However, Applicant’s failure to follow treatment plans after 
alcohol consumption and the diagnosis of major depression and mood disorder does 
raise AG ¶ 28(c) (the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a 
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take prescribed 
medication). 
 I considered Psychological Conditions Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 29(a) (the 
identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the individual has 
demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the treatment plan); AG ¶ 29(b) 
(the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment program for a condition 
that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is currently receiving counseling or 
treatment with a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified mental health professional); AG 
¶ 29(c) (recent opinion by  a duly qualified mental health professional employed by, or 
acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an individual’s previous 
condition is under control or in remission, and has a low probability of recurrence or 
exacerbation): AG ¶ 29(d) (the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g. 
one caused by death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been resolved, and 
the individual no longer has indications of emotional instability); and AG ¶ 29 (e) (there 
is no indication of a current problem). None of these mitigating conditions apply. 
 The Government presented medical information to show that there is a 
connection between alcohol dependence and mood disorders. As noted in the 
discussion of alcohol consumption, Applicant’s psychological condition is caused by his 
alcohol consumption and not due to a temporary condition. Applicant has not shown an 
ongoing and consistent compliance with a treatment program. He voluntarily entered 
treatment programs but consistently relapsed into alcohol use. The opinion of the 
psychiatrist that he should be granted a security clearance does not indicate that 
Applicant’s condition is under control and that there is a low potential for recurrence or 
exacerbation. It is merely the psychiatrist’s opinion that Applicant should be granted 
 
10 
 
 
access to classified information. Applicant has not mitigated security concerns based on 
psychological conditions. I find against Applicant as to SOR allegations 2.c and 2.f 
which allege a failure to follow through or comply with treatment plans.   
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and 
the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s ten years of 
honorable service on active duty in the Navy, over 27 years of service with the same 
defense contractor, and that he successfully held a security clearance most of his 
career. I considered that Applicant is a good employee and his job performance is 
excellent. Applicant’s admits to being alcohol dependent for over 40 years. Even with 
this diagnosis, he continued to drink alcohol. He attended inpatient rehabilitation 
programs and continued to drink alcohol. His last drink of alcohol was only a little over 
15 months ago. His failure to follow treatment plans to control his excessive alcohol 
consumption raises a psychological condition security concern. This history shows that 
Applicant is unreliable and untrustworthy and does not have the ability to protect 
classified information. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated alcohol consumption and psychological condition 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
11 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f and 1g:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline I:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.d:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.e:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.f:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
