 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09690 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 7, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 23, 2012, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 19, 2012. The FORM was mailed to 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant and he received it on November 16, 2012. Applicant was given an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. On 
November 20, 2012, he provided a response (Response) to the FORM, which included 
several attachments. The case was assigned to me on January 3, 2013.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
  
 Department Counsel indicated in her FORM submission that she amended SOR 
¶¶ 1.c and 1.d by replacing the names of the listed creditors with the names of 
subsequent creditors. Counsel cited ¶ E.3.1.13 of the Directive as authority for this 
amendment. I conclude that this amendment falls under ¶ E.3.1.17 of the Directive 
because the amendment of the respective creditors conforms the pleading to the 
evidence admitted in this case. In his Response to the FORM, Applicant posed no 
objection to Department Counsel’s amendment, nor did he request more time to 
prepare his case in light of the amendment. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b, and admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. Those admissions are adopted 
as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and evidence 
submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He was born in Afghanistan and became a U.S. citizen 
in 2000. He is married and has one child. He has worked for his current employer, a 
defense contractor, since November 2012. He worked for another defense contractor 
from November 2009 until November 2012. He is a linguist. He attended a community 
college from 1991 to 1993. He is seeking a security clearance for the first time.1  
  
 The debts listed in the SOR are supported by credit reports dated November 
2009 and August 2012. The debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. are both credit card debts. 
The debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d arise out of the foreclosure of Applicant’s home. The 
debt at ¶ 1.c was the second mortgage taken on Applicant’s home. The debt alleged in 
¶ 1.d was the first mortgage on the home. Both mortgage loans are delinquent.2  
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a credit card account in the amount 
of $3,011. Applicant provided documentation showing this debt was paid in January 
2011. This debt is resolved.3 
 
                                                          
1 Item 4; Response. 
 
2 Items 3, 5-6. 
 
3 Items 3; Response. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a credit card account in the amount 
of $5,899. Applicant claims this debt was paid in March 2011. The original creditor is 
listed on a credit report dated September 2012, which Applicant supplied. That debt was 
charged off by the creditor in March 2009. There is also an entry by the subsequent 
collection company that states that the status of the account is “no status”. There is one 
further notation on the credit report relating to this account stating that the account is in 
dispute. Applicant wrote on the credit report that he closed the account because of a 
high interest rate and that the account was closed after everything was paid. He did not 
provide any documents showing payment towards the debt. This debt is unresolved.4 
 
 The two delinquent mortgage debts arose when Applicant purchased a house in 
June 2005. The house was financed with a first mortgage in the amount of about 
$324,000, and a second mortgage in the amount of about $81,000. There is no 
evidence of Applicant’s income during the 2005 time period, but for 2008, Applicant’s 
gross income was about $41,500 and his wife’s income was about $32,000. His wife 
lost her job in 2008 and Applicant was unable to make the mortgage payments. The 
house went into foreclosure in August 2008. The second mortgage is reported on the 
most recent credit report as open and past due in the approximate amount of $39,000 
as of August 2012. Applicant states that he is working with an attorney to develop a 
payment plan for both mortgages. He did not provide any details about this payment 
plan or any information from the attorney. These debts are unresolved.5 
 
 In April 2012, Applicant prepared a personal financial statement listing his net 
monthly income at about $9,390, his total monthly expenses at about $6,695, and a 
monthly remainder of about $2,694. He also listed a personal saving account with about 
$140,000. He provided a statement from a previous supervisor who described him as 
an outstanding professional. He has served in a deployed status performing his duties 
in hostile environments.6 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
4 Items 3, 5-6; Response. 
 
5 Item 3-6; Response. 
 
6 Response. 
 
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 Applicant paid one debt, but the other three remain unpaid. He did not provide 
sufficient evidence to show that the debts are unlikely to recur. I find mitigating condition 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because several of Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. 
Applicant provided evidence that his wife’s job loss in 2008 contributed to his financial 
problems. However, in order for this mitigating condition to fully apply, Applicant must 
demonstrate responsible behavior in light of the circumstances. Although he showed 
some responsible behavior by paying one of the credit card debts, he failed to produce 
evidence that he was taking any action on the three remaining debts. Even though he 
apparently has contacted an attorney concerning the two mortgage debts, he failed to 
produce any evidence showing that this contact had any effect on the debt. This 
 
6 
 
 
demonstrates a lack of responsible behavior. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
Applicant failed to present evidence of financial counseling, and while one debt was 
paid, there is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or 
under control because the other three debts remain unpaid. There is some evidence 
that he has made a good-faith effort to pay by resolving one of the debts. I find AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) partially apply. Applicant failed to provide any evidence disputing any of 
the debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s deployed 
service in a hostile environment, the recommendation of his supervisor, and the impact 
his wife’s job loss had on his debt situation. However, he has not shown a track record 
of financial stability. His financial worksheet shows that he has liquid assets available to 
apply towards these debts, yet he failed to do so. The record lacks evidence that 
Applicant has made an overall good-faith effort to resolve his debts. Therefore, he failed 
to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph   1.a:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
