 
1 
 
 
                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 12-00356 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated foreign preference security concern but has not mitigated the 
concerns related to foreign influence. His request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference) of the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
. 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated September 4, 2012, Applicant admitted the 
allegations under Guideline B, and denied the allegation under Guideline C. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on 
November 2, 2012, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 19, 2012. I 
 
2 
 
 
admitted two Government Exhibits (GE 1 and 2) and seven Applicant Exhibits (AE A - 
G). DOHA received the transcript of the hearing on November 29, 2012. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Israel. Department Counsel provided a 5-page summary of the facts, 
supported by 12 Government documents pertaining to Israel, identified as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 30 years old, was born in Israel. In 1992, after completing fourth grade, 
he left Israel at nine years of age. He has lived in the United States since then, and has 
earned a master’s degree in aerospace engineering at a U.S. university. Applicant 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen on May 20, 2004.1 He is a dual U.S.-Israeli citizen. 
Applicant has no obligation to perform Israeli military service because he applied for and 
received a waiver. Applicant was married in 2011 and has no children. His wife, a U.S. 
citizen, is a medical doctor and a captain in the U.S. Air Force. She currently serves in a 
military medical facility. Applicant was granted a position of public trust in 2008. He 
testified that he is willing to renounce his Israeli citizenship if required to receive a 
security clearance. (GE 1, 2; AE D; Tr. at 24-27, 31-32, 37-38, 61, 64-65) 
 
In 2006, Applicant accepted his current position as a space systems engineer for 
a defense contractor, and is currently a division head. He submitted a character 
reference letter from the vice president of operations, who has been his direct supervisor 
for the past seven years. He noted that Applicant started as a project engineer, and rose 
to become a division head in charge of ten engineers. He described Applicant as 
technically excellent and a hard worker whose contribution to the Government customers 
is of “enormous value.” A co-worker, the director of administration/finance, extolled 
Applicant's reliability, integrity, and trustworthiness. (GE 1; AE E, F; Tr. 30-31, 37-38) 
 
Applicant’s parents and two brothers live in the United States and are dual 
citizens of the United States and Israel.2 His 60-year-old mother is a scientist at a U.S. 
                                                          
1
 The evidence contains conflicting information about the date of Applicant's naturalization. In his security 
clearance application, he lists the date as May 20, 2004 (page 7), but on page 20, he notes that he was 
naturalized in 2006. (GE 1) 
  
2
 Applicant's parents and brothers are not alleged in the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
military research facility, and holds a public trust position. His 61-year-old father is 
Judaics director at a day school. Both hold Israeli passports and travel to Israel about 
once per year to see family. They own an apartment in Israel. Applicant testified that he 
has no inheritance interest in the property, because he expects his sister to receive it. 
One of Applicant's brothers is a college teacher and the other is a graduate student at a 
U.S. university. (Tr. 31-35, 66-68) 
 
Applicant's sister is a dual citizen of the United States and Israel. She is a 
pediatrician, residing in Israel. She married an Israeli citizen in 2011, and has no 
children. Her husband works for an information technology company. Applicant is unsure 
if his brother-in-law’s company has contacts or connections with the Israeli government, 
but stated in his security interview that his sister does not have such contacts. Applicant 
stated in his security interview that he is in touch with his sister about twice a week by 
telephone and email. They visit in person when he travels to Israel, or she visits the 
United States. (GE 2; Tr. 35-37) 
 
Applicant has other family members who are citizens and residents of Israel, 
including 3 grandparents, 4 sets of aunts and uncles, and 16 cousins. When Applicant 
discussed his family during his security interview,3 he stated that he has close 
relationships with his foreign family members. In his security clearance application, 
Applicant described his contact with his grandparents, aunts, and uncles as “Frequent 
phone conversations throughout the year, yearly trips to Israel to see [them] in person, 
and…” either email correspondence or meetings during their visits to the United States. 
Applicant visited Israel to see family in 2004 and annually from 2007 to 2012. In 2012, he 
visited family in Israel during his honeymoon. The frequency Applicant described at his 
hearing was less than that described in his security clearance application because of the 
demands of his wife’s current schedule, but he remains in touch with his foreign family 
members several times per year. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 57-63) 
 
Applicant's paternal grandmother is a homemaker. His paternal grandfather is 
retired. Previously, he held a clerical position in an Israeli military agency for more than 
two decades. He retired from that position approximately 20 years ago, and no longer 
has military contacts. Applicant's grandfather visits the United States frequently, most 
recently in 2012. Applicant sees his grandparents when he visits Israel, and when they 
come to the United States. He testified that he speaks with them by telephone about four 
times per year. Applicant's maternal grandmother, a homemaker, is a citizen-resident of 
Israel. He talks to her about four times per year by telephone, and visits her when he 
travels to Israel. His maternal grandfather is deceased. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 22, 39-41) 
 
Applicant's aunt and uncle (allegations 1.d, 1.h, and 1.i) are citizen-residents of 
Israel. Applicant's aunt is also a U.S. citizen. His uncle is an attorney and his aunt is a 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
3
 The Government did not present written documentation showing that Applicant had reviewed and 
adopted the summary of his security interview. However, Applicant testified that he had read the 
summary and agreed that it was accurate. (GE 2; Tr. 33) 
 
 
4 
 
 
nurse. At the time of his security interview (May 2011), Applicant spoke with them 8 to 15 
times per year, but he now talks with them about three times per year. Applicant's aunt 
and uncle have three sons and one daughter. Two of the cousins are students. The older 
two sons served two years compulsory service in the Israeli military. Applicant was 
unsure of the younger brother’s profession, or if he had finished his military service. The 
other son recently became a U.S. citizen and is now living in the United States and 
working for a “start-up.” Applicant is in touch with them by telephone and e-mail about 
four times per year. He visits these relatives in Israel, and they have visited with him in 
the United States three times. (GE1, 2; Tr. 41-47) 
 
Applicant's second set of relatives (allegations 1.e and 1.j) include an aunt, uncle 
and their five children. Applicant's aunt is a teacher, and he speaks with her one to three 
times per year. Applicant testified that his contact with his uncle of 8 to 15 times per year 
in 2011 has decreased to 3 to 6 times per year. His uncle worked for a private company 
in the aerospace field. However, he is no longer in that position and Applicant is unsure 
of his current employment. Applicant's cousins include a grocery store manager, a high 
school student, and a married architect with three children. He is unsure of the 
occupations of the other two cousins. Applicant speaks to these cousins about three to 
four times per year. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 47-52) 
 
Applicant's third set of relatives includes his aunt, uncle and their three children 
(allegations 1.f and 1.l). His aunt works for a nonprofit organization. Applicant is in touch 
with her once every two to three months by email and Skype. His uncle is a U.S. citizen, 
but Applicant is uncertain about his Israeli citizenship status. They have lived in Israel for 
16 years. Applicant's uncle is a physicist, working for a private company. Applicant is in 
touch with him every three to four months. Their children are students, and dual U.S.-
Israeli citizens. Applicant sees them once or twice a year when he visits Israel, or his 
aunt visits the United States on business. (Tr. GE 1, 2; Tr. 52-54, 58) 
 
Applicant's fourth set of relatives includes an aunt, uncle and four cousins 
(allegations 1.g and 1.k). His aunt and uncle are both medical doctors. His cousins 
include a high school student, a recent high school graduate who was working on social 
service projects in 2012, and two college students. He is in touch with them once or 
twice per year when he visits Israel. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 54-57) 
 
Applicant has no financial interests, property, or bank accounts in Israel, and has 
never voted in Israeli elections. Applicant and his wife currently live in a condominium 
that she bought in 2007; its present value is approximately $250,000. (Tr. 27, 39, 67) 
 
Applicant held a valid Israeli passport after becoming a U.S. citizen in June 2004. 
He traveled to Israel in 2004, and annually between 2007 and 2012. He used his U.S. 
passport for foreign travel to countries other than Israel. However, he was required by 
Israeli law to use his Israeli passport.to enter and exit Israel. When he traveled there in 
May 2011, he used both his U.S. and Israeli passports. In June 2011, Applicant's facility 
security officer (FSO) contacted the Israeli embassy, requesting that Applicant's passport 
be invalidated, because Applicant “is in the process of obtaining a U.S. Government 
 
5 
 
 
Security Clearance.”  The embassy complied. The FSO destroyed Applicant's Israeli 
passport on June 30, 2011. (AE B; Tr. 58-60) 
 
In January 2012, when Applicant went to Israel for his honeymoon, he no longer 
had his Israeli passport to enter and exit Israel. He met with officials at the Israeli 
embassy before leaving the United States, and provided information about his travel 
dates and flights. He was granted a waiver to use his U.S. passport to enter and exit 
Israel. (AE A, B, C, G; Tr. 23-25, 60-64, 68-70) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
The United States and Israel, a parliamentary democracy, have a close 
relationship based on common democratic values and security interests. Despite 
regional instability, it has developed a robust market economy. The United States is 
Israel’s largest trading partner. In 1985, Israel and the United States concluded a free-
trade agreement designed to strengthen economic ties by eliminating tariffs. From 
1976-2004, Israel was the largest annual recipient of U.S. foreign assistance. Almost all 
U.S. aid to Israel is in military assistance. Israel and the United States have established 
joint groups to further military cooperation, participate in joint military exercises, and 
collaborate on military research and weapons development. The United States has 
pledged to ensure that Israel maintains a qualitative military edge over its neighbors. 
 
However, Israel and the United States have serious disagreements on several 
issues involving national security. The United States is concerned about Israel’s military 
sales to China, its inadequate protection of U.S. intellectual property, and espionage-
related incidents implicating Israeli officials. There have been several cases of U.S. 
citizens convicted of selling or attempting to sell classified documents to Israeli embassy 
officials, and Israeli nationals indicted for espionage against the United States. There 
also have been instances of illegal export or attempted export of U.S. restricted, dual-
use technology to Israel. 
 
Groups designated as foreign terrorist organizations by the U.S. Department of 
State operate in Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza. On several occasions, they have 
kidnapped, injured, or killed tourists, students, residents, and U.S. government 
personnel. They have attacked highly frequented shopping areas, pedestrian areas, and 
public buses. They have used foreign hostages as bartering tools. 
 
In August 2012, the Department of State issued a warning concerning travel to 
Israel because of threats to U.S. citizens and U.S. interests. Israel strictly enforces 
security measures: U.S. visitors have experienced prolonged questioning and thorough 
searches upon entry or departure. Israel considers U.S. citizens who also hold Israeli 
citizenship to be Israeli citizens for immigration and other legal purposes; such citizens 
must enter and exit Israel using their current Israeli passport. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines B and C. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 expresses the concern about foreign preference as follows: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
                                                          
4
 Directive. 6.3. 
 
5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7 
 
 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the  interests of the United States.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 10, the following disqualifying condition is relevant: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2004. He continued to possess a valid Israeli 
passport after that date. In 2009, he renewed his Israeli passport, which was valid until 
2019. Applicant’s possession and renewal of his foreign passport were exercises of his 
rights of foreign citizenship, and they occurred after he became a U.S. citizen in 2004. 
AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 contains factors that can mitigate disqualifying conditions. I have 
considered all the mitigating conditions, especially the following: 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant testified that he was willing to renounce his Israeli citizenship. In 
addition, when his FSO informed him that his foreign passport must be invalidated, 
Applicant complied. The Israeli embassy provided documentation stating that the 
passport has been invalidated. Applicant’s FSO also forwarded a letter stating that she 
was present when the passport was destroyed. AG ¶ 11(b) and (e) apply. Security 
concerns under Guideline C are mitigated. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
8 
 
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 I have considered all the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7, and find that the 
following are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
 The possession of family ties to residents or citizens of a foreign country is not 
automatically disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an Applicant has a close 
relationship with even one relative in a foreign country, that is sufficient to create a 
potential for foreign influence, which could result in compromise to classified 
information.8 The record evidence indicates that Applicant has ties of affection to his 
family in Israel. He keeps in touch with his sister in Israel often, and with numerous 
other family members several times per year. He travels to Israel regularly to spend 
time with them. In addition, the country in question must be considered. Terrorist groups 
operate in Israel, have attacked transportation and shopping hubs, and kidnapped or 
killed innocent parties. The Department of State recently issued a warning concerning 
the danger of travel to Israel. Applicant's ties to his foreign family members in Israel, 
with whom he is bound by affection, represent a heightened risk of exploitation and a 
potential conflict of interest. AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) apply. 
 
 I have also considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline B, AG ¶ 8, 
especially the following: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
                                                          
8
 See generally, ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant maintains relationships with his foreign family members who are 
citizens and residents of Israel. They include his sister, a dual U.S.-Israeli citizen, as 
well as 3 grandparents, 4 aunts, 4 uncles, and 16 cousins. His contact with his sister, an 
immediate family member, is the most frequent. The Appeal Board has held that there is 
a rebuttable presumption that ties with immediate family are not casual.9 The evidence 
shows that Applicant maintains his family relationships during the year by telephone 
calls, emails, and by visiting his foreign family annually. Although his marriage has 
resulted in somewhat less frequent contact, that change has occurred only in the past 
year, and his contacts are still as often as every other month with some relatives. The 
report of his security interview in May 2011, which Applicant agreed was accurate, 
noted that he closely identified with his foreign family members, and that he had 
continuing contact with them. In his security clearance application, Applicant described 
his contacts with his grandparents, two uncles and two aunts as, “Frequent phone 
conversations throughout the year, yearly trips to Israel to see [her/him] in person…” 
and either email correspondence or in-person visits in the United States.  
 
In addition, the location of Applicant's relatives must be considered. Foreign 
terrorist organizations operate in Israel. They have targeted high-traffic areas, and 
kidnapped, injured, or killed tourists and residents. They have used foreign hostages as 
bartering tools. Given these facts, and Applicant's close ties to his foreign family 
members, I cannot confidently conclude that Applicant could not be placed in a position 
of having to choose between the interests of foreign individuals and the interests of the 
United States. AG ¶ 8 (a) and (c) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
                                                          
9
 ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
 
10 
 
 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
I considered the extent of Applicant's U.S. ties: his many years in the United 
States, his U.S. education, his economic ties through his employment, and his wife, who 
is a military officer. However, Applicant's attachment to his family in Israel raises 
security concerns. His attachment is evident in his ongoing relationships with his sister, 
his grandparents, and numerous aunts, uncles, and cousins. Even though most are 
extended family members, he has kept in close touch with them. Although the frequency 
of contact has decreased somewhat since his marriage a year ago, he has visited Israel 
annually for years, and continues to maintain frequent contact with his foreign family 
members. Such ties could place Applicant in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of his foreign family and the interests of the United States.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the cited security 
concerns. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts 
raised. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the Government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
