1 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
as amended  (Directive), and adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-09685
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant’s Afghani relatives who are alleged to create security concerns are all
either deceased or residents of the United States. Applicant was the victim of identity theft
and he has mitigated the alleged financial consideration security concern. Clearance is
granted.  
On August 21, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1 The SOR alleges security
concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence) and F (financial considerations). On
September 4, 2012, Applicant submitted a response to the SOR in which he admitted SOR
allegations 1.c. 1.d, and 1.e. He denied all other allegations and he requested a decision
based on the written record without a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 2,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
2012, that was mailed to Applicant on November 5, 2012. Applicant was informed he had
30 days from receipt of the FORM to submit his objections to any information contained in
the FORM or to submit any additional information he wished to be considered. Applicant
acknowledged receipt of the FORM on December 1, 2012, but did not submit a response
to the FORM or object to anything contained in the FORM within the time allowed him. The
case was assigned to me on January 11, 2013.
Procedural Matters
The record establishes that Applicant’s mother, father, and father-in-law, as alleged
in SOR subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1. e died years before the SOR was issued.
Department Counsel withdrew those allegations in the FORM. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is 43 years old and has been employed as a linguist by a defense
contractor since January 2012. He serves with U. S. military forces in Afghanistan. He was
employed full time as a department store salesman from October 2011 until January 2012;
and part time as a driving instructor from November 2011 until January 2012. Applicant was
self-employed as a part-time taxi driver from October 2008 until September 2011. He
reported he was unemployed from January 2005 until September 2008. During those years,
Applicant was attending schools to obtain a high school diploma and a certificate. He also
attended a college from which he did not receive a degree. Applicant worked as a cook in
a diner from January 1998 until December 2004.
Applicant married his wife in Pakistan in August 1999. They have four children, ages
10, 9, 6, and 1. Applicant’s wife was a citizen of Afghanistan and resident of the United
States at the time he submitted his response to the SOR. Applicant indicated in his
response to the SOR that his wife was to receive a Certificate of Naturalization 30 days
thereafter. Applicant entered the United States in July 1988, and he became a naturalized
U. S. citizen in February 2002. His children are all citizens and residents of the United
States.   
Applicant’s two brothers are citizens of Afghanistan and residents of the United
States. They entered the United States in 1988, and have not left the United States since
immigrating to it. Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen of Afghanistan and a resident of the
United States. She immigrated to the United States in 2002, and she has not left the United
States since she arrived there. 
SOR subparagraph 1.g alleges that Applicant’s sister-in-law is a citizen and resident
of Afghanistan. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denies this allegation and asserts his
sister-in-law is a citizen of Afghanistan but a resident of the United States. In support of the
allegation, Department Counsel cited to Applicant’s response to the SOR (mis-cited  as
Exhibit 4) and Exhibit 5. However, in his response to the SOR Applicant specifically denied
3
this allegation. Exhibit 5, a list of Applicant’s relatives, lists one sister-in-law and identifies
her as a permanent resident of the United States. 
SOR subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c allege three debts that have either been
charged off as bad debts or submitted for collection. Applicant asserted each of these debts
do not belong to him but were the result of identity theft. His credit reports verify that he
disputed the debts alleged in subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b. The file also contains letters that
establish each of the three debts were directed to be removed from his credit report in
response to information supplied to the creditors by Applicant. Additionally, the file contains
two letters from creditors not alleged in the SOR which specifically acknowledge that
Applicant was the victim of credit fraud. 
SOR subparagraph 2.f alleges an automobile loan as having been charged off in the
approximate amount of $31,131. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denies the
allegation and asserts the vehicle was sold to a third party and the loan was assumed by
the third party with the creditor’s approval. To prove the allegation, Department Counsel
cites to Applicant’s response to the SOR and two credit reports. Both credit reports state:
“Account assumed by another party.” There is no evidence to suggest the account was
ever charged off as a bad debt. 
SOR subparagraph 2.d and 2.e allege two automobile loans, owed in the combined
amount of $9,696, that were charged off as bad debts following repossessions. Applicant’s
credit reports list both accounts as having been charged off with the last activity dates
occurring in 2009. Applicant’s credit report, dated February 3, 2012, contains the notation
“dispute following resolution” for the account alleged in subparagraph 2.d, and “there may
be balance due” for the account alleged in subparagraph 2.e.  Applicant denied each
allegation and asserted the accounts were a mistake due to an overcharge, and were
currently under dispute. He also claimed each account should be resolved in his favor in
the near future.    
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision
must be a fair and impartial decision based upon the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6
of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or
against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be
followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Considering the
evidence as a whole, Guidelines B (foreign influence) and  F (financial considerations), with
their disqualifying and mitigating conditions, are most relevant in this case. 
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
2 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.
3 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
5 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).
6 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.
7 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
8 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
9 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
10 Id. at 531.
11 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.
4
applicant.2 The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.3 The burden of
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.5 “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the
evidence.”6 Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.7 Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance9 and “the clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”10  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to
classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.11     
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline
can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the
foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
The SOR listed three of Applicant’s relatives who had been dead for years before
the SOR was issued. Department Counsel prudently withdrew those three allegations. Of
the remaining allegations, only one alleged a relative who was believed to be a resident of
5
Afghanistan. However, nothing in the record supports that allegation. Instead, the evidence
establishes that each alleged relative who is still alive resides in the United States. There
is no evidence to indicate any of Applicant’s relatives have any continuing contact with
anyone in Afghanistan, or that they have returned to Afghanistan, or that they have even
left the United States since they immigrated to the United States. No Guideline B
disqualifying condition applies.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . . 
The record contains proof that Applicant was the victim of credit fraud. He disputed
the accounts listed in SOR subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c, and, in response to those
disputes, the creditors directed the accounts be deleted from his credit reports. There is no
evidence to support the allegation contained in SOR subparagraph 2.f. 
The record establishes the accounts listed in SOR subparagraphs 2.d and 2.e were
charged off in the combined amount of $9,696. Disqualifying Condition (DC) 19(a): inability
or unwillingness to satisfy debts applies. 
Applicant somewhat unclearly states the accounts alleged in subparagraphs 2.d and
2.e were mistakes due to overcharges, and that he was disputing them. He also claimed
each account should be resolved in his favor in the near future. Applicant’s credit report,
dated February 3, 2012, contains the notation “dispute following resolution” for the account
alleged in subparagraph 2.d, and “there may be balance due” for the account alleged in
subparagraph 2.e. Considering the proof he submitted that he was the victim of identity
theft, that he had been successful in disputing a number of other accounts, and the
uncertain entries in his credit report, he likely has, or reasonably believes he has, a
legitimate basis to dispute the accounts listed in subparagraphs 2.d and 2.e, and they will
be removed from his credit reports in short order.  
The accounts alleged in subparagraphs 2.d and 2.e both arose following a lengthy
period of unemployment experienced by Applicant that was then followed by his part-time
employment as a taxi driver. Further, the total amount alleged as owing on those two
accounts is not an amount that is likely to prompt Applicant to engage in illegal acts to raise
funds to satisfy those accounts. Mitigating Conditions (MC) 20(a): the behavior happened
so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; MC 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances: and MC 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute
the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
6
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions
to resolve the issue apply.  
 
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole-person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant mitigated the foreign
influence and financial considerations security concerns. He overcame the case against
him and satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Guidelines B and F are decided for
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: For APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-g: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: For APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

