 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04074 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carolyn H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 1, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 10, 2012, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline G (alcohol consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within DoD for SORs on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 2, 2012, and the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received his answer on November 7, 2012. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 14, 2012. The case was assigned to 
 
2 
 
 
me on November 21, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 29, 2012, 
scheduling the hearing for December 20, 2012. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, 
which were received without objection. The Applicant testified, but did not offer any 
exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 3, 2013.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. (SOR response, Tr. 10-11.) His 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, 
I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old aircraft painter, who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since November 2011. (GE 1, Tr. 12-13.) He seeks a security clearance, 
which is a requirement of his continued employment. (Tr. 13-14.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1976. He served in the Army National 
Guard as an enlisted person from April 1977 to February 1983, and was honorably 
discharged as a specialist 4 (pay grade E-4.) Apart from Army National Guard service 
schools, Applicant has no formal education beyond high school. Applicant never 
married and has no dependents. (Tr. 14-15, 28-29.) 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
The facts are not in dispute. Applicant has a history of episodic alcohol abuse 
spanning 43 years. He has consumed alcohol to excess and to the point of intoxication 
since he was 15 years old until the present. Of particular concern is his history of 
drinking and driving that include five alcohol-related driving arrests and one incident of 
driving while intoxicated. Specifically these incidents include: (1) an April 1990 driving 
under the influence (DUI) arrest that resulted in Appellant being convicted of the charge 
and fined $748; (2) a November 1997 DUI and open container arrest in which the 
charges were later dismissed; (3) a January 2002 DUI arrest that resulted in Appellant 
being convicted of the charge and sentenced to a $855 fine,12 months probation, and 
two days in jail; (4) a May 2004 DUI arrest resulting in being convicted of the charge 
and fined $455; (5) an April 2005 DUI arrest in which the charge was later dismissed; 
and (6) an admission during his January 2012 Office of Personnel Management (OPM)  
interview that he last drove while intoxicated in December 2011. During that same 
interview, Applicant stated that he continues to drink alcohol and that he does not 
believe he has a problem with alcohol consumption. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.f, Tr. 16-26.) 
 
Applicant has not participated in an alcohol-treatment program and claims that he 
is able to manage his drinking. He further claims that his drinking has never caused him 
any work-related problems nor has anyone ever told him that he has a drinking problem. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant does not believe his five DUI arrests are an indication of a drinking problem. 
(Tr. 26-30.)  He stated that he would like to get the issue of his security clearance 
resolved so he could remain at work. (Tr. 31.) 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
4 
 
 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G (alcohol consumption), the Government’s concern is that 
excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21.) 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline G through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented. At times, Applicant consumed alcohol to 
excess and to the point of intoxication since he was 15 years old until the present, a 
period spanning 43 years. He has a history of five DUI arrests between 1990 to 2005 
and one acknowledged incident of driving under the influence as recently as December 
2011. 
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of two alcohol consumption 
disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 22(a): “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as 
driving while under the influence,” and AG ¶ 22(c): “habitual or binge consumption of 
alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” apply. 
 
Two alcohol consumption mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not define the sufficiency of the passage of time, and there is no 
“bright-line” definition of what constitutes “recent” conduct. Based on my evaluation of 
the record evidence as a whole,1 for reasons discussed supra, I am unable to apply AG 
¶ 20(a). AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply because Applicant had not acknowledged that he 
has a drinking problem when the evidence clearly suggests otherwise. He claims that 
he can manage his drinking; however, as recently as December 2011 he drove while 
intoxicated. His assurances are insufficient to overcome his history of alcohol abuse and 
alcohol-related problems. I am still left with doubts regarding his ability to come to terms 
with the adverse effects alcohol has had on his life and have limited or no faith that his 
alcohol consumption problems are “unlikely to recur.”2   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant has stated that he can manage his drinking and does not have a 
drinking problem. He provided no evidence from a qualified medical professional or 
licensed clinical social worker suggesting that concerns raised by his history of alcohol-
related problems were as Applicant suggests “under control.” Applicant honorably 
served in the Army National Guard from 1977 to 1983 and has been working in the 
defense industry since November 2011. However, Applicant’s lengthy history of alcohol 
abuse and the related problems that alcohol consumption has caused him leaves me 
with doubt regarding his eligibility to hold a security clearance. Given his history, more is 
required than his assurances that he does not have a drinking problem.  
                                                          
1
See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). 
   
2
 These two mitigating conditions are discussed further in the whole-person analysis portion of 
this decision, infra. 
 
 
6 
 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the 
law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful 
consideration of the whole-person factors”3 and supporting evidence, my application of 
the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my 
responsibilities under the guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible 
for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
3
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
