 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-09324
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Eric Roper, Esq.
                                                              
01/31/2013
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant owes over $488,000 on delinquent student loans. He made a few
relatively small payments on one of the loans in 2010; and he recently began making very
small payments on another of the loans. No payments have been made on the remaining
delinquent accounts, most of which have been delinquent for years. Clearance is denied.
On November 2, 2012, the Department of Defense (D0D) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  The SOR alleges1
security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct) and Guideline F (financial
considerations). Applicant submitted an undated response in which he requested a hearing
and admitted SOR allegations 1.a and 1.b, denied allegations 1.c and 1.d, and stated he
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
neither admitted or denied the Guideline F allegations alleged in SOR subparagraph 2. At
the hearing, Applicant admitted all Guideline F allegations.
The case was assigned to me on December 20, 2012. A notice of hearing was
issued on December 20, 2012, scheduling the hearing for January 7, 2013. The hearing
was conducted as scheduled. The Government submitted ten documentary exhibits that
were marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-10. GE 1-4 and GE 6-10 were admitted into
the record without objection. Applicant’s objection to GE 5 was overruled and it was
admitted into the record. Applicant testified, called one witness to testify on his behalf, and
submitted 11 documentary exhibits that were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1-11. AE
1-8 were admitted into the record without objection. Department Counsel’s objections to
AE 9-11 were overruled and they were admitted into the record. The transcript was
received on January 22, 2013. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is a 37-year-old man who has been employed as a linguist by a defense
contractor since April 2012. He was unemployed from September 2011 until April 2012.
He worked in a retail store from August 2010 until August 2011. 
Applicant obtained a bachelor’s degree in December 1999. He attended medical
school outside the United States and obtained a degree in medicine in May 2007. He has
taken and failed the examinations required before he could apply to begin a residency in
2007 and 2009. Considering how much time has passed since he completed his medical
training and last failed the examination, it is unlikely he will ever be able to practice
medicine. Applicant did not work while studying to become a doctor, and, instead,
supported himself and his family with student loans.
Applicant was married in January 2001. That marriage ended by divorce in February
2012. Applicant has two children from that marriage, ages 10 and 7, who reside with his
ex-wife. Applicant is not required to pay child support, but he testified he does provide his
ex-wife with $400 per month. 
On May 9, 2010, Applicant was charged with Battery, Terroristic Threats, and
Obstruction of a 911 call based on allegations made by his wife. The Terroristic Threat
charge, a felony, was based on his wife’s claim that he would kill her by cutting her throat.
Applicant claims his wife filed the charges because she is a devout Muslim who is against
United States military forces being in any Muslim country, and she did not want him to work
with the United States military. The Court entered a protective order and required Applicant
to attend a domestic violence pretrial diversion program. Applicant successfully completed
3
the domestic violence pretrial diversion program and a nolle prosequi was issued as to all
charges on August 8, 2011. 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 10, 2012, in which he
reported that he had been charged with a misdemeanor simple battery and that the case
was dismissed. The security clearance application does not indicate that Applicant
disclosed the other two charges that had been filed against him or that one of those
charges was a felony. Applicant testified he did disclose the charges and he submitted
photographs of what he claims are the saved copy of his submission on his computer that
contains drop-down boxes that disclose additional information indicating he had been
charged with three charges, one of which included the word terroristic. (AE 9 & 10)
On April 9, 2012, Applicant signed and submitted a document entitled
Prenomination Personal Interview Form in which, in response to a question asking if he
had ever been arrested or convicted of a felony, he answered: “Yes - argument with my ex-
wife.” On April 23, 2012, during a three and one-half hour interview in which a
counterintelligence-focused security screening questionnaire was prepared, Applicant fully
discussed his arrest and the three charges that had been placed against him.
The woman who interviewed Applicant for his employment with the defense
contractor testified Applicant disclosed to her that three charges had been filed against him
for the May 2010 incident with his ex-wife. She stated that the hand-written notation of
page 41 of the Questionnaire for National Security Positions (AE 1) under the phrase “All
three charges” was put there by her. She also testified that Applicant sent her the two
documents immediately following that page, which are the nolle prosequi and a personal
statement prepared by Applicant concerning his version of the events preceding his arrest.
Applicant accumulated over $488,000 in student loans while attending medical
school. Those loans have now been submitted for collection, charged off as bad debts, or
listed as past-due. Applicant made two payments, totaling $500, toward the debt listed in
SOR subparagraph 2.p in March and April 2010. (AE 2) He has not made any payment
toward that account since April 2010. He made one payment of approximately $60 toward
the account listed in subparagraph 2.c in April 2004. (AE 2) He has made three additional
payments of approximately $60 each toward that account beginning in November 2012.
The account listed in SOR subparagraph 1.a is an ambulance charge that is the
responsibility of the insurer of the person who was involved in an automobile accident with
Applicant. The accounts listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.o through 1.s have been
consolidated into the debt listed in subparagraph 1.d, owed in the amount of $112,597.
Applicant testified he has contacted the creditor holding those consolidated debts and he
has agreed to begin making $875 monthly payments toward those accounts in February
2013. As of the date of the hearing, no payment, other than the payments discussed above
in regard to subparagraph 2.p, has been made toward those accounts. No payment or
payment arrangements have been made in regard to any of the other delinquent accounts.
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2.6
4
Applicant’s net pay monthly is about $6,500. He testified he owed his mother
between $15,000 and $20,000, and he has paid her between $20,000 and $30,000. He
also testified he has between $20,000 and $30,000 in savings.  
Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from an Army sergeant first class
with whom he has worked as a linguist. The sergeant first class highly recommends that
Applicant be granted a security clearance based upon his proven performance during the
two months they worked together. Applicant’s personal references attest to him being a
responsible, honest, and compassionate individual who possesses integrity and dedication
to duty. 
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision must be a fair
and impartial decision based upon relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive.
Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against
clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guideline E (personal
conduct) and Guideline F (financial considerations) with their disqualifying and mitigating
conditions, are most relevant in this case. 
  The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of2 3
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden
of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of5
the evidence.”  Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant6
to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 Id. at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
5
her.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable7
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard9
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access10
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.    11
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or willingness
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure
to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. (Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 15)
Applicant was involved in a domestic altercation with his ex-wife in May 2010. He
was charged with three offenses, including a felony offense. Although Applicant denies
most of the allegations and attributes the charges to his wife’s efforts to prevent him from
accepting employment assisting United States military forces, the Court entered a
protective order and required Applicant to attend a domestic violence pretrial diversion
program. Applicant successfully completed the domestic violence pretrial diversion
program and a nolle prosequi was issued as to all charges on August 8, 2011. 
The security clearance application Applicant submitted indicates Applicant was
charged with a misdemeanor battery that was dismissed. Applicant testified that he
disclosed all the charges in the electronic copy that he submitted, and he offered some
evidence in support of that assertion. Further, it is clear from the record, that Applicant
disclosed that three charges had been filed against him when he was interviewed for his
prospective employment with a defense contractor. He disclosed that he had been arrested
or charged with a felony in a form he submitted on April 9, 2010, the day before he
submitted the security clearance application. Applicant fully disclosed the charges that had
been placed against him during a lengthy interview conducted on April 23, 2012. 
6
It is clear that Applicant did not deliberately provide false information in the security
clearance application he submitted on April 10, 2010. The woman who interviewed him for
his employment specifically noted that the form she received contained information that
three charges had been filed against Applicant. On at least two other occasions, both
before and after Applicant submitted the security clearance application, he provided
information disclosing the exact charges that had been filed against him and that one of
those charges may have been a felony.
The SOR does not allege the underlying offense as a criminal offense security
concern, undoubtedly because there is no evidence of any other criminal conduct in
Applicant’s history. However, when combined with Applicant’s financial history, as
discussed below, his conduct and the Court’s response to that conduct is sufficient to allow
for application of Disqualifying Condition (DC) 16(d): credible adverse information that is
not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available information supports
a whole-person assessment of questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.
While the Court imposed an order of protection and required Applicant to attend a
domestic violence diversion program, it eventually entered a nolle prosequi upon his
successful completion of the program. Applicant has not been involved in any other
criminal activity, either before or after the events of May 9, 2010. Further, Applicant’s
references indicate he has demonstrated that he is an honest and responsible individual
who has demonstrated trustworthy characteristics during at least part of the time he has
been working with the Army.  
Considering the nature of Applicant’s conduct and that he is now divorced from his
ex-wife, Applicant’s conduct is unlikely to recur.  Mitigating Condition (MC) 17(c): the
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment applies.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG 18
Applicant has over $488,000 in delinquent student loans that have been submitted
for collection, charged off as bad debts, or listed as past due. Those debts have been
delinquent for years. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts; and 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations apply.
7
Applicant chose to support himself and his family on student loans while he
attended medical school. In so doing, he voluntarily acquired the enormous debt that has
now become severely delinquent. His failure to pass the examinations required before he
could pursue a career as a physician makes it highly unlikely he will ever be able to satisfy
his delinquent debt. Until he was hired by his current employer, Applicant had only worked
one year, at a low paying and unskilled job, in the past ten years. In addition to student
loans, he primarily survived by borrowing money from his mother. As a result, he not only
acquired enormous debt, he also maintained the inability to satisfy that debt. 
Applicant made a few relatively small payments on two of his debts before the SOR
was issued. He began making regular very small payments on one of those debts after the
SOR was issued. He testified he has made arrangements to make $875 monthly payments
toward a very large debt that is the result of the consolidation of a number of debts owed
to the same creditor, but those payments were not to begin until after the hearing of this
case. Assuming Applicant actually makes the payments he has agreed to on that debt, it
will take over ten years, not counting accumulating interest on the debt, before it is
satisfied. 
Applicant knowingly placed himself in a precarious financial position by choosing to
support himself and his family solely on student loans. He did not act responsibly in
acquiring such enormous debt solely in the hope that he would someday become a doctor
and, hopefully, have sufficient income to begin to satisfy that debt. He has not acted
responsibly in simply ignoring the debt since he acquired it. Mitigating Condition MC 20(b):
the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances does not apply.
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and unlikely to be resolved in the
foreseeable future. The few and nominal payments he has made on a couple of his
accounts cannot be considered a good faith effort to resolve those debts. While he has
negotiated a repayment plan on one large consolidated debt, it will take many years for that
plan to actually resolve that debt even if he makes the required payments. Further, there
are many other delinquent accounts on which no effort has been made to set up
repayment plans.
I have considered the following mitigating conditions and concluded they do not
apply: MC 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; MC 20(c): the person has received
or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the
problem is being resolved or is under control; MC 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: and MC 20(e): the individual
has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause
of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, the whole-person concept, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant mitigated the
personal conduct security concern but failed to mitigate the financial considerations
security concern. Applicant has not overcome the case against him nor satisfied his
ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
Applicant a security clearance. Guideline F is decided against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.b-n: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.o-s: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
