 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-03913 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 10, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
From 2009 through 2010, Applicant had an unreported, extra-marital relationship 
with a foreign national who was employed as a “lingerie model” or lap dancer. He 
continued his relationship in 2011, after he separated from his wife and the foreign 
national left her dancing job. He currently provides $3,000 per month to the foreign 
national. His personal conduct and sexual behavior raise security concerns under 
Guidelines E and D, which were not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 17, 2012, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines E and D. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 19, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 28, 2012. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 29, 2012, scheduling the hearing for December 14, 2012. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through E, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 26, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 2.a, with 
qualifications. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; Tr. 7.) 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor for over 30 years and has risen to the level of a 
senior executive. He has held a security clearance and special program access since 
1989. In March 2011 Applicant separated from his spouse, whom he married in 1989. 
They have no children. (GE 1; AE A; AE D; Tr. 24-26.) 
 
 From 2004 to 2009, Applicant visited a “one-on-one strip club” (club) 
approximately one-to-three times per month. It was a “discrete” club that did not permit 
touching. The club was located approximately an hour away from Applicant’s 
hometown. He traveled to the club in the distant town to avoid being seen by the people 
with whom he worked and to hide his conduct from his wife. (GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 25, 34-39.) 
 
 Starting in July 2009, Applicant only requested dances from his favorite “lingerie 
model” (Miss X). He customarily paid her $100 for a dance and tipped her an additional 
$100. In spring 2010, Applicant invited Miss X to lunch and they began seeing each 
other outside of the club. In summer 2010, Applicant became aware Miss X was not a 
citizen of the United States, but was a citizen of the Czech Republic. He did not report 
his foreign contact to his security office or report his relationship with a foreign national 
to any of his special access programs. Applicant asserted that she held a green card, 
permitting her to work in the United States. Applicant wanted to keep this relationship a 
secret because he was married at the time and did not want anyone at work to know 
about their affair. (GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; Tr. 25-30, 34-41, 54.) 
 
 Applicant’s relationship with Miss X continued inside and outside of the club, and 
included sexual intercourse outside of the club. Applicant testified that during this time 
frame he paid Miss X for her services inside of the club, but that he did not pay her for 
any activities outside of the club. He considered their meetings outside the club to be 
“dating.” (Tr. 27-28, 54-56.) 
 
 In July or August 2010, Applicant stopped seeing Miss X and began attending 
marriage counseling with his wife. Applicant claimed that his affair was disclosed to his 
wife during the counseling sessions. The marriage counseling was unsuccessful and 
 
3 
 
Applicant separated from his wife in March 2011. No separation agreement has been 
filed and he stated their divorce is pending. He provided no documentation to 
substantiate his claims. While his security clearance application reflects that he and his 
wife physically separated on March 16, 2011, it also states they are “not legally 
separated.” (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; GE 6; Tr. 24, 52-53.) 
 
 Applicant resumed his relationship with Miss X immediately after separating from 
his wife. Applicant was still dating Miss X at the time of the hearing. In the spring of 
2011, he began to provide Miss X $3,000 per month ($36,000 per year) in support. Miss 
X had left her “modeling” position with the club in the fall of 2010. Applicant testified that 
since leaving the club, Miss X worked as a “fitness therapist,” although he admitted that 
she has no license, no place of business, and little income from her work. He believes 
she has one client. He indicated that she had a naturalization interview scheduled and 
hoped to become a U. S. citizen. They do not cohabitate. (GE 2; GE 3; GE 6; Tr. 54-58.) 
 
 On May 26, 2011, Applicant was notified that he would be scheduled to undergo 
a polygraph examination for access to a special program. Applicant testified that he 
knew he would have to disclose the relationship with a foreign national during the 
polygraph examination, so on May 30, 2011, he went to his Facility Security Officer 
(FSO) and reported the relationship. On June 6, 2011, he completed a “SAP FORMAT 
20” (Form 20). On the Form 20, Applicant indicated Miss X was employed as a “fitness 
therapist” and that they met “at her place of business July 2009. Began infrequen[t]; 
casual dating 2/2010; stopped August 2010; started more frequent dating end Mar 
2011.” (GE 5; GE 6; Tr. 29, 45-52.)  
 
 As a result of Applicant’s relationship with a foreign national and his failure to 
report it in a timely manner, he was suspended for two weeks off of work without pay in 
July 2011, was debriefed and terminated from one of his special access programs, and 
was ineligible for a bonus or raise in 2012. Applicant also received a letter of reprimand. 
He feels that he has been sufficiently punished. He has lost approximately $125,000 as 
a result of his ineligibility for a raise and bonus. (GE 6; Tr. 30-33.) 
 
 Applicant presented four character reference letters attesting to his 
professionalism, good character, and loyalty. Of those who wrote letters, only one knew 
the details of his relationship with Miss X. (Tr. 51.) Applicant’s supervisor, who was 
aware of the details of his relationship with Miss X, indicated that Applicant is a trusted 
member of management and stated that the company considers this matter closed after 
Applicant’s reprimand. In fall 2012, Applicant was awarded a prestigious award “in 
recognition of his outstanding accomplishments and [omitted] achievements.” (AE A; AE 
B; AE C; AE D; AE E.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
5 
 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or 
award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country of that is legal 
in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group. 
 
 Applicant is embarrassed about his relationship with Miss X and how it began 
while he was married. He drove an hour away from his home to find the club, as he did 
not want his wife or his work associates to know of his activities there. He failed to 
disclose his relationship with Miss X, a foreign national he met at the club, until he faced 
a polygraph examination. When he disclosed their relationship, he stated that she was a 
fitness therapist on the Form 20 and indicated they met at her place of business, 
thereby intentionally falsifying the Form 20 and misleading the FSO about the true 
nature of their initial introduction and interactions. Further, there is little evidence that 
Miss X actually works as a fitness therapist, but instead she appears to be supported 
solely by Applicant. His concealment of his past conduct and choice to deliberately 
provide misleading information on his Form 20 demonstrate that Applicant has 
questionable judgment; and that he is vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
because he engaged in conduct, which if known, could affect his personal and 
professional standing in the community. AG¶¶ 16(a), 16(b), and 16(e) are disqualifying. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
6 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence that any of the above mitigating conditions 
apply. Applicant has had a security clearance since 1989 and is familiar with the rules 
and regulations. He blatantly disregarded the rules when he had the opportunity to 
satisfy his own interests. Applicant’s disclosure on the Form 20 occurred several years 
after his affair with Miss X began, and it was prompted by his upcoming polygraph 
examination, not a voluntary decision to disclose his misconduct. Further he omitted 
and distorted relevant facts on the Form 20. Hence, AG ¶17(a) does not apply because 
his admission was neither prompt nor in good faith.   
 
 His poor decisions were not based upon the advice of another, but instead were 
attributable to his intentional unwillingness to comply with security rules and regulations. 
Thus AG ¶17(b) is inapplicable. 
 
 His affair with the foreign national began in 2009 and is on-going. He pays her 
$3,000 per month in support and has a close bond of affection for her. His failure to 
timely and truthfully disclose the relationship until his scheduled polygraph cannot be 
construed to be minor offense and does cast doubt on his trustworthiness and good 
judgment. AG ¶17(c) does not apply.    
 
 Applicant acknowledged that his failure to report his relationship with a foreign 
national in a timely manner was improper. He has been reprimanded at work and 
believes he has been sufficiently punished. However, he failed to produce sufficient 
evidence of other positive steps he has taken that make it unlikely he would act in an 
inappropriate and self-serving manner in the future. Applicant placed his own personal 
satisfaction above the security regulations and he has not presented evidence to 
mitigate this behavior. AG ¶17(d) does not apply.    
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant testified that his supervisor was the only one of his character 
references that knew of his relationship with Miss X. He presented no documentation 
from his wife demonstrating the depth of her knowledge of Applicant’s affair or the 
nature of their present marital status. While he testified that he is in the process of filing 
for divorce, he presented no documentation to support this claim. He failed to establish 
that he has reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress in the 
future, as required for AG ¶17(e) to apply. 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Sexual Behavior is set out in AG 
¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
Applicant engaged in sexual behavior that makes him vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress, and reflected a lack of discretion and judgment. He admitted his 
extra-marital affair with Miss X and his attempts to hide his activities from his wife, his 
co-workers, and his FSO. While neither the affair nor his decision to frequent the club 
were illegal, his embarrassment over his previous and repeated sexual behavior in a 
public setting reflects his lack of discretion and judgment. The evidence supports the 
application of both disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 14 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 
8 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is private, consensual, and discrete. 
 
None of the above mitigating conditions apply. AG ¶ 14(b) does not apply 
because Applicant’s extramarital relationship with Miss X is ongoing and casts doubt on 
his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 14(c) does not apply because Applicant’s continuing 
relationship with Miss X could potentially subject him to exploitation, coercion, or 
duress, as evidenced by his ongoing efforts to hide and minimize it. Applicant failed to 
produce sufficient evidence that his wife is aware of the affair and that he has disclosed 
his relationship to his coworkers. AG ¶ 14(d) fails to mitigate Applicant’s conduct. While 
Applicant asserted that the sexual relationship with Miss X is private, consensual, and 
discrete, this alone cannot mitigate the concerns raised above. First, it was not initially 
private, when Applicant was soliciting her services in the club. Second, it was because 
he hid the details of his relationship with a foreign national that he was found to be 
vulnerable to coercion. Applicant’s choice to keep private the details about his foreign 
national sexual partner led to his discipline and reprimand. Applicant admitted that, of 
those who wrote letter on his behalf, only his supervisor knows the exact nature of the 
beginning of his relationship with Miss X. His other colleagues and references are 
unaware of his conduct. Other than Applicant’s testimony, there was no proof that 
Applicant’s wife knows of the affair. Thus, he could still potentially be subject to coercion 
regarding the details of his relations with Miss X and her ongoing financial support.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
 
9 
 
Guidelines E and D in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a long history of working in the defense industry and is respected 
by his colleagues and supervisor. He recently won a prestigious award for his work. 
Those are two facts that weigh in favor of reinstating his security clearance. However, 
that long history of employment, coupled with his familiarity with security rules and 
regulations, aggravates the seriousness of his misconduct and weighs heavily against 
his reinstatement.  His embarrassment over his extra-marital sexual relationship with a 
foreign national and his ongoing decision to mislead and hide the details from the 
government, his wife, and his FSO further demonstrate a lack of honesty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. He failed to provide evidence of sufficient remedial action that could 
assure the Government that similar conduct will not occur in the future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Personal Conduct and Sexual Behavior 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
