                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                     )                                                           
      --------------------------------------                  )         ISCR  Case No.  12-06916       
                                                                  )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case
On August 1, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary
affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance. DOD
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. This action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD  Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security clearance review Program (January 2, 1962), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the Department of Defense on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 17, 2012, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on October 22, 2012, and was scheduled for hearing on
November 15, 2012. The hearing was convened on that date. At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5). Applicant relied on three
witnesses (including himself) and 15 exhibits (AEs A-O). The transcript (Tr.) was
received on November 27, 2012. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated (a) 16 consumer debts
exceeding $21,000; (b) a car repossession and deficiency totaling $16,560; (c) a
motorcycle repossession and deficiency totaling $5,311; (d) a mortgage foreclosure on
Applicant’s first trust deed with a mortgage balance of $292,000; (e) a mortgage
foreclosure on Applicant’s second trust deed with a mortgage balance of $73,200; and (f)
an outstanding judgment entered against Applicant in the amount $1,142.  
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations. He claimed his
listed medical and unsecured consumer debts reflect both medical and retail accounts he
is seeking to discharge. He claimed his real estate mortgages were foreclosed upon due
to interest rate adjustments and a 50 percent reduction in the value of their property. He
claimed the alleged car repossession is now considered unsecured debt, which will be
discharged legally and permanently without any attempts to qualify the amount owed the
creditor. He claimed longstanding attempts to make “arrangements” with the creditors
without any documentation to corroborate his attempts.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 28-year-old aircraft mechanic for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The SOR allegations admitted by Applicant are incorporated and
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant completed five years of active military duty with the Army in November
2007. (GE 1) He claims two years of college credits at a local college and no degree or
diploma to date. (GE 1) Applicant married his wife in June 2006 and has two young
children from this marriage and two older stepchildren. (GE 1 and AE K; Tr. 45, 54-57)
Finances
Following their marriage, both Applicant and his wife worked and kept their
finances in stable order. (Tr. 76) They purchased a home in June 2006 for $366,000 and
financed their purchase with a $292,000 first trust deed with creditor 1.n and a $73,200
second trust deed with creditor 1.p. (GEs 2, 3, and 5 and AEs E, P, and Q; Tr. 76, 99)
The interest rate on Applicant’s first mortgage was adjustable and called for monthly
payments of $2,000. (GE 3; Tr. 107-108) His second mortgage also carried an
3
adjustable interest rate and called for monthly payments of $725. (GE 3; Tr. 107-108)
Both of the mortgages taken out by Applicant and his wife were considered purchase
money mortgages. (GEs 2, 3, and 5 and AEs E and Q; Tr. 106) 
In December 2006, Applicant’s spouse broke her ankle in an automobile accident.
(Tr. 46-47, 77) She and Applicant incurred considerable medical bills over the ensuing
two years associated with her injuries. (GE 3) At the time, she was pregnant with her first
child and could not take pain medications. (Tr. 77) When Applicant asked for additional
days of leave to be with his wife, his Army commander denied his request and offered
Applicant nonjudicial punishment (NJP) when he returned. (AE C; Tr. 79-80) Applicant
accepted his commander’s offer and was awarded NJP in December 2006. (GE 1; Tr.
80) Applicant accepted reduced rank and income. 
In January 2007, Applicant deployed with a reduced rank and income. (Tr. 46-47)
With his wife at home and receiving medical treatment for her pregnancy and therapy for
her surgically repaired ankle (Tr. 76-77), Applicant encountered increased difficulty
meeting his  mortgage, vehicle, and medical/consumer payments in a timely way. (GE 3;
Tr. 48-52, 80-81)   By May 2007, he and his wife had stopped making payments on their
first and second home mortgages. (GE 3) Upon completing his enlistment in November
2007, Applicant encountered difficulties finding work and fell further behind with his
mortgage and vehicles. (GE 3) To conserve resources, he moved his wife and family into
the home of his in-laws and took low-paying jobs. (Tr. 85-86) 
Between January 2008 and February 2009, Applicant continued working in low-
paying jobs that placed additional strains on his family’s finances. (GE 3; Tr. 80-82)
Financial pressures on their family resources were compounded by medical
complications associated with his wife’s pregnancy with their second child.  (GE 3; Tr.
47-49) 
In June 2008, Applicant and his wife encountered a break-in of their home and the
ensuing loss of most of their belongings and possessions. (AE E; Tr. 83-86, 97-98) They
considered filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection, but belatedly decided against this
course of action. Between Applicant and his wife (who left her job in May 2007), they
earned just over $24,000 a year in 2008 and could barely take care of their accruing
medical bills. (Tr. 57, 88-89) As a result, they fell further behind with their mortgages and
vehicle loans. (Tr. 88) 
In September 2008, Applicant’s first mortgage holder (creditor 1.n) foreclosed on
his home mortgage and received sale proceeds of only $80,000. Six months later, the
lender resold the home for $134,000. (AE Q) It is not clear from the documentation in
evidence as to the status of Applicant’s first and second mortgages with creditor 1.p.
Credit reports (GEs 2 and 5) reveal no remaining balances for either of these delinquent
mortgages. (GEs 2-3 and 5) The last reported loan balance on each of these home
mortgages was $292,800 on the first mortgage and $73,200 on the second mortgage.
(GEs 2 and 5)
4
In August 2005, while he was still on active military duty, Applicant purchased a
motorcycle for around $9,000. Payments on the motorcycle ran about $150 a month.
(GEs 2-3 and 5). And from 2005 through December 2006, he was current with his
payments. However, in December 2006 he stopped making payments on the motorcycle,
and in February 2007, the lender (creditor 1.o) repossessed the motorcycle. (GE 3) At
the time of the repossession, Applicant owed approximately $5,311 on the vehicle. (GE
3) Since the repossession, Applicant has not received any demand notices from creditor
1.o and has not made any payments towards the reported deficiency balance. (GEs 2
and 5) Because the reported $5,311 balance does not reflect any credits from the
creditor’s presumed sale of the motorcycle, he initially disputed this debt. (GE 3) The
credit reports in evidence do not show any credits from sale proceeds of the
repossessed motorcycle, and there is nothing in the record to indicate whether the
motorcycle was ever sold by creditor 1.o or its assigns. 
For lack of any clarifications of the amount still owing on the creditor 1.o account
(if any), the full extent of Applicant’s obligations to this creditor is unknown. Because
Applicant admits the debt in his answer and does not question the amount owed,
Applicant is not factually absolved of the debt generally. All that is in question is the
owed amount of the unresolved deficiency. 
Applicant and his wife purchased an automobile in August 2006 for $12,355 and
financed the entire balance. (GE 3) Following his deployment in January 2007, they
struggled to keep up with the car payments. The account became delinquent in February
2007 and was repossessed by creditor 1.m in March 2007 with a reported balance of
$16,560. (GEs 2-3 and 5) Applicant’s credit reports do not reflect any credits to Applicant
from the sale of the vehicle, and none can be inferred from the documentation in
evidence.  Since the automobile’s repossession, Applicant has not received any demand
notices from creditor 1.m and has not made any payments towards the deficiency
balance on this account. (GEs 2-3 and 5). What remains of Applicant’s dispute is the
amount still owing on the loan balance. 
Between 2006 and 2010, Applicant and his wife accumulated other delinquent
debts, mostly unsecured medical and consumer debts. (GEs 2-3 and 5) The unsecured
medical debts (creditors 1.a through 1.e and creditors 1.r through 1.u) associated with
Applicant’s wife’s injuries resulting from  her two accidents: one in 2006 and the other in
April 2010. (GEs 2 and 3 and 5 and AE F and I; Tr. 55-56) Together, their medical debts
exceed $12,000 and remain mostly unaddressed and outstanding. (GEs 2-3 and 5)  
Applicant’s consumer accounts (all but one unsecured) created with creditors 1.d
($323), 1.f ($368), 1.g ($160), 1.h ($2,733), 1.i ($614), 1.j ($486), 1.k ($1,273), and 1.l
($4,067) exceed $10,000 and to date have only been partially addressed by Applicant.
The judgment debt covered by creditor 1.q ($1,142) was taken against Applicant in April
2008 and has not been paid or addressed to date either. (GEs 2-3 and 5 and AE B)
Applicant hopes to satisfy this judgment in the near term. (AE B)  Only his consumer
debts with creditors 1.f, 1.g, and 1.i are documented by Applicant as paid. (AE O; Tr.
104)
5
Concerning the disputed debt he has with creditor 1.h ($2,733), Applicant claimed
in his 2011 OPM interview that it is not his debt. (GE 3; Tr. 94, 102) The debt no longer
appears on his most recent credit report. (AE O) Afforded a post-hearing opportunity to
provide documented proof of the merits of his dispute with this creditor or why the debt
was deleted from his credit report he could not do so. (GE 3 and AE P; Tr. 95)  His post-
hearing submission (AE P) contains a brief summary of a telephonic conversation he had
with the creditor confirming resolution of his creditor dispute, but nothing substantive
from the creditor. (AE P) Absent more details of his dispute with creditor 1.h, the debt
must inferentially be treated as a disputed but potentially valid debt based on prior
reports. (GEs 2 and 5). 
Applicant’s wife was a responsible caretaker for her father who was seriously ill
and required her personal care. (AE G; Tr. 52) Due to her caretaker responsibilities, she
was unable to complete her schooling, or work. (AEs G and H) Altogether, his wife was
out of work for almost two years, and when she did earn part-time income during this
period, her earnings were deducted from her unemployment benefits. (Tr. 61-62) 
After his wife’s father passed away in 2011, Applicant and his wife agreed to
parent the two small children of his wife’s sister and accepted them for a short period in
September 2011 as their foster children. (AEs G, H, and L;Tr. 61) The children were
returned to their home in August  2012. (Tr. 62) Caring for two additional children in their
household placed extra strains on their finances.
Currently, Applicant nets around $3,752 a month after deductions are computed.
(GE 4; Tr. 56) His wife is still recuperating from back surgery associated with her 2010
automobile accident and has no immediate plans to return to work. (Tr. 61-62) Applicant
has a net remainder each month of less than $400 and is not in a position to pay on any
of the remaining listed debts without jeopardizing his family’s necessities. (Tr. 92-93)
Applicant and his wife continue to struggle with their delinquent medical and
consumer debts and have not been financially able to address most of these debts to
date. (GEs 3 and 4; Tr. 69-82) They consulted a financial counseling firm in August 2012
and have talked with a lawyer associated with the counseling firm about seeking Chapter
13 or Chapter 7 bankruptcy protections. (AEs M and N; Tr. 110-111) Applicant’s lawyer
is prepared to file a bankruptcy petition on Applicant’s behalf as soon as Applicant
provides the authorization. (Tr. 111) Applicant and his wife will carefully evaluate their
legal options in consultation with their lawyer and make the decision that best protects
his job and family within the next two months. (AE A; Tr. 110-111) 
  
Endorsements
Applicant is well regarded by a former Army supervisor who is familiar with his
work.  (Tr. 65-67) This supervisor considered Applicant to be trustworthy and reliable in
his military assignments. (Tr. 67) Applicant’s Army fitness reports for 2006 are solid and
included a promotion recommendation. (AE D) 
6
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, revoked, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs. AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
7
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by
known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.” 
Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis  
Applicant is an aircraft mechanic who accumulated numerous delinquencies in his
mortgage and vehicle loans, as well as in his medical and consumer obligations following
8
his military discharge in November 2007. Since his Army discharge, he has lost his home
to foreclosure and his motorcycle and automobile to repossession. Medical and
consumer debts he and his wife incurred during extended periods of spousal physical
rehabilitation and unemployment and Applicant underemployment have been minimally
addressed to date. At this time, Applicant is exploring either Chapter 13 or Chapter 7
bankruptcy protections as the best course of action for him to take with the limited
resources he has available to him.
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the
AGs when an individual Applicant is so financially overextended as to indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which can
raise questions about the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information, and place the person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts (based on produced credit
reports and Applicant admissions) and his past inability to resolve these debts, either by
payment, successful dispute, or a combination thereof, warrant  the application of two of
the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: ¶ DC 19(a), “inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to
inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of
a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases.
Extenuating circumstances are associated with some of Applicant’s delinquent
mortgage, medical, and consumer debts. Both he and his wife faced considerable
financial stress from their extended periods of unemployment and underemployment and
mounting medical and consumer debts.  MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” is applicable to Applicant’s
situation.  
To date, Applicant and his wife have made some payment progress with several
of their smaller consumer accounts.  But they still owe in excess of $20,000 in proven
delinquent medical and consumer debts (excluding the disputed creditor 1.h debt of
$2,733) and have an unpaid judgment against them in the amount of $1,142. Further,
they have already lost both their home and vehicles to foreclosure and repossession,
respectively.  Unable to meet the payment demands of his mortgage and vehicle loans,
Applicant defaulted. Deficiencies ensuing from his mortgage foreclosure and vehicle
repossessions in 2007 and 2008 have not been addressed by Applicant since he
returned to full-time employment status. 
Based on available information, the sale proceeds produced from the foreclosure
of Applicant’s residence left deficiency balances in excess of $368,000 on his first and
9
second mortgages. Were Applicant’s state of residence a resource state, he and his wife
would be at risk of deficiency enforcement on these loan balances  However, neither the
first nor second lien holders retain any visible deficiency rights under the non-judicial
foreclosure procedures covered by the state’s code of civil procedure, § 580b. Section
580b is fairly all encompassing as it pertains to debt instruments created to facilitate a
purchase of a home in Applicant’s state of residence. 
Section 580b, properly construed, leaves little room for excluding mortgage
instruments considered integral to the financing of the home in question. Where a
borrower has used all or a portion of loaned funds secured by a second trust deed for
upgrades not a part of the purchase of the home, the funds secured by the trust deeds in
issue should still be considered purchase money mortgage instruments subject to §
580b’s anti-deficiency bar. Cf. Roseleaf Corp. V. Chieroghino, 59 C. 2d 35, 39-42 (1963);
Prunty v. Bank of America, 37 C.A. 3d. 430 (1974). 
To be sure, a second trust deed holder of a loan or line of credit not related in any
way to the borrower’s purchase of the home, who retains no security following a
foreclosure by the first trust deed holder, is entitled to sue for a deficiency as a sold-out
junior lien holder. See Brown v. Jensen, 41. C. 2d 193, 195-198 (1953). A sold-out junior
lien-holder may not take advantage of this exception, though, if its second trust deed has
any connection to the borrower’s purchase of his residence. Brown’s holding, as such, is
distinguishable from Applicant’s situation. Accordingly, Applicant is at no risk of creditor
enforcement of the remaining deficiencies on either of his foreclosed mortgages.
Security concerns over Applicant’s finances remain, though, with respect to the
deficiencies remaining on his vehicle repossessions and his delinquent medical and
consumer debts. Progress in addressing these debts is lacking. Currently, Applicant is
considering a bankruptcy course of action and has retained a bankruptcy attorney to
assist him. This attorney is expected to take legal bankruptcy measures in the near
future on Applicant’s behalf.
Follow-up measures with Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney were required of
Applicant to satisfy the counseling, good-faith requirements of MC ¶ 20(c), “the person
has received counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the
problem is being resolved or is under control” and the good-faith and due diligence
repayment requirements of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” By the proofs presented, Applicant
is absolved of any deficiency liability as the result of the foreclosure of the trust deeds on
his home. He has paid off three of his listed debt delinquencies (creditors 1.f, 1.g, and
1.i) and is credited with a good-faith dispute of his listed creditor 1.h debt. So, of the
roughly $44,000 in listed unsecured debts (inclusive of the listed creditor 1.n and 1.o
vehicle debts and creditor 1.q judgment debt), he has favorably disposed of no more
than $3,800 worth of listed indebtedness.
Much of Applicant’s remaining debts are related to medical services and
expenses accrued by his wife in connection with her two accidents and medical
10
complications stemming from her two pregnancies. Her accidents and pregnancies
severely inhibited her ability to work. Still, Applicant retains a modest remainder every
month and without any home mortgage or vehicle loans to manage, he has been in a
position for some time to address his old debts with payments and repayment plan
proposals with his creditors. His failure to address his remaining debts to date weakens
his ability to mitigate the Government’s debt concerns.
Historically, the Appeal Board has imposed good-faith repayment responsibilities
on applicants who emerge from experiences that have restricted their abilities to pay
their creditors. Framed differently, even if an applicant’s financial difficulties initially
arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his or her control, the judge can
still consider whether the applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when
dealing with those financial difficulties. See ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd.
Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005); ISCR
Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd.
Dec. 1, 1999)).  A key component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors
and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. In Applicant’s case,
he has presented no evidence of his endeavoring to work out payment agreements or
extensions with any of his unpaid creditors. With over $44,000 in listed unpaid delinquent
debts (including an outstanding judgment), concerns remain over the absence of any
Applicant follow-through with most of his remaining creditors. Despite some initial
counseling sessions, he has not to date concretized any workable budgets or plans to
resolve his still unresolved debts.  
So, under the circumstances of this case, Applicant can take very little advantage
of either MC ¶ 20(c) or MC ¶ 20(d). For while an applicant need not have paid or
resolved every one of his proven debts or addressed all of his debts simultaneously, he
needs a credible plan to resolve his financial problems, accompanied by implementing
actions. See ISCR Case No. 07-06488 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)
To be sure, some of Applicant’s debts appear to be time-barred by his state’s
pertinent statute of limitations (including any deficiency claims related to his vehicle
repossessions). His state’s statute of limitations for written contracts and open-ended
accounts (like credit card debts) is four years. See § 337 of state’s civil code. When
applied, the state statute bars enforcement of debts over four years delinquent.
Applicant has not asked for statute of limitations protection, and it is not available to him
in any case under Appeal Board guidance. Over time, the Appeal Board has shown
general consistency in disallowing applicant claims to mitigation based on charge-offs
and limitation bars on debts previously unpaid due to cited extenuating circumstances.
Cf. ISCR Case No. 07-16427 at 3-4 and n.6 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-
01122 at 5 and n. 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2009) No different application of the mitigation
guidelines are warranted in Applicant’s situation.
                                              
Consideration of Applicant’s background and circumstances surrounding his debt
accumulations, his wife’s lengthy rehabilitation and associated unemployment, his own
unemployment and underemployment periods, his limited income sources, and his lack
11
of follow-up efforts in pressing his bankruptcy attorney to file a bankruptcy petition on his
behalf, makes it difficult to credit Applicant with the degree of good judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness necessary to mitigate security concerns about his finances at this
time. Applicant’s corrective efforts taken to date, while encouraging, are insufficient to
enable him to meet his evidentiary burden of mitigating the listed debts. 
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is insufficient to demonstrate that
Applicant has mounted sufficient good-faith efforts to resolve his debts. While his military
service is commended and respected, his lack of any concrete plan to address his
identified delinquent medical and consumer debts deprives Applicant of sufficient
probative evidence to surmount debt concerns when making an overall trust assessment
of Applicant’s clearance eligibility. 
In making a whole-person assessment, careful consideration was given to the
respective burdens of proof established in Egan (supra), the AGs, and the facts and
circumstances of this case in the context of the whole person. Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e, 1.h,
1.j through 1.m, 1.o, and 1.q through 1.u.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to
subparagraphs 1.f, 1.g, I.i, 1.n, and 1.p.    
     Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e, 1.h, 1.j  
      through 1.m, 1.o,  and 1.q through 1.u: Against Applicant
 Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.n, and
      1.p:                                          For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
12
