1 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, as
amended (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-09322
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Eric Roper, Esquire
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to overcome the foreign influence security concern that arises
from his relationship with his relatives who are citizens and residents of Iran, and the
travel to Iran by his wife and children. Clearance is denied. 
On August 20, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1 The SOR alleges a
security concern under Guideline B (foreign influence). Applicant submitted an undated
response to the SOR in which he admitted all allegations except those contained in
subparagraphs 1.b and 1.f. Applicant did not indicate if he was requesting a hearing or a
decision on the record without a hearing. On September 24, 2012, Department Counsel
requested a hearing.
2
The case was assigned to me on December 5, 2012. A notice of hearing was
issued on December 20, 2012, scheduling the hearing for January 7, 2012. The hearing
was conducted as scheduled. 
The Government submitted 16 documentary exhibits that were marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-16. GE 1-3 were admitted into the record without objection.
Administrative notice was taken of the contents of GE 4, 5, 7, 8, and 12-16 over
Applicant’s objection. Applicant’s objections to GE 6, 9, 10, and 11 were sustained.
Department Counsel submitted a document entitled Administrative Notice which was
marked as Appellate Exhibit (App. Ex.) I, and made part of the record without objection.
Applicant testified, called two witnesses to testify on his behalf, and submitted four
documentary exhibits that were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1-4, and admitted
into the record without objection. 
Post-hearing, Department Counsel submitted one document and requested that
administrative notice be taken of its contents. That document was marked as GE-17.
Department Counsel also submitted a document entitled Memorandum For
Administrative Judge which was marked as App. Ex. II. App. Ex. II indicated a copy of
GE 17 was served on Applicant’s attorney on January 16, 2013. No response having
been received from Applicant’s attorney, administrative notice will be taken of the
contents of GE 17, and App. Ex. II is made part of the record. The transcript was
received on January 15, 2013.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 55-year-old man who has been employed as a linguist by a
defense contractor since June 2010. He has served almost continuously with United
States military forces in Afghanistan since he was hired, with only short periodic visits
back to the United States. From September 2005 until May 2009, Applicant worked for
several different employers outside the defense industry as either a driver or stocker.
He was unemployed from May 2009 until June 2010.
Applicant was born in Iran to Muslim parents. Applicant did not adhere to Muslim
teachings and eventually converted to Christianity. He attended school in Iran and
received an associate’s degree as a math teacher in July 1979. He taught math for a
time in Iran, but was eventually fired because he did not espouse Muslim beliefs and
participate in Muslim worship practices. He thereafter worked as a cab driver until he
immigrated to Germany under the auspices of a Christian association. Applicant resided
in Germany from November 1999 until he was permitted to immigrate to the United
States in December 2004. Applicant did not work while he resided in Germany, but
instead was supported by the organization that sponsored him into that country.
Applicant became a naturalized U. S. citizen in May 2010.
3
Applicant has been married since March 1987. His wife is an Iranian citizen who
immigrated to the United States with Applicant. She has not attempted to gain U. S.
citizenship because she is unable to effectively read the English language. Applicant
and his wife have two children, a 23-year-old daughter and a 21-year-old son. Both
children reside with Applicant’s wife, and both became naturalized U. S. citizens in
2012. Each of their children is a full-time college student and part-time employee of a
grocery store. 
Applicant’s wife and children remained in Iran when he immigrated to Germany.
They joined him in Germany after he was granted permission to immigrate to the United
States, and only remained there for the 50 days it took to complete the processing for
them to also be granted permission to immigrate to the United States. 
Applicant’s parents are both deceased. He has a brother and a sister who are
both citizens and residents of Iran. Both of his siblings are married to Iranian nationals.
Applicant’s mother-in-law is 84 years old and a citizen and resident of Iran. Applicant’s
wife has a sister and brother who are citizens and residents of Iran. Both of them are
married to Iranian nationals. Applicant and his wife have nephews and nieces who are
citizens and residents of Iran. 
Since leaving Iran in 1999, the only time Applicant has visited there was in 2009
when his mother became ill. He had not earlier returned to Iran because he felt it was
too dangerous. However, when his mother became ill, he discussed the danger with his
wife and informed her he felt he had to visit with his mother despite the danger.
Applicant had an Iranian passport which he surrendered in May 2012. He obtained a
United States passport in May 2010.
Applicant’s wife has visited Iran at least three times since she immigrated to the
United States. She last visited Iran in early-2012. Applicant’s daughter has also visited
Iran three times since she immigrated to the United States. Her last visit occurred in
mid-2011. Applicant’s wife and daughter stayed with relatives when they visited Iran,
and neither reported experiencing any difficulties during their visits. Applicant’s son has
also visited Iran on at least one occasion, that occurring in either 2009 or 2010.
Applicant has expressed his concern to his wife and children about their visits to Iran.
However, his wife insists on returning because she has family there, none here, and her
mother is elderly.
Applicant’s wife has either weekly or bi-weekly telephone contact with her
relatives in Iran. Applicant’s daughter is close to a cousin in Iran and speaks with her by
telephone about every other week. His daughter speaks with other relatives in Iran
about once a month. Applicant’s wife and children maintain Iranian passports. 
Applicant earns approximately $200,000 annually. The first $95,000 is not taxed.
He estimates that he paid about $25,000 in income taxes last year. He just recently
purchased a second residence. He intends to keep his prior residence and use it as
2 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.
3 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
5 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).
4
income property. He has about $150,000 in savings, which he plans to use to start a
business after working for his current employer for about one more year. 
Applicant submitted certificates of appreciation and a work appraisal which
establish that he has proven himself to be a valued employee who performs his duties
above expectations. His letter of recommendation and the testimony of his character
witness establish that Applicant has proven himself to be trustworthy, honest, sincere,
and a man of his word. He has high moral standards and is dedicated to supporting the
United States. Applicant’s response to the SOR demonstrates he has absolutely no
loyalty to Iran, but is instead totally committed to the United States.    
Iran is one of the most active state sponsors of terrorism. It either directly or
through intermediaries supplies training and weapons to terrorist organizations and to
the Taliban in Afghanistan. Iran has a poor human rights record and is reported to have
carried out many executions, including public hangings from cranes and overpasses. It
has detained U. S. citizens who have traveled to Iran, including on false accusations of
espionage. Iran considers dual citizens as solely Iranian, and the U. S. State
Department warns U. S. citizens against traveling to Iran. It also has warned dual
citizens that they may encounter difficulties when they attempt to exit Iran.   
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Clearance decisions must be fair
and impartial decisions based upon relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive.
Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against
clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Considering the
evidence as a whole, Guideline B (foreign influence), with its disqualifying and mitigating
conditions, is most relevant in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.2 The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.3 The burden
of proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of
evidence,4 although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet
its burden of proof.5 “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a
6 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.
7 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
8 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
9 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
10 Id at 531.
11 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.
5
preponderance of the evidence.”6 Once the government has met its burden, the burden
shifts to an applicant to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to
overcome the case against him.7 Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance9 and “the clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”10  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.11  
   
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the
foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens
to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Applicant’s wife is an Iranian citizen who has resided in the United States since
2004. She has returned to Iran on at least three occasions to visit relatives. Applicant’s
son and daughter are U. S. citizens who have resided in the United States since 2004.
Applicant’s daughter has returned to visit relatives in Iran on at least three occasions,
and his son has returned to Iran on at least one occasion. Those visits were against
Applicant’s expressed concerns for the safety of his wife and children.
Applicant has a brother, sister, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, and mother-in-law
who are all citizens and residents of Iran. In addition to visiting those relatives in Iran,
Applicant’s wife and daughter maintain frequent telephonic contact with at least some of
them. They stayed with some of those relatives when they visited Iran.  
6
Iran is a country with interests inimical to those of the U.S. It actively supports
terrorism and is repressive to its own citizens. The U. S. State Department has warned
of the danger of travel to Iran for both solely U. S. citizens and those holding dual
citizenship with Iran. Applicant has been working with United States military forces
engaged in combat operations against the Taliban in Afghanistan since 2010. Iran has
been supplying the Taliban with training and weapons during that entire time period.
Despite Applicant’s expressed concerns for their well-being, his wife and daughter have
traveled to Iran while he was serving in Afghanistan. The danger to his wife and
daughter during those travels would be great if Iranian officials were to become aware
of Applicant’s service to United States military forces. Disqualifying Conditions (DC)
7(a): contact with a foreign family member . . . or other person who is a citizen of or
resident in a foreign country it that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion: and DC 7(d): sharing
living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that
relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion apply. 
I have considered all mitigating conditions and find that none apply. Specifically,
Mitigating Condition (MC) 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located . . . are such that it is unlikely the individual
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual  . . . and the interests of the U.S. does not apply because of the obvious close
relationship between Applicant and his wife and daughter and the nature and history of
the Iranian Government. 
Applicant has proven himself in a relatively short time to be a loyal and dedicated
United States citizen. However, considering his obvious close affection for his wife and
daughter and the danger they expose themselves to when traveling to Iran while
Applicant serves in Afghanistan, it is impossible to predict what action he would take if
they were detained in Iran. Accordingly, MC 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person . . . is so
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of
the U.S. does not apply.
Applicant has little contact with anyone in Iran, however his wife and daughter
have frequent contact with their Iranian relatives. Thus, MC 8(c): contact or
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation obviously does
not apply. The remaining mitigating conditions have no applicability to the facts of this
case.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” In this case, there is no reason to doubt that Applicant is a loyal
American citizen or suspect he would ever consider doing harm to the interests of the
7
United States. Still, his immediate family member’s travels to Iran, their regular contacts
with their relatives in Iran, the potential for his immediate family members to travel to
Iran in the future, and the nature of the Iranian Government and its relationship with the
U.S. create a security concern that has not been overcome. 
    
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this
case, the whole-person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the
Directive, and the applicable disqualifying conditions, Applicant failed to mitigate the
foreign influence security concern that exists in this case. He failed to overcome the
case against him in this regard or satisfy his ultimate burden of persuasion. Guideline B
is decided against Applicant. It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
Applicant a security clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a : Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c-f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance is denied.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
8
9
