 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-03150 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 10, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 11, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 24, 2012. He answered the 
SOR in writing on August 23, 2012, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. DOHA received the request on August 27, 2012. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on October 9, 2012. The case was originally assigned to another 
administrative judge on October 15, 2012, and reassigned to me because of caseload 
considerations on October 31, 2012.  
 
2 
 
 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on November 15, 2012, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on November 29, 2012. The Government offered Exhibits 1 
through 7, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Exhibits A through C, without objection.  
 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 7, 2012. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in ¶¶ 1.c to 1.h, 1.j, 
1.k, 1.m to 1.q, and 2.c to 2.f. Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.i, 
1.l, 2.a, and 2.b of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old, divorced, and has two children, ages 21 and 18. He is 
the president of a growing defense contractor in the information technology business. 
Applicant served in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1986 to 1992. He has a college degree. 
He started his business in 2005. While in the Marine Corps and working for his previous 
employer on government contracts, he held security clearances until about 2006. (Tr. 
17-24; Exhibits 1 and C) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant has 17 delinquent debts. They total $63,524 plus 
the amount of his unpaid mortgage, which is about $84,000. Applicant began to have 
financial difficulties in 2006 when he gave his brother $30,000 to try to save his 
construction business in Tennessee. His brother did not repay him and Applicant did not 
expect to be repaid. If Applicant retained those funds and did not make the gift, he 
would have had sufficient funds to pay his mortgage, motorcycle and car loans, and his 
other debts. (Tr. 23-27, 60; Exhibits 1-7) 
 
 Applicant owed $629 to a dentist (Subparagraph 1.a). This debt was reduced to a 
judgment. Applicant paid this debt on August 20, 2012. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 33, 
71; Exhibits 2-5, 7, A; Answer attachment) 
 
 The SOR contains a duplicative listing of Applicant’s motorcycle loan for $6,588 
(Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.i). Applicant stopped making payments on the loan in 2006 
and the bank never repossessed it. Applicant settled the debt for $6,000 on August 21, 
2012. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 33, 34, 40; Exhibits 2-5, 7, B) 
 
 Applicant owes $1,095 to U.S. Bank (Subparagraph 1.c). He does know for what 
purchase or purpose this debt was incurred. He has not paid it. The debt is unresolved. 
(Tr. 35; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 Applicant owes a $325 cable television debt (Subparagraph 1.d). He does not 
think he owed this debt. Applicant claimed he had an installment payment agreement 
 
3 
 
 
with the collector, but had no proof of payment or evidence that he disputed the debt. 
This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 35; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 A debt to Midland MCM for $7,272 is not resolved (Subparagraph 1.e). Applicant 
has done nothing to try to repay this debt. The amount owed has now increased to 
$7,920. (Tr. 37; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 Wells Fargo Bank wants to be repaid the $2,344 Applicant borrowed on a loan. 
(Subparagraph 1.f). The credit reports show the debt is now $4,022. Applicant states he 
does not know anything about this debt. It is not resolved. (Tr. 38; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 Applicant owes LVNV Funding $1,114 on a credit card debt (Subparagraph 1.g). 
This debt is unpaid and unresolved. (Tr. 38, 39; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 Applicant owes another debt to LVNV Funding in the amount of $1,123 on a 
Dillard’s Department Store credit card (Subparagraph 1.h). This debt is unpaid and 
unresolved. (Tr. 39; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 Applicant owes $7,300 to CitiFinancial (Subparagraph 1.j). The amount owed is 
now $7,449. This debt is unpaid and unresolved. (Tr. 40; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
    
 AT&T is the creditor on a $1,048 debt (Subparagraph 1.k). Applicant states he 
does not know the origin of this debt. It is unpaid and unresolved. (Tr. 44, 45; Exhibits 2-
5, 7) 
 
 Applicant owed a $26 medical debt (Subparagraph 1.l). He paid this debt and it is 
resolved. (Tr. 46; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 Applicant has not paid his home mortgage since 2006 (Subparagraph 1.m). He 
lives in the house at the present time and has since purchasing it. He sent the U.S. 
Bank a partial payment of 75% of the arrearages two years ago. The bank, according to 
Applicant, returned his check. He spent the money instead of saving it to make future 
payments. His mortgage was foreclosed in 2009. He claimed he did not know about the 
foreclosure and sheriff’s sale. Yet Applicant’s documents resulting from his discussions 
with the Consumer Credit Counseling Service (CCCS) in 2011 show he knew about that 
action in 2011, before he completed his e-QIP. His acknowledgement of the debt is 
documented in paperwork from the CCCS he consulted to resolve his delinquent debts. 
Applicant testified he thought his mortgage was undergoing a loan modification process, 
but had no documents to support his contention. A sheriff’s sale of his home was 
ordered in 2009 but never took place. Applicant owes $84,000 to U.S. Bank on his 
mortgage. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 27-32, 41-43, 46, 60; Exhibits 2-5, 7)  
 
 Applicant owes Wells Fargo Bank $27,129 on a car loan (Subparagraph 1.n).. 
The car was not repossessed by the bank. Applicant claims he is trying to negotiate a 
settlement. He did not submit any proof that such attempts were being made. Applicant 
 
4 
 
 
stopped making payments on the car in September 2007. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 
46, 47; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 Applicant owes $203 on his car insurance from 2008 (Subparagraph 1.o). This 
debt is unpaid and unresolved. (Tr. 48; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 Applicant denies knowing the nature of the WFF Cards debt for $1,361. 
(Subparagraph 1.p). He has not contacted the creditor. This debt is unpaid and 
unresolved. (Tr. 49; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 The final SOR debt is a medical account in the amount of $1,451 (Subparagraph 
1.q). Applicant’s Answer stated the debt would be paid by September 30, 2012. At the 
hearing he stated he is not certain about the status of the debt. This debt is unpaid and 
unresolved. (Tr. 49; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 Applicant established an installment payment agreement with CCCS that 
required an initial payment of $1,369 and subsequent payments of $2,339 monthly for 
four years. Applicant did not start those payments because he decided to repay the 
debts in larger amounts and faster than provided in the agreement. But Applicant has 
paid only three debts to date and claims ignorance of the other delinquent financial 
obligations listed in the SOR. Applicant discussed his debts with CCCS in 2011 before 
he completed his e-QIP. He did not obtain his own credit report until February 2012, 
after he submitted his security clearance application on January 10, 2012. He had his 
background investigation discussion with a government investigator in February 2012. 
(Tr. 51-55; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 Applicant denied any delinquent debts, judgments, collection actions, charged-off 
credit card accounts, payment delays, or repossessions in his answers to Question 26 
on the e-QIP. He claims ignorance of those debts at the time he completed that 
document. At the hearing he denied knowing about 14 debts listed and found to be 
unpaid and unresolved. He admitted he deliberately falsified his answers to Question 26 
in Subparagraphs 2.c to 2.f of the SOR. He again denied he knew about his mortgage 
foreclosure, but the CCCS document proves he discussed it with the counselor in 2011 
(Exhibit 2 at 240). He also denied reading the CCCS document thoroughly. Applicant 
also denied knowingly falsifying his answers, even though his SOR Answer admits the 
allegations of four deliberate falsifications on the e-QIP. His explanations regarding his 
denials of falsifications on Subparagraphs 2.a (judgments) and 2.b (foreclosures) are 
not persuasive based on the evidence in the record. Applicant is a college-educated 
president of a company doing business with the government. His denials of knowledge 
of the $58,144 of debts (deducting from the original $63,524 listed in the SOR the 
$7,217 of debt paid) and his mortgage foreclosure, are not credible or persuasive. (Tr. 
41-43, 54-78; Exhibits 2-5, 7)   
 
 
 
  
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Four conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the 
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt. 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
Applicant accumulated $63,524 in delinquent debt from 2006 to the present time 
that remains unpaid. His unpaid mortgage debt is $84,000. Applicant has 17 delinquent 
debts listed in the SOR. Two debts were duplicates, so there were actually 16 
delinquent debts. Applicant has done nothing to pay his mortgage since 2006, or his 
motorcycle and car loans. He denied knowledge of all but three of the original debts 
listed in the SOR. He took no action to pay or resolve the debts in the past six years or 
in the past 11 months since he submitted his e-QIP. His spending was irresponsible and 
he has no realistic plan to repay the debts. Applicant spent beyond his financial means, 
demonstrated by his excessive indebtedness and high debt-to-income ratio after having 
given his brother $30,000 to help him from his financial difficulties. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
7 
 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the  person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is  being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
Applicant consulted a consumer financial counseling service in 2010 and 2011. 
That service, CCCS, tried to help Applicant arrange a consolidation and payment plan 
for his debts. It discovered the status of his home mortgage. Applicant took no action 
regarding the installment payment plan CCCS suggested. He has not paid his mortgage 
debt. AG ¶ 20(c) has limited application. Although Applicant obtained credit counseling 
for his problem, he failed to implement the plan or establish a different plan to 
successfully resolve all delinquent debts. There are no indications that his problems are 
under control or being solved. He continues to deny knowledge of most of his debts and 
has taken no action to resolve most of his debts.   
 
Applicant paid three debts in 2012. He paid the dentist debt for $626, the 
motorcycle loan for $6,000, and the medical debt for $26 (Subparagraphs 1.a, 1b, and 
1.l). AG ¶ 20(d) has partial application as applied to these three debts.  
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and continuing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant’s debts were not beyond his control and he has not acted responsibly 
in attempting to resolve them. He denies knowing the origins of several of the debts. He 
had four months since the issuance of the SOR and nine months since his interview 
with the government investigator to resolve debts or establish installment payment 
plans. He did nothing about the majority of the debts. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not have a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of any of the 
debts. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
8 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. One condition applies: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant provided untruthful answers in response to four subsections of 
Question 26 on his e-QIP. He denied falsifying the first two subsections of Question 26, 
but his denials are not credible. He did not list any financial debts, charge off of credit 
cards, repossessions, foreclosure of his mortgage, or any tardiness in paying his debts. 
This disqualifying condition applies. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. 
None of these conditions apply to Applicant: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
 
9 
 
 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 I considered each of the mitigating conditions. Applicant did not correct his 
omissions or falsifications. No one advised him that he should not disclose his debts 
and other financial failings. Applicant has not taken any positive steps to eliminate or 
reduce his vulnerability to exploitation or duress. The first five mitigating conditions do 
not apply. The last two mitigating conditions are not relevant under the facts of the case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
10 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an 
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and 
the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has taken no action to resolve 
14 delinquent debts. He is an educated business executive who displayed an alarming 
lack of knowledge of his finances, debts, and the mortgage on his house. The behavior 
of failing to repay his mortgage and his delinquent financial obligations is ongoing and is 
not likely to change in the future. He clearly does not know how he spends his money. 
There is no indication that his financial situation will change. 
 
Applicant knowingly falsified his six answers to Question 26 on his e-QIP. He did 
not list any financial debt or adverse collection actions. His pleas of ignorance about his 
debts are not credible. He consulted CCCS before he filled out the e-QIP and could 
have obtained a credit report before he completed the e-QIP.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his Financial 
Considerations and his Personal Conduct. I conclude the whole-person concept against 
Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.i, 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c to 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 1.m to 1.q: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.f:     Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
