1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-04764 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s step-father is a citizen and resident of Kuwait who has served in the 
Kuwaiti military for more than 35 years. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the foreign 
influence trustworthiness concerns. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to sensitive information and eligibility for a public trust 
position is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
  
On October 10, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
(DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation), and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
2 
 
 
 On October 17, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
November 27, 2012, I was assigned the case. On November 28, 2012, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the hearing held 
on December 6, 2012.1 At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, as did her 
husband, and submitted Exs. A through H, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. 
On December 11, 2012, additional material was submitted. Department Counsel had no 
objection to the material, which was admitted into the record as Ex. I. On December 17, 
2012, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
State of Kuwait (Kuwait) and provided supporting documents to show detail and context 
for those facts. Applicant agreed to the administrative notice request and the five 
documents were admitted as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through V.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) 
(listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). I marked the documents as Ex. 
Exhibits I to V. See the Kuwait section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, for 
the facts accepted by administrative notice. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted her step-father was a citizen and 
resident of Kuwait who had served in the Kuwaiti military for 35 years. This admission is 
incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old data entry specialist who has worked for a defense 
contractor since 2002, and seeks to maintain a position of trust. She received an 
exceptional performance award from the U.S. Army for her work in 1990 and 1991. (Ex. 
B) In 1992, her dedication and unselfish service was again recognized by the U.S. 
Army. (Ex. D) Coworkers and acquaintances indicate she is efficient, punctual, goal 
oriented, motivated, dedicated, dependable, hardworking, and a personable individual 
of high moral character whose dedication to duty and attention to detail are recognized. 
(Ex. A, C, F, G, I ) She possesses a positive attitude. (Ex. H) 
                                                          
 
3 
 
 
Applicant is married to a U.S. Army veteran who served four years of service 
from 2001 through 2005. In 2004, he served in Iraq for just over one year. (Tr. 25) 
Applicant and her husband have known each other for six years. They have been 
married four years and have two children ages three and six. (Tr. 26) During the time 
her husband has known her, her husband is aware of his wife having talked with her 
step-father, on the telephone, approximately ten times. (Tr. 27) 
 
 Applicant’s step-father is a member of the Kuwaiti military who was stationed in 
the United States. He is an automation clerk. (Tr. 46) He was enrolled in a DoD 
language school in the United States with follow on assignments in the United States. In 
May 1977, her mother and step-father married. Applicant is the oldest of her siblings. 
(Tr. 41) At the time of the marriage, Applicant was four years old and her half-brother 
was four months old. From the marriage, came two additional children who are 
Applicant’s half-sister and half-brother. All of her siblings were born in the United States. 
She was never adopted by her step-father. (Ex. I) Between 1977 and 1992, her step-
father returned to Kuwait twice, once for a period of two years. (Tr. 29)  
 
 In June 1991, Applicant graduated from a U.S. high school. She has since taken 
continuing education through a U.S. college. (Ex. I) In October 1992, she accompanied 
her father, mother, and siblings to Kuwait. Following Operation Desert Storm, her step-
father was reassigned to Kuwait. He was anxious to return to look after his aging mother 
who was still living in Kuwait. Applicant remained with her family in Kuwait for seven 
years. (Tr. 30)  
 
 Before leaving for Kuwait, during Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm, 
Applicant was a civilian employee for the U.S. Army working as an office automation 
clerk. (Ex. B, C, D, I) In 1993, her grandmother got her a job at the English speaking 
television station. She worked for the Ministry of Information, as did all station 
employees. (Ex. I) In 1996, her mother was depressed and wished to return to the 
United States, in part to see her son. (Tr. 31) Applicant’s half-brother had returned to 
the United States in 1993 to live with relatives and finish high school. Applicant’s step-
father attempted to be reassigned back to the United States at the same U.S. military 
base where he was when he and his wife married.  
 
 In April 1996, Applicant returned to the United States with her mother, half-
brother, and half-sister. Applicant paid for the airplane tickets back to the United States 
and incurred $10,000 in credit card debt reestablishing the family in the United States. 
(Tr. 32) The plan was that her step-father would soon join them in the United States. 
However, this did not occur. Applicant returned to Kuwait to work and pay off the credit 
card debt she incurred from the family’s relocation. (Ex. I, Tr. 32) However, shortly after 
returning to Kuwait she decided to return permanently to the United States. (Tr. 32) 
 
 In 2001, Applicant’s mother and step-father divorced. Her step-father blames 
Applicant for the breakup of the marriage because she paid to have her mother and 
siblings return to the United States. (Tr. 54) Her step-father had married a second wife 
4 
 
in Kuwait while still married to Applicant’s mother. (Tr. 37) Her mother suffers from 
diabetes and Applicant has contacted her step-father asking him to help address her 
mother’s medical bills. Applicant’s sister was raped, and beginning last year, Applicant 
would call her step-father asking that he call and talk with her half-sister to provide 
emotional support. (Tr. 35) Additionally, her half-sister needs financial assistance from 
her step-father and Applicant would contact him asking him to assist her half-sister. (Tr. 
36) She would call her step-father approximately once a month. (Tr. 36, 41) They have 
never exchanged emails. (Tr. 37)  
 
 Applicant, her husband, children, mother, half-brothers, half-sister, and nephew 
all live close together. Applicant, her husband, children, and mother all live in the same 
house. (Tr. 39)  
 
 Kuwait is a small, oil-rich constitutional, hereditary emirate ruled by princes. Its 
constitution provides for an elected National Assembly and details the powers of the 
branches of government and the rights of citizens.2 The Department of State remains 
concerned about the possibility of terrorist actions against U.S. citizens and interests 
abroad, specifically in the Middle East, including the Persian Gulf and Arabian 
Peninsula. The Near East region remains one of the most active in terms of terrorist 
activity. The threat of terrorism remains high in Kuwait. 3 Kuwait lacks legal provisions 
that deal specifically with terrorism and terrorist financing. As a result of Kuwait’s lack of 
a clear legal framework for prosecuting terrorism-related crimes, it often resorts to other 
legal statutes to try suspected terrorists, which hampers enforcement efforts. 4 
 
 Strategic cooperation between the United States and Kuwait increased in 1987 
with the implementation of a maritime protection regime that ensured the freedom of 
navigation through the Gulf. The U.S.−Kuwait strategic partnership intensified 
dramatically after Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait and the U.S.−Kuwait relationship remains 
strong in the post-gulf War period.5 Kuwait is an important partner in the U.S. 
counterterrorism efforts.6 
 
 The principal human rights problems in Kuwait include limitation on citizens’ right 
to change their government; trafficking in persons (especially in the domestic and 
unskilled service sectors) and limitation on workers’ rights. Authorities restrict freedom 
of special foreign workers and stateless Arabs.7 Other human rights problems include 
reports of security forces abusing prisoners, restriction on freedom of movement, 
                                                          
2
 U.S. Department of State Country Specific Information, March 13, 2012, page 4. (HE I) 
 
3
 U.S. Department of State Country Reports on Terrorism 2011, July 2012, page 92. (HE IV) 
 
4
 Id. page 110. (HE IV) 
 
5
 U.S. Department of State Country Specific Information, March 13, 2012, page 10. (HE I) 
 
6
 Id. page 11. (HE I) 
 
7
 U.S. Department of State 2011 Human Rights Reports: Kuwait, May 24, 2012, page 1. (HE III) 
 
5 
 
limitation on freedom of press, association, and religion. Women do not enjoy equal 
rights. 8  
 
 The constitution states that Islam is the state religion and that Sharia (Islamic 
law) is a main source of legislation. The constitution calls for “absolute freedom” of 
belief and for freedom of religious practice in accordance with established customs, 
provided that it does not conflict with public order or morals. 9  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of sensitive information is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
8
 Id. page 1.(HE III) 
 
9
 U.S. Department of State, International Religious Freedom Report for 2011, page 1.(HE V) 
 
6 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
  
AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;10 
                                                          
10
 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
7 
 
 
Applicant has monthly telephone contact with her step-father, who is a resident 
and citizen of Kuwait. He has been a member of the Kuwaiti military for 35 years. The 
relationship with her step-father creates a potential conflict of interest because the 
relationship is sufficiently close in nature and could raise a security concern over her 
desire to help her step-father.  
 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
The U.S.−Kuwait relationship remains strong in the post-Gulf War period. Kuwait 
is an important partner in the U.S. counterterrorism efforts. It is unlikely that Kuwait 
would attempt to exploit Applicant’s relationship with her step-father. Her contact with 
him is infrequent and limited to attempting to have him assist her mother financially or 
support her half-sister emotionally. Telephone calls are approximately once a month. 
They do not engage in email communication. AG ¶ 8(a) and AG ¶ 8(c) apply. 
 
Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on her relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the United States, she can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of U.S. interests. She was born in the United States, as were all her 
siblings, and lived here until a few years after graduating from high school. From 
October 1992 through 1996, she lived with her step-father, mother, and siblings in 
Kuwait. In 1996, she took steps to have her mother and siblings relocated to the United 
States. Her step-father believed this action influenced the 2001 divorce between him 
and Applicant’s mother.  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and carefully considered Applicant’s 
connection to her step-father, a citizen and resident of Kuwait. There is substantial 
evidence in mitigation. Applicant was born and raised in U.S. Her husband, children, 
mother, siblings, and nephew are all native born U.S. citizen who lives in the U.S. Her 
husband is a U.S. Army veteran who served in Iraq. 
 
Applicant has no meaningful relationship with her step-father. Her communication 
with him is limited to asking that he provide financial support for her mother and 
emotional support for her half-sister. As the oldest sibling she believes this is her duty. 
She has no relationship with the other members of her step-father’s family who live in 
Kuwait. Her step-father has remarried. She has no financial ties overseas in contrast to 
her U.S. financial ties. There is no evidence she has ever taken any action which could 
cause potential harm to the United States.  
 
Applicant is dedicated, dependable, and hardworking. She has the respect and 
support of her coworkers and acquaintances. Her employer’s confidence and trust in 
her is very high. She received letters of commendation for her work as a civilian 
employee when working for the U.S. Army. Her step-father has been a clerk in the 
Kuwaiti military for 35 years, but neither he or and members of his family have been 
foreign agents. There is no evidence suggesting the Kuwaiti government has used its 
resident citizens to extract information from U.S. relatives. The likelihood of such an 
occurrence appears remote.  
 
This Analysis must answer the question whether there is a legitimate concern 
under the facts presented that the Kuwaiti Government or its agents might exploit or 
9 
 
attempt to exploit Applicant’s step-father in such a way that this U.S. citizen would have 
to choose between her pledged loyalty to the U.S. and her step-father. After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns 
pertaining to foreign influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information and occupying a public 
trust position is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
