 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 12-05374 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 29, 2011, Applicant submitted her electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On August 3, 2012, the Department of Defense 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F 
and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 24, 2012. Applicant stated 
she was making payments on some debts and not paying others. She also asserted the 
debts were at least seven years old. Applicant requested her case be decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On November 1, 2012, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on November 1, 2012. She was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
November 9, 2012. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day 
time allowed that expired on December 9, 2012. I received the case assignment on 
January 4, 2013. Based upon a review of the complete case file, pleadings, and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f and denied all 
other allegations in Paragraph 1 pertaining to Financial Considerations. She denied the 
allegations in Paragraph 2 concerning Personal Conduct. (Items 2-6)  
 
 Applicant is 29 years old, unmarried, and a full-time student who does part-time 
security work for a defense contractor. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant has 11 delinquent debts totaling $15,727. These debts remain 
unresolved. They date from at least 2006 and continued to be incurred into 2011. The 
debts include four medical debts, a repossessed automobile, unpaid rent on an 
apartment (which the creditor reduced to a court judgment), a furniture purchase, a 
telephone bill, and three book or movie purchases. (Items 3, 5-8) 
 
 Applicant submitted responses to a DOHA interrogatory about her delinquent 
debts. She did not provide any responses to the questions about the debts in 
Subparagraphs 1.a, and 1.d to 1.k. Applicant attached several documents to her 
interrogatory pertaining to other debts she paid, but no documents relevant to the 
financial obligations alleged in the SOR. (Items 1, 5, 6 and 7) 
 
 Applicant’s SF-86 contains negative replies to the questions pertaining to her 
financial history. Specifically, she denied having possessions repossessed (Question 
26.b), having any judgments rendered against her (Question 26.e), having been over 
180 days delinquent on any debt (Question 26.m), and having been more than 90 days 
delinquent on any debt at the time she completed that SF-86 (Question 26.n). Applicant 
claims she misread the questions, was going too fast to comprehend the information 
requested, denied knowing of the landlord’s judgment against her, and was unaware of 
her current debts because she was told by someone sometime that debts older than 
seven years “go away,” and her debts are “several years old.” (Items 3-8) 
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement with her July 2012 
interrogatory. It shows a net monthly surplus of income over expenses of $649. The 
statement shows she is paying two delinquent debts, including the two medical debts 
listed in Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c of the SOR that are combined into one amount on 
her financial statement. She claims to be paying $100 on the total debt of $2,182. In her 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
September 2011 statement to the government investigator Applicant stated she 
intended to look into these accounts. She did not provide any proof of actual payments 
on these two medical debts. Her SOR Answer claims she pays each medical account 
$100 monthly; however her financial statement does not support that contention. (Items 
3, 5-8)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2006 to the present, Applicant accumulated 11 delinquent debts, totaling 
$15,727, which are unpaid or unresolved.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. No mitigating condition applies. 
 
Applicant did not present any evidence that she acted responsibly regarding 
these delinquent debts. Even her claim that she is paying two medical debts is 
unsubstantiated by any documentary evidence. She has no plan to repay these 11 
debts and no basis to dispute them. She failed to meet her burden of proof on all issues.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action 
or administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant did not disclose her financial delinquencies as alleged in SOR 
Paragraph 1 on her SF-86. She spent the money to purchase furniture, purchase phone 
service, purchase an automobile, and buy books and entertainment material. She did 
not pay for those items. She also obtained medical services and did not pay for them. 
Applicant claims ignorance of the obligation to repay debts she incurred, but such a 
defense is not reasonable in any adult. Nor is the assertion that after seven years her 
debts would simply disappear. She knew she had delinquent debts and did not disclose 
them on her SF-86.  
 
AG ¶ 17 lists seven mitigating conditions which might apply in any case. Two 
conditions might apply, while the remaining five conditions are not relevant. AG ¶ 17 (a) 
states it might be mitigating if Applicant promptly corrected her financial omissions 
before being questioned by the government investigator. She did not do so, so this 
mitigating condition does not apply. AG ¶ 17 (b) might apply if Applicant received 
improper or inadequate advice from an authorized person or her attorney. There is no 
evidence of such advice, so this mitigating condition does not apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept  
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when she 
incurred the debts. She has not taken any action to resolve her delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves her vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of her financial obligation. Her lack of action continues to this day and is 
obviously voluntary. Applicant’s inaction will continue based on her past performance. 
Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, she exhibited a 
continued lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of her 
delinquent debts during the past seven years. 
 
I also considered the several falsifications exhibited by Applicant’s answers to the 
various questions contained in Question 26 of the SF 86. She did not disclose any of 
her delinquent debts, though she had many. This pattern of falsification does not reflect 
favorably on Applicant’s trustworthiness, good judgment, and reliability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. She also did not mitigate the security concerns under the 
guideline for Personal Conduct. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against 
Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
