 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00610   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 14, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has an inability to satisfy her financial indebtedness. She currently has 
12 delinquent debts totaling $16,583, and has not satisfied any of her delinquent 
accounts. She has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the Statement of Reasons (SOR) in writing on July 11, 2010, 
and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on November 9, 2010. 
The Government’s submission included Government Exhibits (GEs) 1 through 9. 
Applicant expressed no objection to the Government’s submissions and they were 
admitted. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was received by 
Applicant on November 15, 2010. She was afforded a 30-day opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant did not submit any information in response to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on January 21, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is married and 
has a 14-year old child. (GE 5.) 
 
 Applicant applied for a security clearance in 2008, but she received an 
unfavorable determination due to her financial problems in December 2008. As a result, 
she was laid off. At that time, she hired a credit counseling attorney to assist her with 
her credit, but terminated their service at the end of December 2008. In her adopted 
statement, she claims that she then began making payments to her creditors in a timely 
manner. (GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant’s security clearance application reflects no periods of unemployment 
during the past seven years. Applicant has often held several jobs at one time. (GE 5.) 
The SOR sets out 12 delinquent accounts that total $16,583. In her Answer, Applicant 
admits to each debt. Her debts are as follows: 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collections account for $253, as alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.a. This debt has been delinquent since November 2005. Applicant 
failed to offer evidence that she has contacted this creditor, made payment 
arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 9.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a medical collections account for $102, as alleged in 
SOR subparagraph 1.b. This debt has been delinquent since October 2005. Applicant 
failed to offer evidence that she has contacted this creditor, made payment 
arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 9.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a medical collections account for $194, as alleged in 
SOR subparagraph 1.c. This debt has been delinquent since July 2005. Applicant failed 
to offer evidence that she has contacted this creditor, made payment arrangements or 
otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 9.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a medical collections account for $188, as alleged in 
SOR subparagraph 1.d. This debt has been delinquent since July 2005. Applicant failed 
to offer evidence that she has contacted this creditor, made payment arrangements or 
otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 9.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a student loan collections account for $452, as alleged 
in SOR subparagraph 1.e. This debt has been delinquent since April 2009. Applicant 
failed to offer evidence that she has contacted this creditor, made payment 
arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 9.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collections account for $351, as alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.f. This debt has been delinquent since July 2007. Applicant failed to 
offer evidence that she has contacted this creditor, made payment arrangements or 
otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collections account for $151, as alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.g. This debt has been delinquent since March 2009. Applicant failed to 
offer evidence that she has contacted this creditor, made payment arrangements or 
otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collections account for $358, as alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.h. This debt has been delinquent since October 2005. Applicant failed 
to offer evidence that she has contacted this creditor, made payment arrangements or 
otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a medical collections account for $12,852, as alleged in 
SOR subparagraph 1.i. This debt has been delinquent since June 2006. Applicant failed 
to offer evidence that she has contacted this creditor, made payment arrangements or 
otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent telecommunications account for $96, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.j. This debt has been delinquent since June 2005. 
Applicant failed to offer evidence that she has contacted this creditor, made payment 
arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collections account for $595, as alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.k. This debt has been delinquent since July 2006. Applicant failed to 
offer evidence that she has contacted this creditor, made payment arrangements or 
otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collections account for $990, as alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.l. This debt has been delinquent since November 2005. Applicant failed 
to offer evidence that she has contacted this creditor, made payment arrangements or 
otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant’s financial statement, completed as part of her Answers to 
Interrogatories in April 2010, indicated that her household net income was 
approximately $2,700 per month and that her monthly expenditures totaled $6,400. She 
indicated she was operating at a monthly net remainder of $400. However, her listed 
monthly net income is actually $3,700 less than her monthly expenditures and indicates 
she is spending more each month than she is bringing in. She listed no savings or other 
assets. (GE 7.) 
 
4 
 
 Applicant failed to submit any reference letters or work performance evaluations 
to support her character. She did provide documentation that she had satisfied a wage 
garnishment levied against her in the past by an unalleged creditor. (GE 7.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts, totaling $16,583, from 
2005 through the present time and she is unable to pay her obligations. Further, her 
financial problems have been ongoing since at least 2005, and she has demonstrated 
little effort to resolve these outstanding obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The evidence does not show that Applicant has resolved any of the 12 debts 
alleged in the SOR. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. She operates with a 
large monthly deficit and is unable to satisfy her delinquent accounts. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. Applicant debts were not caused by circumstances 
beyond her control. She failed to provide any evidence to support application of this 
mitigating condition. Further, to be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the 
individual act responsibly under the circumstances. She has not submitted any evidence 
to establish she is addressing her debts in a responsible manner and she continues to 
operate with a monthly deficit. I am unable to make a determination that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant’s adopted statement indicated that for a short period in 2008, she 
sought financial counseling. However, she decided to stop the counseling after a short 
period of time, prior to the resolution of any of her debts. Further, there is little indication 
that Applicant’s delinquent accounts are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve her delinquent 
debts. The record fails to establish that Applicant has contacted the creditors or made 
any other good faith efforts to repay her financial obligations. AG ¶ 20(d) is not 
applicable. 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted to each debt listed. She failed to 
present any evidence to show that she was in the process of disputing these debts 
formally with the creditors or that she had successfully disputed any of her debts in the 
past. AG ¶ 20(e) is inapplicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
34-years old. She has been denied a security clearance, due to her financial situation, 
in the past. She is clearly aware of the need to be financially responsible. She has had 
ample opportunity to address her financial delinquencies, but has failed to do so.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
