 
1 
 
 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08849 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has an unpaid 
judgment filed in July 2010, which has yet to be resolved. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on January 10, 
2013, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On February 11, 2013, Applicant answered 
the SOR and requested a hearing. On May 15, 2013, I was assigned the case. On May 
31, 2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing convened on June 10, 2013. I admitted Government’s Exhibits 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
(Ex) 1 through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibit A, without objection. Applicant testified at the 
hearing. On June 19, 2013, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
 In a decision dated August 27, 2013, Applicant’s request for a clearance was 
denied. Applicant appealed that decision. At some point prior to the case file reaching 
the DOHA Appeal Board, 66 pages of material submitted by Applicant was added to the 
record. That material had not been viewed by me or Department Counsel (DC). The 
decision was remanded to allow consideration of Applicant’s post-hearing material. I 
have reviewed the material, marked it, and admitted it as exhibits B through L. Four 
pages (Ex. B – E) of the documents related to Applicant’s past-due debts. Ex. F (8 
pages) relates to his current job performance. The bulk of the material (Ex. G – L, 61 
pages) concerned Applicant’s active duty career in the United States Air Force. He 
retired in September 2004.  
 
 On December 2, 2013, I received the Appeal Board Decision. On December 12, 
2013, I sent DC a letter asking if he had seen Applicant’s post-hearing submissions. DC 
had not seen the material. A copy of the material was provided to DC. How Applicant’s 
post-hearing submissions came to be included in the case file is unknown.  
 
The determination to deny Applicant’s security clearance application was due to 
Applicant’s minimal efforts to address his delinquent accounts. At the hearing, one 
delinquent telephone account SOR 1.c ($555) had been paid by allotment. AG ¶ 20(d) 
applies to this single debt. There was no documentary evidence to support his 
assertions that he contacted any of his creditors and tried to arrange repayment plans. 
He asserted one creditor had offered a settlement, which he asserted he had accepted, 
but on which he had yet to start making payments. He asserted he was negotiating with 
the creditor holding a July 2010 judgment against him. (Ex. 2, 3) Because Applicant had 
failed to act aggressively, timely, or responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts, his 
security clearance was denied.  
 
 Applicant’s post-hearing submission established that the March 2009 judgment 
listed in SOR 1.a. ($2,095) had been paid by garnishment. (Ex. E) The creditor for the 
debt listed in SOR 1.e had agreed to accept $146.57 weekly payments, but no 
payments in accord with the agreement had been made. (Ex. C) On June 12, 2013, two 
days after the hearing, Applicant made an offer to the law firm holding the July 2010 
judgment (SOR 1.b). (Ex. D) Applicant provided no document indicating the offer had 
been accepted. 
 
 Following the remand, the record was opened until January 1, 2014, to allow 
Applicant to provide additional documentation about his finances and up-date his 
progress on the judgment debt and the payments he had offered to make on another 
debt. In a letter dated December 12, 2013, Applicant was asked to provide proof he was 
making his $146 weekly payments as he had agreed; that his offer related to the unpaid 
judgment had been accepted, that he was making payments in accord with the offer; 
and to provide documentation that the holder of the second mortgage on his foreclosed 
home was not bringing legal action to obtain a judgment regarding the deficiency 
resulting from the second mortgage. 
 
3 
 
 
 
 Having received no response from Applicant by January 1, 2014, I sent him an 
email requesting he submit all financial information that he wished to be considered by 
January 21, 2014. On January 14, 2014, Applicant submitted material that was admitted 
as Ex. M – P. As of January 14, 2014, Applicant’s offer to pay $100 weekly on the July 
2010 judgment had been submitted to the law firm. (Ex. O) The law firm requested 24 to 
48 hours to respond to the offer.  
 
 On February 5, 2014, Applicant was asked as to the status of his offer on the 
judgment and given to February 10, 2014, to provide any documentation that he desired 
to be considered. On February 7, 2014, he responded that he did not agree to the law 
firm’s counter offer and negotiations were continuing on this judgment. (Ex. Q) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied two charged-off and one 
collection account. He admitted the remaining allegations. I incorporate Applicant’s 
admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old supervisor who has worked for a defense contractor 
since April 2010, and seeks to maintain a secret security clearance. (Tr. 22) He was on 
active duty in the U.S. Air Force from September 1984 through September 2004, retiring 
as a master sergeant (E-7). (Tr. 57) Following his retirement, he moved to another 
state. His wife, a registered nurse, was employed prior to his retirement, but was 
unemployed in the new location for one year before finding employment. (Ex. 2, Tr. 24, 
50)  
 
 While in the Air Force, Applicant had been awarded the Air Force Commendation 
Medal twice, the Air Force Achievement Medal, the Kosovo Campaign Medal, and 
various other ribbons and awards. (Ex. G) He provided numerous letters of appreciation 
and certificates of recognition. In 1993, he was the wing’s professional of the quarter. 
(Ex. G –K)  He was very highly rated on his enlisted performance reports between 
September 1984 and January 2004. (Ex. L) 
 
 Applicant’s income and Air Force retirement were insufficient to meet the 
household’s financial needs. In December 2004, three months after retiring from the Air 
Force, he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. (Tr. 48) In April 2005, his debts 
were discharged.  
 
 Applicant was employed for approximately 20 months when he learned his father 
had Alzheimer’s disease. (Tr. 25) In June 2006, Applicant obtained new employment on 
the opposite coast, which was closer to his father’s location. (Ex. 2, Tr. 25) In July 2006, 
one week after arriving at the new location, his wife gave birth. (Tr. 26) In November 
2007, she gave birth to another child.2 (Tr. 32) Due to the births and raising the children, 
                                                          
2 Applicant and his wife have seven children. His wife has a child from her first marriage. He had two 
children from his first marriage. And they had four children together. (Tr. 32) The children are ages 5, 6, 
12, 15, 25, 26, and 27. (Tr. 59) 
 
4 
 
 
 
his wife was unemployed for two years. (Tr. 32) At times, he used a credit card to pay 
another credit card bill. (Tr. 35) In August 2008, his wife regained employment. (Tr. 32)  
 
In June 2007, he purchased a home for $212,000. (Tr. 54) He financed 100 
percent of the purchase price. (Tr. 54) His monthly payment on his first mortgage was 
$1,440 and $335 on his second mortgage, both held by the same lender. (Tr. 48)  
 
In October 2007, Applicant obtained the services of a debt financial service 
company to help him with his financial obligations. (Tr. 26) In 2009, he learned the 
company had gone out of business after he had paid them several thousand dollars. 
(Ex. 2)  
 
Applicant incurred a credit card debt (SOR 1.e) in the amount of $5,642. (Ex. 2, 
page 144) The account was sold to another lender, which placed the debt for collection 
(SOR 1.d, $7,152). (Ex. 2, page 141) In July 2010, that lender obtained a judgment 
(SOR 1.b) against Applicant in the amount of $5,642, attorney’s fees of $640, and court 
costs, plus $567 interest as of November 6, 2009 with interest continuing at seven 
percent annually thereafter. (Ex. 2) The debts listed in SOR 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e are the 
same debt. Applicant was questioned about the judgment during his March 2011 
personal subject interview (PSI). (Ex. 2) In his September 2012 response to written 
financial interrogatories (Ex. 2), he states that he was “[i]n negotiations now” about the 
debt. In June 2014, following the hearing, he made an offer to pay $100 weekly on this 
debt. 
 
Between Applicant’s June 2014 offer and the December 2014 letter requesting 
the status of his offer, he provided no proof of any negotiations. He failed to respond by 
January 1, 2014, when he was again asked to provide an update on the status of 
payment on this judgment. On July 14, 2014, he had renewed his offer to pay $100 
weekly and the law firm was to respond within 24 to 48 hours. On February 5, 2014, 
Applicant was again requested to provide an update as to the status of his offer and 
payment on this judgment. On February 7, 2014, he stated he did not accept the law 
firm’s offer because it was $2,000 higher than the judgment. His response did not 
address that in addition to the principal amount owed, the judgment required him to pay 
attorney fees and interest. He asserted he is attempting to negotiate a repayment 
agreement on the judgment filed in July 2010. 
 
In April 2010, Applicant was laid off at work. He was unemployed for two weeks 
before starting his current job, which required him to relocate to another state. His wife 
was unemployed following the move to the new state. (Tr. 32) After leaving the state 
and his home, he never made another mortgage payment on his home. (Tr. 47, 55) 
When he left, he hoped to arrange a short sale of his home, but foreclosure occurred 
before he could arrange a sale. He was five months behind on his first mortgage of 
$1,440 monthly and on his second mortgage of $335 monthly. (Tr. 48) The property 
sold for $124,901. (Tr. 45)  
 
 
5 
 
 
 
The lender of the first and second mortgage was the same mortgage company. 
Applicant asked the bank for a letter of forgiveness, which he never received.3 Under 
state law, to obtain a deficiency judgment after foreclosure, a lender must seek legal 
action with the state superior court within thirty days following the sale. (Ex. P) The 
lender failed to so this. The second mortgage debt is no longer enforceable.  
 
 In August 2012, Applicant finished paying, by weekly allotment, a $13,953 
collection account not listed in the SOR. (Tr. 27) He was released from any and all 
obligation on the account. (Ex. 2, Tr. 20) The weekly allotments started at $100, which 
he later increased to $200 weekly. (Tr. 28) The judgment listed in SOR 1.a ($2,095) was 
paid in early 2011 by garnishment. (Ex. E) 
 
 Following the hearing, Applicant arranged a repayment plan with the creditor 
listed in SOR 1.f ($4,880). (Ex. N) As of January 2014, Applicant had made 31 weekly 
payments of $146 each. He has paid $4,543 and $2,491 remains to be paid. (Ex. N)  
 
Applicant asserts he intends to fully pay his debts. (Tr. 24) His wife is now 
employed full-time, making $34,000 per year. (Tr. 58) His salary is just under $80,000 
and he receives $18,000 annually from his Air Force retirement. (Tr. 58) He stated he 
and his wife are now making more money than they have ever made before. The 
combined household annual income is $132,000. He asserts he does not have very 
much remaining income after paying his expenses. (Tr. 32) He has not received any 
financial counseling since 2007. 
 
A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for 
collection, and other unpaid obligations and their current status follows:  
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a March 2009 judgment by 
bank on a credit card 
account. 
$2,095 Paid by garnishment in 2011. (Ex. E)  
b July 2010 judgment. 
Attorney fees and 
interests is owed on this 
judgment in addition to 
the $5,642 principal 
amount.  
$5,642 
 
Unpaid. Although Applicant has been 
frequently questioned about this 
judgment since July 2010, it remains 
unpaid. This same debt is listed in d. as 
a charged-off account and in e. as a 
collection account.  
c Telephone service 
collection account. 
$555 
 
Paid. (Ex. A, Tr. 27) 
d Collection account.  $7,152 Duplicate debt. This is the same debt 
listed in b. and e. 
 
 
                                                          
3 Applicant provided no documentation pertaining to the state law provisions of mortgage companies 
seeking reimbursement following foreclosure of a primary residence. (Tr. 55) 
 
6 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
e Charged-off account. $4,316 Duplicate debt. This is the same debt 
listed in b. and d.  
f Charged-off account. 
 
$4,880 Paying. Applicant has made 31 weekly 
payments of $146 each. He has paid 
$4,543. The balance owed is $2,491. 
(Ex. N)  
g Second mortgage was 
more than 120 days past 
due on $166,000 
balance. 
$1,340 
(Est.) 
Unenforceable. Any action to obtain a 
deficiency judgment is barred by statute 
unless the lender seeks court action 
with the state superior court within thirty 
days of the foreclosure. (Ex. P) The 
lender brought no action.  
h Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
filed in December 2004. 
Discharged in April 2005. 
 Applicant filed for bankruptcy protection 
three months after his retirement from 
the Air Force. His wife was unemployed.  
 Total debt listed in SOR $24,640 This amount does not include the 
mortgage foreclosure.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
7 
 
 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. He resorted to bankruptcy in 2004, 
three months after retiring from the Air Force. He had two judgments, collection 
 
8 
 
 
 
accounts, and charged-off accounts which total more than $24,000. AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 In 2005, all of his debts were discharged in bankruptcy and he was given a fresh 
financial start. I do not find against him simply for having to seek bankruptcy protection. 
However, someone who has had to resort to bankruptcy should be especially careful 
concerning their personal finances to insure problems do not continue or recur. 
Following a bankruptcy, a person should be more aware, concerned, and careful about 
their finances than someone who has not sought such protection. Following his 
bankruptcy, his financial problems continued. In 2009, a judgment, now paid, was 
entered against him. In July 2010, a judgment, still unpaid, was entered against him. He 
was questioned about this debt in March 2011. In September 2012, he asserted he was 
in negotiations to pay this debt. He provided no documents showing any type of contact 
with the law firm holding the judgment from September 2012 until June 2013, the date 
of the hearing. 
 
 Following the hearing, Applicant contacted the law firm and made an offer. 
Following that offer, he has provided no documentation of any additional follow-up or 
negotiations on the offer until January 2014. In January 2014, he renewed his offer. In 
February 2014, he rejected the law firm’s counter offer and alleged he was once more 
involved in negotiations concerning this judgment.  
 
 
9 
 
 
 
It has been more than three and a half years since the judgment was entered. 
During that period, the only documents related to negotiating a repayment plan on this 
judgment appear to be the result of the SOR. Even after being initially denied a 
clearance, because he had not acted aggressively in addressing this long-standing 
judgment. His actions to reach a repayment agreement have been minimal. He has had 
sufficient time to address this judgment. The handling of this debt casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant receives very limited application of the mitigating conditions listed in 
AG ¶ 20(b). The household’s annual income is now $132,000. His wife was unemployed 
for varying periods when he accepted employment in new locations, with the last period 
of unemployment occurred following his 2010 move. Except for two weeks in 2010, 
Applicant has been employed full-time since retiring from the Air Force in 2004.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. AG ¶ 20(d) applies 
to some of his debts. The judgment in SOR 1.a was paid by garnishment in early 2011. 
He paid the obligation in SOR 1.c ($555). He is making weekly payments on the debt in 
SOR 1.f. He has reduced the balance owed from $7,035 to $2,491. Having made 31 
weekly payments, it is likely he will continue making payments until the debt is paid. 
 
In 2012, Applicant paid $13,953, by weekly allotment, on a collection account not 
listed in the SOR. The weekly allotments started at $100, which he later increased to 
$200. The repayment of this debt shows Applicant follows through on repayment 
agreements once they are established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s wife went through 
several periods of unemployment following the birth of their children and after moving 
 
10 
 
 
 
with her husband to a new state for his employment. Applicant honorably served in the 
Air Force and retired as a master sergeant. His evaluations indicate he was highly rated 
while in the Air Force. The delinquent second mortgage on his foreclosed home is 
unenforceable. He has paid some of his debts. Although one was paid by garnishment.  
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has a long history of financial problems. In 2004, his financial situation was 
such that he sought bankruptcy protection. Even with the discharge of his debts, he 
continued to have financial problems resulting in a March 2009 judgment, and July 2010 
judgment and other charged-off and collection accounts. In April 2010, when he moved 
to a new state for a new job he stopped making his mortgage payments. After leaving, 
he never made another payment. His house went to foreclosure. Bankruptcy, 
judgments, and home foreclosures are strong evidence of an individual with serious 
financial problems that have occurred over a long period of time.  
 
Even though the annual household income is $132,000, Applicant asserts he has 
little money each month to address his past due obligations. He has a long-standing 
failure to repay the July 2010 judgment. His actions related to addressing that judgment 
are minimal and any action on that debt appears to be largely due to the SOR. There is 
no documentation showing he continued negotiation to reach a repayment plan 
following the hearing when six months later he was requested to provide updated 
information about this judgment. His inaction on this debt raises concerns about his 
fitness to hold a security clearance as does his ten-year period of serious financial 
problems.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid it is whether 
his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
(See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
concerning Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Any doubt must 
be resolved in favor of national security. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant      
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant    
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant      
  Subparagraphs 1.d—1.h:  For Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
