 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-08313 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On April 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 In a response signed April 28, 2014, 
Applicant admitted all allegations and requested a hearing based on the written record. 
On August 20, 2015, the Government prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) which 
included nine attachments (“Items”). Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I was 
assigned the case on December 1, 2015. Based on a thorough review of the case file, I 
find that Applicant failed to carry his burden in mitigating security concerns arising under 
both Guideline B and Guideline E.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 71-year-old man who is presently not working while his security 
clearance is updated. He has earned a high school diploma. He was divorced in 1998 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
and is now estranged from a subsequent spouse. Facts about this estranged female are 
unclear, although it appears she is from Russia, where she currently resides with or 
near family. He provided incomplete information on his security clearance application 
(SCA) about his family and children. Other discrepancies appear throughout his 
investigatory record. Applicant presently lives in another country with a female foreign 
national in order to reduce the costs he would otherwise expend living in the United 
States while awaiting a return to work.  
 
 At issue in the SOR are the following facts: Applicant has a wife who is a citizen 
and resident of Russia.2 They are estranged, but Applicant has no plans to divorce his 
foreign wife because he no longer believes in divorce. He has a daughter who is a 
citizen of the United States and is currently a resident of Russia, where she is a 
university student. He also has parents-in-law who are citizens and residents of Russia. 
Applicant met them in about July 1998 on a visit to their home. He again saw them on a 
subsequent trip to Russia with his wife. He has had no other contact with them and 
does not know how often his estranged wife currently has with her parents now that all 
three are in Russia. His father-in-law and mother-in-law are a teacher and a 
gynecologist, respectively. Applicant assumed they were Communists because the 
Communists were in power when he met them. As of 2015, Russia is one of the two 
leading state intelligence threats to United States interests, based on their capabilities, 
intent, and broad operational scopes.3 Applicant admits the Guideline B SOR 
allegations, but did not address them in any manner in his SOR Response.     
 
 In completing SCAs in both August 3, 2009, and March 23, 2013, Applicant failed 
to list multiple names he has used, places of former residence, periods of 
unemployment, relatives, and foreign contacts. He told an investigator in 2010 that he 
had no problems while working with a particular employer, but later conceded he was 
involved in a harassment suit while working there. Despite a 2010 claim to the contrary, 
he failed in 2007 to file an appropriate contact with foreign nationals report regarding the 
foreign woman with whom he currently cohabitates. Applicant admits these allegations.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
2 In some records within the FORM, Applicant indicated that his estranged wife became a naturalized 
citizen in 2007 or 2008 and now resides in the United States, but the discrepancies are never resolved. 
(See FORM, Item 6) 
 
3 FORM, Item 9, at 3. 
 
 
 
 
3 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline B is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Applicant remains married to the female of Russian origin at issue. Therefore, it 
can be assumed he maintains some level of affection for this woman, the mother of his 
child. It can also be assumed he maintains a bond or ties of affection for their child, who 
is now studying at a Russian college. As for his in-laws, while their contact with 
Applicant is negligible, it can be assumed his estranged partner has ties of affection with 
her own parents. Those ties are routinely attributed to the spouse (Applicant) in these 
cases. Given these facts, disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) apply:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b) connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
In finding disqualifying conditions applicable, I specifically note that AG ¶ 7(a) 
requires substantial evidence of a heightened risk. The heightened risk required to raise 
a disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk 
greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. Russia is one of the two leading 
state intelligence threats to United States interests. In addition, foreign family ties can 
pose a security risk even without a connection to a foreign government. This is because 
an applicant may be subject to coercion or undue influence when a third party pressures 
or threatens an applicant’s family members. Under these facts, while unlikely, a third 
party coercion concern potentially exists in Russia. Therefore, there is sufficient 
evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, and find the following are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests.  
 
 
 
 
5 
The mere possession of close family ties to persons in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information.  
 
Here, Applicant provided scant information about his estranged wife, daughter, 
and in-laws. Indeed, information about his in-laws is more abundant than information 
about his child and her mother. While his personal ties to his in-laws may be weak, their 
impact on Applicant cannot be discerned without more information about his wife and 
child. Under these limited facts, no mitigating conditions weigh in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, where the 
significance of conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations is defined ([p]ersonal conduct can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information). Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process.  
 
In completing his 2009 and 2013 SCAs, Applicant’s answers in many areas were 
either deficient or in conflict. His answers in a 2010 interview were either intentionally or 
negligently incomplete with regard to past workplace problems and the reporting of a 
foreign cohabitant to his former employer. If these inaccuracies were intentionally 
incorrect, such facts could give rise to:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities, 
and  
 
AG ¶ 16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant admitted all three allegations raised under Guideline E and provided no 
explanations or commentary. While his admission to the SCA discrepancies could be 
discounted and his discrepancies found to be the product of negligence, this guideline 
could be found in his favor. In admitting allegations that he knowingly withheld 
information and denied having had problems while employed at a place where he was 
involved in a harassment suit, however, the facts tend to indicate that these answers – 
without more – were intentionally false or misleading. This is particularly true in the 
 
 
 
 
6 
absence of some explanation claiming forgetfulness or another basis for having 
provided a negligently entered SCA answer. Therefore, given his admissions, none of 
the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 17(a) – (g) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant failed to do more than admit the allegations raised in the SOR. He then 
requested a judgment based on the written record. It is that very record that is full of 
discrepancies and contradictions that contributed to the security concerns at issue. 
There are simply insufficient facts to evaluate Applicant’s foreign kin, the SCA and 
interview inaccuracies, or even the Applicant as an individual. This is simply the result of 
a deficiently supplemented record. Without more, there is insufficient information to 
rebut, refute, or mitigate the security concerns raised under the foreign influence and 
personal conduct guidelines.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 FOREIGN INFLUENCE     AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Allegations 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
PERSONAL CONDUCT    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Allegations 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant  
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
