 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07877 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 6, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 On July 14, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On November 20, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
 
2 
 
 
mailed to Applicant, and it was received on January 4, 2016. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and Items 3 through 15 are 
admitted into evidence. Applicant provided a response and additional evidence that was 
marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, and it was admitted into evidence without objection. 
After the record closed, Applicant provided an additional document. It was marked as 
AE B. Department Counsel did not object to its late submission, and it is admitted into 
evidence.1 The case was assigned to me on March 7, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegation in ¶ 1.a and denied the remaining 
allegations with explanations. I have incorporated his admissions into the findings of 
fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He has a bachelor’s degree. He has worked for a 
federal contractor since 2004. He has been married since 1990. He has two children 
ages 16 and 13.2  
 
Applicant’s wife’s had a real estate investment business. He and his wife 
invested in real estate and owned rental properties along with their primary residence.3 
They had first and second mortgages on the properties. In 2007, they invested in a 
condominium project that went bankrupt. They were sued by their real estate agent for 
breach of contract concerning the transaction and a $70,000 judgment was entered 
against them. Applicant indicated that their joint debts were incurred not from 
irresponsible spending, but from real estate holdings that “went under.”4 In Applicant’s 
statement of January 24, 2014, he said:  
 
Due to the business failures and [real estate agent] lawsuit [it] caused my 
spouse to file Bankruptcy protection…. [We] incurred legal debts in excess 
of $180,000 from the lawsuit from December 2007 until January 2009. 
She had no other choice tha[n] using the unsecured credit cards and line 
of credit to keep up with the legal fees and continue financing the real 
estate projects in [State A and State B].5 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memorandum. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Items 12, 13, 14, and 15 are credit reports that reflect most of the real estate holdings were held jointly. 
 
4 Item 2. 
 
5 Item 5 page 3. In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he acknowledged that he and his wife invested in a 
commercial strip mall development from 1995 to 2003. After they sold this property they invested in real 
estate projects in State A and State B. These projects failed. It appears from Applicant’s statements that 
the investments were jointly held. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s wife filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2009 and her debts were 
discharged in August 2010. Applicant is listed as the co-debtor in Schedule H of his 
spouse’s bankruptcy filing. Under Schedule D of the bankruptcy petition, $408,269 is 
listed as the unsecured portion of their secured debts, and under Schedule F, $476,716 
is listed as unsecured debt.6 This included significant credit card debt, personal loans, 
the civil judgment and legal fees. Following the discharge, Applicant received IRS forms 
1099-C, cancellation of debt, for two debts in the amounts of $29,833 and $39,847.7 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy in January 2010. Under Schedule D, 
Applicant listed $444,190 as the unsecured portion of secured debts and under 
Schedule F, listed $438,552 of unsecured debt. He listed his spouse as a co-debtor 
under Schedule H. A year later, the Bankruptcy Trustee moved the case be dismissed 
because Applicant failed to file a plan or disclosure statement, a monthly operating 
report, and due to post-petition liabilities of $99,286 to two secured creditors. The 
bankruptcy was dismissed in April 2011.8  
 
 In May 2012, Applicant filed a Request for Modification and Affidavit concerning 
the mortgage associated with his primary residence (SOR ¶ 1.f). In the request he listed 
his monthly income as $11,344, expenses as $13,373 and his total assets as $12,500.9 
In response to interrogatories in January 2014, Applicant completed a personal financial 
statement. He estimated his monthly income as $8,875 with a net remainder of $3,075 
and total assets valued at $1,450,000.10 It does not appear Applicant’s modification 
request was granted.  
 
In February 2013, June 2014 and July 2014, Applicant’s wife filed Chapter 13 
bankruptcy protection. In each instance the case was dismissed for failing to file 
supporting documentation.11 In an order dated September 3, 2014, Applicant’s wife was 
barred from refiling a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition for 180 days.12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
6 Item 7 pages 3 and 10. 
 
7 Item 6; Answer to SOR at page 23. Applicant provided information that explained in a community 
property state creditors are not entitled to collect from any of the community assets of the non-filing 
spouse. I have not considered Applicant’s wife’s bankruptcy filings, individual real estate investments, or 
financial actions for disqualifying conditions. I have considered them when analyzing Applicant’s 
credibility, mitigation, and the whole-person. 
 
8 Item 8. 
 
9 Item 5. 
 
10 Item 4. 
 
11 Items 9, 10, and 11. 
 
12 Item 11. 
 
4 
 
 
The SOR alleges consumer debts that are past due or charged off totaling 
approximately $55,500 and multiple mortgage accounts that are past due in the 
approximate amount of $339,000.  
 
Applicant indicated that he is not legally obligated to pay the debts that are 
included in his wife’s bankruptcy, that have fallen off his credit report, or are barred from 
enforcement by the statute of limitations.  
 
The consumer debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($22,467) is an individual credit card account 
that was charged off. Applicant indicated that the debt was included in his wife’s 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy that was discharged in 2010. Applicant also included this debt in 
his Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing that was later dismissed. Applicant provided a 
document, after the record closed, from the creditor indicating Applicant’s account is 
closed and charged off, and due to the age of the account it was removed from 
Applicant’s credit report. Applicant also stated in his answer that the debt is 
unenforceable under the statute of limitations.13  
 
Applicant indicated he paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c (past due $13,278) listed as a 
home equity loan. He provided a document that stated: “we have approved your Home 
Equity account for a principal forgiveness program offered by [creditor] as part of its 
recent settlement with the Department of Justice. You will receive full forgiveness of the 
remaining balance of $88,735 on your Home Equity account.” The letter informed 
Applicant that the forgiveness of this debt did not affect his first mortgage.14 
 
The consumer debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($31,468) is an individual credit card account 
that was charged off. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated the debt is 
uncollectible because it was discharged in his wife’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy and also 
barred by the statute of limitations. 
 
The loan in SOR ¶ 1.e (past due $2,275, balance $107,000) appears to have 
been paid and the account closed in 2012. The amount is also listed in Applicant’s 
wife’s 2010 Chapter 7 bankruptcy Schedule D, as an unsecured amount for a secured 
credit line.15 
 
Applicant has been disputing the mortgage loan on his primary residence in SOR 
¶ 1.f ($324,000 past due on a $681,079 balance) since at least 2011. He indicated the 
loan has been transferred several times to different mortgage companies. He indicated 
the debt was discharged in his wife’s 2010 Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and there was an 
improper filings and procedures by the creditor. Due to the residence value being less 
than the loan, he anticipated submitting a loan modification that he anticipated would be 
                                                          
13 Item 2 page 20, Item 7 page 26; AE B. 
 
14 Item 2 at 29. 
 
15 Item 2 page 27; Item 7 page 20. 
 
 
5 
 
 
resolved by April 2016. No additional documents were provided to show that he has 
resolved the debt. The current status of this debt is unclear.16 
 
Sufficient documentation was provided to show the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g (past due 
$1,625 on $11,152 balance) is paid.17 Applicant provided his performance appraisal for 
2015 reflecting his excellent performance.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
16 Answer to SOR; Response to FORM. It is unclear how Applicant claims the mortgage debt was 
discharged in bankruptcy yet he is still attempting to modify the loan. 
 
17 Item 2 page 30. 
 
18 Response to FORM. 
 
6 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
  
Applicant filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy that was dismissed in 2011. He had 
consumer debts and real estate loans that were delinquent. Applicant was unable or 
unwilling to satisfy his debts. The above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
7 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant had consumer debts and mortgage loans that were charged off or 
discharged in his wife’s bankruptcy. Applicant continues to dispute his past-due 
mortgage loan on his residence with the creditor, but failed to show recent actions he 
has taken to resolve it. He filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy that was dismissed due to his 
failure to provide a plan and incurring additional debt.  
 
 Applicant relied on bankruptcy and the statute of limitations to resolve his 
delinquent debts and past-due mortgage loans. Bankruptcy is a legitimate legal means 
to discharge debt. It does not, however, preclude consideration of Applicant’s past 
financial problems. Although the debts included in his wife’s bankruptcy may be 
unenforceable against Applicant, it does not mean he acted responsibly toward the 
debts. Relying on the statute of limitations regarding delinquent debts does not 
constitute a good-faith effort to resolve debt. Applicant’s behavior is recent and frequent. 
Considering his conduct in failing to pay legitimate debts, I cannot find his actions 
happened under unique circumstances that are unlikely to recur. His actions cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a downturn in the real estate 
market, which was beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b) Applicant 
must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant and his wife had 
considerable real estate holdings. They were overextended and used credit cards to 
fund their expenses. Many of Applicant’s debts were charged off, included in his wife’s 
bankruptcy, or unenforceable under the statute of limitations. Although the debts may 
be legally unenforceable, his actions do not constitute acting responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. There is no evidence Applicant received 
financial counseling. Although some of Applicant’s debts are no longer legally 
enforceable there is insufficient evidence at this time to conclude his finances are under 
control. AG¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant has not resolved the mortgage loan (SOR ¶ 1.f). He disputes the debt 
claiming it was discharged in bankruptcy. Its current status is unclear. It is unknown if he 
has made any payments on the loan since his wife’s bankruptcy discharge in 2010. It is 
unknown if he still resides in the house. He anticipated filing a new modification request 
and resolving the matter in 2016. He did not provide documents to show its current 
status, whether he has completed the request or other recent action he has taken to 
resolve the problem. Applicant has not initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. AG ¶ 20(e) partially 
applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 54 years old. He has been steadily employed since 2004. He 
indicated his delinquent debts were discharged in bankruptcy, charged off, or 
unenforceable under the statute of limitations. Applicant failed to pay legitimate 
creditors. He has an unstable financial track record, which raises questions about his 
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
