 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 12-09725 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 19, 2012, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On May 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated April 19, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on May 12, 2015. In a sworn written statement, 
inadvertently dated May 26, 2014,2 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant on 
September 18, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days 
after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of 
the Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the 
FORM on September 25, 2015. A response was due by October 25, 2015. Applicant did 
not submit any response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 31, 
2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted three of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.d.). The remaining allegation 
was denied. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Although the 
identity of his current employer is known, there is no evidence in the record to indicate 
when he joined his current employer or what position he currently holds. He was 
previously employed by two different federal contractors as a liaison support specialist 
from 2007 to some point after April 2012.3 He is a June 1992 high school graduate.4 
Applicant has completed several college courses over the years in an effort to obtain an 
associate’s degree, but he has not yet completed the requirements for a degree. 
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army Reserve in November 1985, transferred to the U.S. 
Army in November 1986, and served on active duty until he retired as a staff sergeant 
(E-6) in October 2007.5 During his military service, Applicant was deployed to Iraq on 
two occasions: October or November 2003 until October 2004, and from November 
                                                          
2
 It should be noted that the affidavit-form upon which Applicant was to choose either a hearing or a decision 
based upon the administrative record, and list his contact information, and which the notary public was to sign, was a 
boilerplate preprinted form with “2014” furnished by the DOD CAF. 
 
3
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 9-11. 
 
4
 Item 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated June 7, 2012), at 1. 
 
5
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 11-13; Item 5, supra note 4, at 1-2. 
 
3 
                                      
 
2005 until October 2006.6 Applicant failed to submit any evidence of military awards and 
decorations that he may have received. He was granted a secret security clearance in 
March 1998 while he was in the U.S. Army.7 He was married to his first wife in April 
1988 and divorced in November 1997. He married his second wife in December 1997.8 
Applicant has a daughter (born in 1982) and a son (born in 1995).9 
 
Financial Considerations10 
 
 Applicant‘s initial financial problems arose out of a joyful situation when, while 
playing the slot machines at a casino in September 1997, he won a jackpot of $57,000. 
The winnings were electronically deposited by the casino into his bank account, and the 
appropriate report was made to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). No funds were 
withheld for income tax purposes. When he filed his federal income tax return for the tax 
year 1997, Applicant failed to include his casino winnings. Applicant loaned some of the 
money to friends, and spent the remainder on unexpected expenses such as his divorce 
and associated child support. He could not remember any specific major purchases 
made or services received.  
 
In mid-1998, the IRS informed Applicant that, because he had failed to include 
his winnings in his income tax return, he owed the IRS approximately $17,000 in unpaid 
taxes. Applicant claimed that he was under the impression that the IRS would simply 
garnish his wages. So he took no action to address the unpaid balance. In June 2002, 
the IRS filed a tax lien in the amount of $29,644 against Applicant (SOR ¶ 1.b.). 
Applicant ignored the situation between mid-1998 and mid-2012, when he again 
received a notification from the IRS. In April 2012, when he completed his e-QIP, 
Applicant indicated “have set up payment plan with IRS” and “have a monthly payment 
plan set up to pay this back.”11 He failed to submit any documentation to support his 
contention that a payment plan existed or that he had made any payments under the 
plan. In fact, it appears that the statements were false, for in June 2012, Applicant told 
an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) that he would set 
up an installment plan that same month to start making monthly payments of $1,200. He 
failed to do so. Instead, Applicant later noted that “[t]he tax lien on my home is actually 
preferable to a monthly payment. This way, I will satisfy the lien when I sell my home 
and can use my monthly paychecks to meet other obligations.” Applicant has taken no 
further action with regard to the tax lien, and the matter remains unresolved. 
                                                          
 
6
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 9. 
 
7
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 36-37; Item 5, supra note 4, at 10. 
 
8
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 16-19. 
 
9
 Item 2, supra note 1, at  27-28. 
 
10
 General source information pertaining to the financial issues and accounts discussed below can be found 
in the following exhibits: Item 1 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated June 5, 2015); Item 2, supra note 1; Item 3 
(Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated April 27, 2012); Item 4 (Equifax Credit Report, 
dated October 17, 2015); Item 5, supra note 4.  
 
11
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 38-39. 
 
4 
                                      
 
In addition to the unpaid federal income tax, Applicant encountered financial 
difficulties with other creditors. For reasons not specifically attributable by Applicant to 
any one particular cause, several accounts became significantly delinquent and were 
placed for collection, charged off, or transferred or sold. Applicant claimed that payment 
plans were established for some delinquent accounts, and that some of his military 
retirement pay was garnished by one creditor. He submitted no documentation to 
support the establishment of any repayment plans, garnishments, or payments to any of 
those creditors.  
 
In addition to the $29,644 federal tax lien, the SOR identified three purportedly 
continuing delinquent accounts, totaling approximately $9,100 which had been placed 
for collection or charged off. Although Applicant offered comments regarding each of the 
accounts, with the exception of one account, he failed to submit any documentation to 
support his contentions pertaining to his actions or activities to resolve them. Those 
debts, other than the federal tax lien, and their respective current status, according to 
the above-cited credit reports, Applicant’s comments to the OPM investigator, and his 
Answer to the SOR, are described as follows:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a. – This is a bank credit card account with a high credit of $3,029 that 
was initially over 150 days past due in the amount of $3,839, but which eventually 
became $5,263 past due, and was charged off. In April 2012, when he completed his e-
QIP, Applicant indicated “have payment plan set up” and that he had made a payment 
of $1,000.12 He failed to submit any documentation to support his contention that a 
payment plan existed or that he had made any payments under the plan. In June 2012, 
Applicant told the OPM investigator that he had made one $500 payment and had set 
up an installment plan to start making monthly payments of $170. He also claimed that 
he had been making monthly payments of $200 since December 2011. He anticipated 
paying off the debt in February 2013.13 Once again, he failed to submit any 
documentation to support his contention that any payment plan existed or that he had 
made any payments under the plan(s). Applicant’s October 2014 credit report does not 
reflect any payments having been made, and the past-due balance has not decreased. 
There is no documentary evidence to support a finding that the account is in the 
process of being resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c. – This is a joint installment sales contract with a high credit of $3,000 
and an unpaid balance of $2,209 that was placed for collection in 2006 before being 
transferred or sold to another collection agent.14 During his June 2012 OPM interview, 
Applicant claimed to have no knowledge of the account. Since then, he apparently took 
no action to identify the original creditor, although the name of the original creditor 
appears in the April 2012 credit report, or to resolve the account. The account is no 
longer listed in his October 2014 credit report. In his June 2015 Answer to the SOR. 
Applicant continued to deny the debt, but stated that he planned to dispute it with the 
                                                          
12
 Item 2, supra note 1, at 42. 
 
13
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 7, 11. 
 
14
 Item 3, supra note 10. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
three credit bureaus.15 He failed to submit any documentation to support that he had 
actually filed disputes as he had intended. Nevertheless, it would not be surprising if the 
account had fallen from Applicant’s credit reports because of its age under the 
appropriate state statute of limitations. In the absence of documentary evidence of a 
dispute or any payments on the account, I conclude that Applicant has taken no steps to 
address or resolve this account. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d. – This is a bank credit card account with a credit limit of $1,000 and a 
remaining balance of $1,627.70 that was placed for collection. In his June 2012 OPM 
interview, Applicant contended that he had an allotment set up in 1998 for monthly 
payments of $130, and that he had sent the bank a check of approximately $500 to pay 
the final balance remaining. If there was any outstanding balance, he intended to set up 
a repayment plan to pay it off.16 Applicant failed to submit any documentation to support 
his contention that any payment plan existed or that he had made any payments under 
the plan. He subsequently revised his comments to acknowledge that the allotment had 
terminated without his knowledge when he retired from military service.17 After receiving 
the SOR, on May 22, 2015, Applicant made a payment of $1,000 to a collection agent.18 
Applicant contends that the payment is considered an agreed settlement of the entire 
remaining balance, but the documentation he submitted does not expressly state that 
upon receipt of the $1,000 payment the remaining $627.70 is to be forgiven.19 
Nevertheless, the account is either in the process of being resolved, or it has been 
resolved. 
  
Applicant stated during his OPM interview that he was “capable of meeting his 
financial obligations.” However, he also stated that he “is just making it financially and 
would like to work overseas in order to make more money and pay off all his debts.”20 
He failed to furnish a personal financial statement setting forth his net monthly income; 
his monthly household expenses; and his monthly debt payments, or even to identify his 
debts. In the absence of such information, I am unable to determine if he has any 
monthly remainder available for savings or spending. Thus, it is nearly impossible to 
determine if Applicant’s finances are under control as he claims or if he is still 
experiencing financial difficulties. Applicant believes that “none of his debt is related to 
events out of his control.”21 Applicant never sought the services of a financial advisor 
and never received debt or credit counseling.22  
                                                          
15
 Item 1, supra note 10, at 1. 
 
16
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 12. 
 
17
 Item 1, supra note 10, at 2. 
 
18
 Card Payment Agreement Notice, dated May 21, 2015, attached to Item 1, supra note 10. 
 
19
 Item 1, supra note 10, at 2; Card Payment Plan Notice, dated May 21, 2015, attached to Item 1, supra 
note 10. 
 
20
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 13. 
 
21
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 13. 
 
22
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 13. 
 
6 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”23 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”24   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”25 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.26  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
23
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
24
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
25
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
26
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”27 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”28 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Also, AG ¶ 19(f) may apply when there are “financial problems that 
are linked to . . . gambling problems, or other issues of security concern.” Applicant has 
had a long-standing problem with his finances which started as early as 1998 when he 
                                                          
27
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
28
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
failed to include his jackpot winnings in his federal income tax return for the tax year 
1997. He loaned some of the money to friends, and spent the remainder. In June 2002, 
the IRS filed a tax lien for approximately $29,644. Other accounts became delinquent 
and were placed for collection, charged off, or transferred or sold. It is unclear if he had 
insufficient funds to continue making his routine monthly payments or if he simply 
neglected to do so.  AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. AG ¶ 19(f) does not apply, for while 
Applicant’s financial problems can be “linked to” his gambling jackpot, his coming into 
money in this instance is no different than receiving a bonus, a lottery, or an inheritance. 
Gambling wasn’t the issue, his failure to report it accurately to the IRS and timely 
address his income liability, is. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”29 Under AG ¶ 20(e), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where 
“the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(c) minimally applies. 
The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since 
about 1998 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so 
infrequent,” especially since the situation is continuing. Although Applicant did comment 
about a divorce and child support expenses, he specifically noted that “none of his debt 
is related to events out of his control,” as possible factors. Applicant never sought 
                                                          
29
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
financial counseling. Applicant failed to demonstrate with documentation the actions he 
claimed to have taken to address his four delinquent debts, and he has offered no 
documentary evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve three of them. Instead, he has 
offered claims of actions supposedly taken and actions to be taken, but no 
documentation to support those claims. Some actions and repayment plans were noted 
by Applicant in his e-QIP, but they were apparently false. Other promises were made 
during the 2012 OPM interview, but they too did not occur. Applicant’s Answer to the 
SOR also referred to actions purportedly taken by him, but with the exception of his 
smallest delinquent account, he offered no documentary proof of any of the actions 
promised.  
 
As for the federal tax lien, Applicant’s attitude is that by ignoring the lien until he 
decides to sell the house, rather than making routine monthly payments on the lien, he 
has more money to use to meet other unspecified obligations. He is essentially ignoring 
the lien, and he seemingly continues to do so. As for the purported disputes, Applicant 
failed to describe any reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
about which he claimed to have no knowledge, and he failed to furnish documentation 
reflecting that disputes had been made. 
 
In the absence of a personal financial statement, or any current information 
pertaining to his monthly income, expenses, and available funds for discretionary 
savings or spending, it is impossible to determine the current state of his financial 
affairs. The overwhelming evidence leads to the conclusion that Applicant’s financial 
problems are not under control. Applicant has not acted responsibly by failing to 
address his delinquent accounts and by failing to make limited, if any, documented 
efforts of working with three of his four creditors.30 Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances confronting him cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.31 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                          
30
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
31
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
10 
                                      
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.32   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He retired as a 
U.S. Army staff sergeant who was deployed to Iraq on two occasions. He was granted a 
secret security clearance in 1998. There is no evidence of drug involvement, 
mishandling of protected information, or misuse of information technology systems.  
 
The disqualifying evidence is more substantial. With the exception of his federal 
tax lien, which he continues to ignore for his own financial reasons (not making monthly 
payments enables him to retain those funds to meet other unspecified obligations), 
Applicant has repeatedly declared his intentions of bringing his accounts current and 
repaying them. However, to date, with one exception, he has not. Instead, Applicant has 
seemingly continued to ignore those delinquent accounts, and he has failed to submit 
any documentation to support his many, though somewhat inconsistent, claims of 
establishing repayment agreements and actually making payments. Applicant offered 
no evidence as to his reputation for reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Applicant’s long-standing failure over the years to voluntarily repay all but one of his 
creditors, even in the smallest amounts, or to arrange even the most reasonable 
payment plans, supported by documentation confirming the existence of the plans and 
payments under them, reflects traits which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. There are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are 
not under control. Applicant’s actions under the circumstances cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Considering the absence of confirmed 
debt resolution and elimination efforts, Applicant’s financial issues are likely to remain. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:33 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘“meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
                                                          
32
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
33
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially poor track record of voluntary debt 
reduction and elimination efforts, generally ignoring all but one of his delinquent debts. 
He has simply made too many unsupported claims of purported repayment agreements 
and payments. Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his financial considerations concerns. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
