KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant contends that he did not receive his right to counsel in accordancew with the
U.S. Constitution he asserted that once a concern was raised that he needed counsel, the Judge
should have required him to be represented or advised hin of his right.  The Directive provides
no right for an applicant to have counsel appointed or paid for by the Government.  Applicant’s
reliance upon Bivens is misplaced.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-08972.a1
DATE: 04/25/2016
DATE: April 25, 2016 
In Re:
---------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-08972
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James E. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Herman L. Jimerson, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 30, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On February 10, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert J. Tuidor denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied his right to
representation and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant’s SOR lists two state tax liens.  It also alleges that Applicant failed to file state and
Federal tax returns for tax years 2006, 2009, and 2010.  During his clearance interview, Applicant
stated that he was overwhelmed with paperwork.  He was not concerned about filing his returns
because his tax withholdings were sufficient.  He told the interviewer that he filed his 2009 and 2011
state and Federal returns.  
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant contended that his problems resulted from
disorganization.  He provided no information about the concerns raised by the SOR allegations. 
Applicant’s response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM) included a statement from an
accountant that Applicant’s 2006 Federal return had been filed, albeit late.  However, it contained
no documentation about the remaining concerns.  Applicant did note that his state had levied over
$18,000 against his bank account.  Applicant stated that his accountant would address his tax issues. 
He provided no evidence of financial counseling.  His Response to the FORM stated that “these
financial issues seem to paralyze me.”  Decision at 3.  Applicant stated that he would prefer to be
performing his job or caring for his elderly father. 
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge entered adverse findings regarding Applicant’s tax deficiencies.  He stated that
the information in the record showed that Applicant had taken little or no steps to resolve these
problems.  He stated that it is perplexing that a person with Applicant’s level of education and job
responsibilities, as well as access to an accountant, should have permitted his finances to deteriorate. 
He stated that Applicant was placed on notice three times that his tax problems were of concern to
the Government–during his interview, upon receipt of the SOR, and upon receipt of the FORM.  The
Judge concluded that Applicant failed to submit enough evidence to mitigate the concerns raised by
the SOR.
Discussion
Applicant contends that he did not receive his right to counsel in accordance with the U.S.
Constitution.  In making this argument, he cites to Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents of the
Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 403 U.S. 388 (1971).  He states that, once a concern was raised that
he needed counsel, the Judge should have required him to be represented or advised him of his right. 
There is no right to a security clearance.  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988).  Accordingly, applicants “do not have constitutional due process rights in connection with
security clearance determinations.”  Gargiulo v. Department of Homeland Security, 727 F.3d 1181,
1186 (Fed. Cir. 2013). There is no constitutional right to counsel in a DOHA proceeding, and
DOHA applicants are not afforded the same protections as criminal defendants.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 11-06925 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2013). Although the Directive provides that an applicant
has the right to employ counsel at his own expense, it provides no right for an applicant to have
counsel appointed or paid for by the Government.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-15235 at 2 (App.
Bd. Oct. 3, 2008).  
There being no constitutional right to counsel in a DOHA case, Applicant’s reliance upon
Bivens is misplaced.  Insofar as the decision to obtain representational assistance is discretionary
with an applicant, a Judge has no authority to require an applicant to employ counsel.  Moreover,
the record shows that Applicant was advised of his right to representation as set forth in the
Directive.  He received a copy of the Directive along with the SOR and another copy with the
FORM.  In addition, the letter from DOHA that accompanied the FORM specifically advised
Applicant of his right to be represented or assisted by counsel.  Letter dated September 22, 2015. 
Applicant received notice sufficient to apprise a reasonable person of his right to counsel.  The
record provides no reason to conclude that Applicant’s decision to represent himself was other than
knowing and intelligent.  See ISCR Case No. 14-02347 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).  
Applicant’s Response to the FORM has a passage in which he wonders if he should have
employed counsel, but the context appears to be in relation to his history of income tax problems. 
At no point during the processing of his case does he appear to have asked for additional time in
which to have a lawyer for security clearance purposes.  Pro se applicants cannot be expected to act
like lawyers, but they are expected to take timely, reasonable steps to protect their rights under the
Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-02371 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 30, 2014).  Applicant was not
denied the due process rights afforded him by the Directive.
The remainder of Applicant’s brief amounts to a dispute as to the weight assigned by the
Judge to Applicant’s evidence in mitigation.  Such a disagreement is not sufficient to demonstrate
that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions that were arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05488 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016).    
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, regarding both the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Egan, supra, at 528.  See also
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
