KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Given evidence that Applicant failed to file his returns for several years due to nothing
more than his admitted “procrastination”, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had not satisfied
the Guideline F mitigating conditions is supportable. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-09719.a1
DATE: 04/06/2016
DATE: April 6, 2016
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-09719
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
William E. Cassara, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 26, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On January 12, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding that
Applicant’s circumstances raised concerns under Guideline F; whether the Judge failed properly to
apply the whole-person factors; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the military from 1977 until 1988.  After his discharge he began working
for his current employer.  In his security clearance application (SCA), completed in 2012, Applicant
disclosed that he had not filed his Federal or state income tax returns for 2009, 2010, or 2011.  He
attributed these failures to negligence and to the difficulty in filing them without professional
assistance.  Applicant eventually filed all of his delinquent returns.  He did so after he submitted his
SCA, his 2010 and 2011 Federal returns being filed about 2 years from the date of his SCA.  He filed
his state tax returns in June 2015.  In addition, Applicant filed his 2012 and 2013 Federal and state
tax returns late.  These delinquencies were not addressed in the SOR.  The Judge stated that she was
not considering them as disqualifying conditions but, rather, for what they might reveal on the issues
of mitigation or the whole-person analysis.  
Applicant hired a debt solution company to help him with his finances.  He received financial
counseling and prepared a budget.  Applicant has about $2,700 each month after expenses.  He
apologized for his negligence in filing his returns.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s tax filing delinquencies raised two concerns under
Guideline F: 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations;” and 19(g): “failure to file annual
[Federal], state, or local tax returns as required.”1  In evaluating his case for mitigation, the Judge
stated that the recency of Applicant’s tax filings militate against a conclusion that his problems are
unlikely to recur.  She stated that Applicant presented no evidence that his failures were due to
circumstances beyond his control and that, based upon the record before her, there was little
evidence that Applicant’s problems were under control.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge
stated that Applicant’s failure was “inexplicable.”  Decision at 6.  She stated that, though Applicant
is apologetic, she finds no reason to conclude that he would have filed his returns at all had he not
been facing a clearance reinvestigation.  She found that there is a significant likelihood that
Applicant’s problems will continue.
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶¶ 19(c), (g).  
2
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s conclusion that his circumstances raised security concerns. 
He argues that he has never been financially overextended or at risk of engaging in illegal acts to
generate funds.  However, the concern under Guideline F is not simply that an applicant might be
tempted to compromise classified information in order to pay his debts.  A Judge must also consider
the extent to which an applicant’s circumstances cast doubt upon his judgment and other
characteristics essential to protecting national security information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
01479 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 2, 2015).  This obligation is rooted in the language of the Directive, which
states that failure to meet financial obligations may indicate unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations, thereby raising questions about an applicant’s ability to protect classified information.
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 18.  We have previously noted that the filing of tax returns is a financial
as well as a legal obligation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02930 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015). 
Moreover, the Directive presumes a nexus between admitted or proven conduct under any of the
Guidelines and an applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04648 at 3
(App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2015).  Indeed, as the Judge acknowledged, the Directive explicitly identifies
failure to file tax returns as a condition that can disqualify an applicant for a clearance.  Under the
facts of this case, the Judge did not err in concluding that Applicant’s filing delinquencies raised
concerns under Guideline F.
Applicant argues that the Judge’s consideration of the non-alleged filing delinquencies for
2012 and 2013 served “to obfuscate this issue concerning any national security concerns.”  Appeal
Brief at 5.  However, conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered for purposes other than to
raise additional security concerns.  These purposes include evaluating an applicant’s case for
mitigation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3, note 1 (App. Bd. Sept. 12, 2014).  They also
include performing a whole-person analysis.  See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct.
26, 2006).  Evidence that Applicant failed to file returns for 2012 and 2013 is relevant in evaluating
whether he has mitigated concerns arising from the earlier delinquencies contained in the SOR.  His
persistent engagement in conduct even after he had been made aware of its security significance is
a matter that bears upon the question of whether he had met his burden of persuasion.  The Judge
did not err in her treatment of this non-alleged conduct.
Applicant contends that he has met all of the mitigating conditions set forth in the Directive.
Among other things, he cites to evidence that all of his tax returns have been filed, that his reason
for having been dilatory was negligence rather than intentional failures, and that he is receiving
counseling.  The Judge made detailed findings about the evidence that Applicant cites in his brief. 
Applicant’s arguments are not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record or that she mis-weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06093
at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2015).   Given evidence that Applicant failed to file his returns for several
years due to nothing more than his admitted “procrastination” (Item 6, Clearance Interview
Summary, at p. 6), the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had not satisfied the Guideline F mitigating
conditions is supportable.  
3
Applicant challenges the Judge’s whole-person analysis.  Among other things, he cites to
Directive ¶ 6.4, which permits officials to suspend an applicant’s clearance pending final
adjudication whenever “there is a reasonable basis for concluding that [the] applicant’s continued
access to classified information poses an imminent threat to the national interest[.]” He argues that
his circumstances do not rise to that level.  However, DOHA proceedings to adjudicate an
applicant’s final eligibility for a clearance are conducted under the Guidelines and procedures set
forth in Enclosures 2 and 3 of the Directive.  ¶ 6.4 is limited in scope and as a general matter the
Government does not have to prove a “clear and present danger” to national security before it can
deny an applicant a clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05238 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 13, 2016).  
Applicant challenges the Judge’s use of the word “inexplicable” in describing his conduct. 
However, under the facts of this case, the Judge did not err in concluding that Applicant’s claims
of neglect were insufficient to explain or excuse a dereliction that extended over a course of several
years.  Neglect is a failure to exercise reasonable care, and an applicant who neglects to file his tax
returns might fail to take appropriate care in regard to other legal obligations, such as those
governing the protection of classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App.
Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). We find no reason to conclude that the Judge contravened the requirements of
Directive ¶ 6.3 in her whole-person analysis, insofar as she considered Applicant’s security-
significant conduct in light of the totality of the record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02806
at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2015).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
4
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
