1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-10810
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
April 27, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On July 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F  for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On July 31, 2015, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1.)
On August 19, 2015, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. On
September 24, 2015, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was
provided to Applicant. In the FORM, Department Counsel offered six documentary
exhibits. (Items 1-6.) Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on October 24,
2015. Applicant submitted a two page letter, identified and entered into evidence without
objection as Item A. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on November
2
10, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 50 years old. He is married and has three adult children. Applicant
served in the United States Air Force from 1987 to 2008. He has been employed by his
present employer, a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in
connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 10 allegations (1.a. through 1.j.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically a bankruptcy and overdue debts totaling approximately $550,000, under
Adjudicative Guideline F. The allegations will be discussed below in the same order as
they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant filed a Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in July
2009; the bankruptcy was dismissed in 2010. Applicant admitted this SOR allegation In
his RSOR. Applicant wrote that he and his wife tried to protect their home, but the
bankruptcy was mishandled. (Item 1.)
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a mortgage account that went to
foreclosure with a deficiency amount of $528,000. Applicant denied this SOR allegation
in his RSOR. He wrote that the property was sold with a $0 balance. (Item 1.) In his
Post-FORM submission, Applicant wrote that this house was sold and there is a $0
balance. (Item A.) In reviewing both credit reports submitted by the Government, it
appears that there is not an outstanding debt on this account. (Items 4 and 5.)
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $8,535. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in his RSOR. He wrote that the account
was closed. (Item 1.) In Item A he wrote the account was closed and removed from the
credit report. Item 4 establishes that this debt has not been resolved or reduced. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $3,027. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in his RSOR. He wrote that the account
was closed. (Item 1.) In Item A he wrote the account was closed and removed from the
credit report. Item 4 establishes that this debt has not been resolved or reduced. 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $6,672. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in his RSOR. He wrote that the account
was closed. (Item 1.) In Item A he wrote the account was closed and removed from the
3
credit report. Item 4 establishes that this debt has not been resolved or reduced, but the
correct amount owed by Applicant is $2,672.  
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $1,263. Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in his RSOR. He wrote that the
account was closed, and he was in the process of contacting the creditor. (Item 1.) In
Item A he wrote that he had contacted the creditor and planned to pay the balance in
November 2015. No evidence has been introduced to show that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a charged-off account in the
amount of $1,050. Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in his RSOR. He wrote that
the account was closed, and he was in the process of contacting the creditor. (Item 1.)
In Item A he wrote that this account was closed and written off during his bankruptcy
proceedings in 2009. Item 4 establishes that this debt has not been resolved or
reduced. 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a charged-off account in the
amount of $15. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in his RSOR. He wrote that this
debt for a car loan was paid in full, not charged off. He planned to contact the creditor to
have this debt corrected from his credit report. (Item 1.) In Item A he wrote that this loan
had been paid in full, and he had contacted the creditor and they will be correcting the
report showing $15 is still owed. While Item 4 establishes that this debt has not been
resolved or reduced, Applicant appears to have a good-faith dispute as to this debt. 
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $1,931. Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in his RSOR. He wrote that the
account was sold to another creditor, and Applicant was attempting to determine whom
to pay. (Item 1.) In Item A he wrote the account was closed and removed from the credit
report. Item 5 establishes that this debt has not been resolved or reduced. 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $9. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in his RSOR. He wrote that he had no
record of this debt. (Item 1.) In Item A he wrote that he had no record of doing business
with this creditor and was planning to dispute the bill with the Experian credit reporting
company. Item 5 establishes that this debt has not been resolved or reduced, but
Applicant appears to have a good-faith dispute as to this debt.  
Additionally, Applicant wrote in his RSOR that he and his wife were negatively
affected by the 2009 mortgage crisis, and they attempted to save their home by filing for
bankruptcy. However, he alleged that his bankruptcy attorney failed to properly
represent them during the bankruptcy proceedings by not making any of the required
appearances, so he was forced to request that the bankruptcy be dismissed. He
claimed that “after over a year of this [the bankruptcy litigation] most of the debts were
relieved. . . . Unfortunately we did not know who was paid and who even owned some
of the debt as they were sold off.” As noted above, Applicant contended that he has
been attempting to contact the creditors and resolve some of his delinquent debts.
4
Again, no independent evidence was introduced to establish that any of these debts
were resolved or reduced. 
The Government has established Applicant’s SOR debts 1.c., d., e., f., g., and i.,
through Applicant’s RSOR, and the credit reports. (Items 4 and 5.) No evidence was
introduced to establish that since the SOR was issued Applicant has contacted any of
the creditors, made any payment plans, or resolved or reduced any of these overdue
debts. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision. 
A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
5
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt, much of it several years old,
which has not been satisfied. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As
reviewed above, Applicant explained his financial difficulties occurred, in part, because
of the poor economy which ultimately contributed to Applicant’s house being foreclosed.
However, despite Applicant initially attempting to resolve his delinquent debts through
bankruptcy, no evidence was introduced to establish that Applicant has been
responsible in taking any steps to resolve, or even reduce, any of the other delinquent
SOR debts, including SOR 1.c., d., e., f., g., and i. Therefore, I find that this mitigating
condition is not a factor for consideration in this case.
Since there is no evidence that Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors, I do not find that AG ¶  20(d) is applicable. Finally, I do not find any
other mitigating condition applies to this case. Therefore, I find Guideline F against
Applicant.
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the disqualifying conditions apply and no mitigating conditions are
applicable, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the
whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.: For  Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
