 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 12-10756 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 30, 2012, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On May 30, 2013, he submitted another e-QIP.2 On May 21, 
2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information 
(December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations 
                                                          
1
 Item 4 (e-QIP, dated April 30, 2012). 
 
2
 Item 7 (e-QIP, dated May 30, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why the 
DOD CAF was unable to make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 4, 2015. In a sworn statement, dated June 
8, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.3 A complete copy of the Government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on August 18, 2015, and he 
was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the 
FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the Guidelines 
applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on August 28, 2015. A response 
was due by September 27, 2015. On September 9, 2015, Applicant submitted his 
response with attachments. Department Counsel had no objections to the documents 
submitted, and I marked them as Applicant Items (AI) A through F. The case was 
assigned to me on October 16, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, acknowledged, and addressed the 
factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. through 
1.d.). Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a general maintenance worker with his current employer since January 
2012.4 He also held a number of different positions, including that of over the road truck 
driver, heavy equipment operator, and warehouse worker, with other employers over 
the years. A June 1976 high school graduate, Applicant earned a commercial driver’s 
certificate and license from a technical college, but did not earn a degree.5 He enlisted 
in the Army National Guard in April 1976 and served honorably until he was discharged 
in April 1997.6 Applicant has never held a security clearance.7 Applicant was married in 
August 1977.8 He has two children, born in 1978 and 1979.9 
                                                          
3
 Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated June 8, 2015). 
 
4
 Item 7, supra note 2, at 10-11. 
 
5
 Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview, dated May 21, 2012), at 1; Item 7, supra note 2, at 9-10. 
 
6
 Item 7, supra note 2, at 17-18. It is unclear if Applicant was merely discharged or if he retired. 
 
7
 Item 7, supra note 2, at 37-38. 
 
8
 Item 7, supra note 2, at 20-21. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations10 
 
Applicant’s employment/unemployment record is similar to a swinging door, for 
Applicant has routinely gone from one status to the other status from 2009 through 
January 2012.11 From April 1990 until February 2009, Applicant was employed by a tire 
manufacturer. He lined up a new job with a company in another state, and he relocated 
his family to that other state. When he arrived, he was confronted with the realization 
that his new would-be employer had implemented a hiring freeze before he arrived, and 
his job was no longer available. Applicant’s wife was also unemployed due to the move. 
She found a part-time job with a large box store, and Applicant worked on his 
commercial driver’s certificate. While searching for jobs, they used Applicant’s savings 
and 401(k) and retirement money to pay their routine bills. Their 401(k) funds enabled 
them to address the routine bills, but the withdrawal of that money also resulted in 
federal income tax and tax penalties for early withdrawal. Applicant found a temporary 
full-time job in September 2009, and his wife found a full-time job in December 2009. 
Applicant’s temporary employment contract expired in December 2009. He was again 
unemployed from December 2009 until March 2010. He did not qualify for 
unemployment compensation during that period. He obtained another job in March 2010 
and retained it until June 2011. His next job only lasted from June 2011 until October 
2011. He was unemployed from October 2011 until January 2012, when he obtained his 
current job. His wife was laid off and remained unemployed from April 2011 until 
January 2014. 
 
Because money was so tight over the entire period, they struggled to pay their 
bills. Their family helped when they could, and Applicant’s wife’s unemployment 
compensation also offered some relief. But those sources ceased, and the financial 
struggles remained. As a result, some accounts became delinquent. While he timely 
filed his state and federal income tax returns, some income taxes went unpaid. State 
and federal income tax liens were filed. A voluntary repossession occurred, and several 
accounts were placed for collection, charged off, and transferred or sold to other 
commercial entities. 
 
In April 2013, Applicant and his wife explored the engagement of a money 
management organization to obtain a variety of financial services. A budget was created 
and assessed; the causes of his financial hardship were identified; financial goals, such 
as reducing debt, getting control of a budget, paying off debt, and building a savings 
account, were discussed; and a financial action plan was established. A debt repayment 
plan forecast was prepared, listing nearly all delinquent accounts. The proposed 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
9
 Item 7, supra note 4, at 24-25. 
 
10
 General source information pertaining to the financial issues and accounts discussed below can be found 
in the following exhibits: Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated May 4, 2012); 
Item 8 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated June 15, 2013); Item 10 (Equifax Credit 
Report, dated March 23, 2015); Item 6, supra note 5; Item 9 (Personal Subject Interview, dated July 2, 2013). More 
recent information can be found in the exhibits furnished and individually identified.  
  
11
 It should be noted that dates used to describe periods of employment and unemployment pertaining to 
both Applicant and his wife are approximations, because Applicant’s explanations in various exhibits (such as his two 
e-QIPs, his two Personal Subject Interviews, and his Answer to the SOR) are somewhat inconsistent. 
 
4 
                                      
 
monthly payment of $1,335 ($1,434, including setup fee and guidebooks, for the first 
month) was simply too much for Applicant’s budget, and he had to decline the service.12 
 
Applicant contacted his creditors and many of them agreed to work with 
Applicant in an effort to establish repayment plans or other methods of resolving his 
debts. Accounts were closed and repayment agreements successfully made and paid 
off or settled. Two creditors were difficult to deal with for they wanted payments that 
were too high for Applicant to make. 
 
The SOR identified four purportedly continuing delinquent accounts, totaling 
approximately $51,295, which had been placed for collection. Those debts and their 
respective current status, according to the above-cited credit reports, Applicant’s e-
QIPs, comments to investigators from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), 
and his Answer to the SOR, are described as follows: 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): This is a credit union credit card with a high credit of $2,500 that 
was sold to the financial services company identified in the SOR in 2006 at a time when 
the account was current. The credit limit was increased to $8,500 and the high credit 
was increased first to $8,590 and then to $8,835. In 2013, the account became 60-days 
past due in the amount of $435. In April 2013, Applicant contacted the creditor and 
sought a repayment plan but the proposed monthly payment was simply too much for 
Applicant at that time. He contacted the creditor again in June 2013 and sought 
approval to be enrolled in their hardship program, but his request was denied. He was, 
however, enrolled in their special payment relief program for 12 months with monthly 
payments of $137. Applicant made the monthly payments, and when the program 
ended in June 2014, he again attempted to enroll in the hardship program. He was 
accepted, but the required monthly payments of $187 were simply too much, and he 
countered with an offer of between $30 and $75 per month. Applicant made such 
payments “when [he] could” until April 2015 when his account was blocked. The 
account had been transferred or sold to another company. Applicant called the new 
company and they agreed to a monthly repayment schedule for 24 months, starting in 
June 2015, with Applicant making monthly payments of $85.20 by automatic electronic 
transfer. At the end of the plan in June 2017, there will be a reevaluation. Monthly 
transfers have been made.13 The account is in the process of being resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): This is a bank credit card for an account with a home repair store 
with a credit limit of $3,000 and a high credit of $3,134 that became 30 days past due in 
the amount of $156 in 2013. By early 2015 the past-due balance had increased to $655. 
In April 2013, Applicant contacted the creditor and sought to enroll in their hardship 
program. He was successful in gaining entry into a temporary repayment program under 
which he was to make monthly payments of $36 for 12 months. Applicant made the 
                                                          
12
 AI F (Financial Plan, dated April 12, 2013); Item 3, supra note 3, at 2. 
 
13
 Item 3 (Payment Agreement, dated June 11, 2015); Item 3, supra note 3, at 1-2; Item 3 (Collection Letter 
and Payment Coupon, dated April 9, 2015); AI E (Collection Letters, Payment Coupons, and Checks, various dates). 
Although Applicant reported that he made payments for 12 months under the special payment relief program, he 
failed to furnish any documentation related to the program or supporting his contentions that he had made the 
payments under the program. 
 
5 
                                      
 
monthly payments, and when the program ended in June 2014, he again attempted to 
enroll in the hardship program or some other repayment program. In February 2015 – 
three months before the SOR was issued – an agreement was reached with Applicant 
making monthly payments of $66 by automatic electronic transfer. Monthly transfers 
have been made.14 The account is in the process of being resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): This is a state income tax lien in the amount of $11,490 filed in 
August 2010 because of Applicant’s failure to pay his income tax for an unspecified 
period believed to be tax year 2009. Applicant enrolled in an installment agreement with 
the state department of revenue under which he agreed to make monthly payments of 
$325 until the balance was paid off. Applicant made the monthly payments during the 
course of the agreement, and on December 12, 2013 – approximately 18 months before 
the SOR was issued – the balance was paid off to the satisfaction of the state. Despite 
the resolution of the debt, Applicant’s March 2015 credit report continues to erroneously 
reflect that the lien remains unpaid and not released or settled.15 Nevertheless, despite 
the possibility that the lien may not have been released, or possible incorrect reporting, 
the account has been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): This is a federal income tax lien in the amount of $28,451 filed by 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in August 2011 because of Applicant’s failure to pay 
his income taxes, penalties, and interest for tax years 2009 ($10,902.39) and 2010 
($17,549.42). Applicant approached the IRS in April 2010 in an effort to obtain a direct 
debit installment agreement. He also made a payment of $2,800. Under that agreement, 
Applicant initially agreed to make monthly payments of $600 by automatic electronic 
transfer until the balance was paid off. In June 2011, the installment agreement had to 
be modified to $250 per month because of the family layoffs. The monthly $600 
payments were routinely made from July 2010 through May 2011. The monthly $250 
payments were routinely made from August 2011 through April 2013. In June 2013, the 
payments were reduced again to $100 per month with an understanding that they would 
increase to $325 in May 2014. The monthly payments were routinely made during that 
entire period. Applicant paid $6,600 to the IRS between July 2010 and July 2011; 
$2,750 between July 2011 and July 2012; $2,600 between July 2012 and July 2013; 
$1,650 between July 2013 and July 2014; and $3,900 between July 2014 and July 
2015. The monthly payments are continuing.16 While the tax liens are still in place, it is 
clear that, since April 2010 – over five years before the SOR was issued – Applicant has 
been in the process of resolving the account. 
 
                                                          
14
 Item 3 (Payment Agreement, dated February 6, 2015); Item 3, supra note 3, at 3); AI C (Checks, various 
dates). Although Applicant reported that he made payments for 12 months under the temporary repayment program, 
he failed to furnish any documentation related to that program or supporting his contentions that he had made the 
payments under the program. 
 
15
 Item 3 (Agreement Letter, dated December 13, 2013); Item 3, supra note 3, at 3; Item 6, supra note 5, at 
3-4; Item 7, supra note 2, at 40-41; Item 10, supra note 10, at 4. 
 
16
 Item 3, supra note 3, at 3-4; Item 3 (IRS Letters and Annual Installment Agreement Statements, various 
dates); Item 3 (Notice of Federal Tax Lien, dated August 22, 2011); AI D (Transaction Details, various dates). 
 
6 
                                      
 
In April 2013, Applicant’s budget listed a net monthly income (for only himself, for 
his wife was still unemployed) as $2,026; monthly expenses of $3,200.69; and a 
monthly deficit of minus $1,959.69.17 Applicant did not submit a Personal Financial 
Statement reflecting his current net monthly income, his estimated monthly expenses, 
his total debt payments (aside from the monthly payments described above), or any 
monthly remainder available for discretionary spending or savings. While he is in the 
process of resolving his three remaining accounts, because of his wife’s employment, it 
now appears that Applicant’s financial problems are under control and that his financial 
status has improved significantly. 
 
Work Performance and Character References 
 
            Applicant’s division manager believes that Applicant is an outstanding 
employee, and he characterized him as trustworthy, honest, and dependable. Applicant 
performs his job very well, and he goes out of his way to assist others.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”18 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”19   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
                                                          
17
 AI F, supra note 12, at 2-3. 
 
18
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
19
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”20 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.21  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”22 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”23 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
                                                          
20
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
21
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
22
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
23
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s significant financial problems arose in 2010 when he had 
insufficient money to maintain all of his monthly payments and was unable to pay his 
federal and state income taxes. He withdrew funds from his 401(k) and incurred 
additional income tax, penalties, and interest for doing so. Various accounts became 
delinquent. Some of those accounts, both SOR and non-SOR, were placed for 
collection, charged off, and transferred or sold to other commercial entities. A voluntary 
repossession occurred. State and federal income tax liens were filed. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) apply. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”24  
 
                                                          
24
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. The nature, 
frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties, arising primarily 
because of his and his wife’s repeated periods of unemployment since about 2010, 
facilitate the conclusions that those financial issues were rather frequent, but they 
occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s financial 
problems were not caused by his frivolous or irresponsible spending, and he did not 
spend beyond his means. Instead, those financial problems were largely beyond his 
control. As noted above, Applicant’s employment/unemployment record is similar to a 
swinging door, for he routinely went from one status to the other status from 2009 
through January 2012. For nearly two decades before that, Applicant had been 
employed by one employer. He lined up a new job with a company in another state, and 
he relocated his family to that other state. When he arrived, he was confronted with the 
realization that his new would-be employer had implemented a hiring freeze before he 
arrived, and his job was no longer available. Applicant’s wife was also unemployed due 
to the move. During the ensuing years, both Applicant and his wife had the misfortune 
to be unemployed on a periodic basis. During periods of unemployment and 
underemployment they used Applicant’s savings and 401(k) and retirement money to 
pay their routine bills. Unfortunately, the withdrawal of his 401(k) funds resulted in 
federal income tax and tax penalties for early withdrawal. In January 2012, Applicant 
obtained his current job. His wife finally found a job in January 2014. 
 
Applicant never shied away from his fiscal responsibilities. He did not ignore his 
creditors. Instead, he initiated a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors and set 
upon a course to resolve his debts. In April 2013, Applicant and his wife explored the 
engagement of a money management organization to obtain a variety of financial 
services. A budget was created and assessed; the causes of his financial hardship were 
identified; financial goals, such as reducing debt, getting control of a budget, paying off 
debt, and building a savings account, were discussed; and a financial action plan was 
established. A debt repayment plan forecast was prepared, listing nearly all delinquent 
accounts. The proposed monthly payment of $1,335 ($1,434, including setup fee and 
guidebooks, for the first month) was simply too much for Applicant’s budget, and he had 
to decline the service. Instead, with the information he had learned, Applicant contacted 
his creditors and many of them agreed to work with Applicant in an effort to establish 
repayment plans or other methods of resolving his debts. A variety of non-SOR and 
SOR-related accounts were closed and repayment agreements successfully made and 
paid off or settled well before the SOR was issued.  
 
The SOR listed four accounts that were purportedly delinquent and unpaid as of 
May 2015. However, in 2010, Applicant entered into repayment plans with the state and 
IRS, and in 2013, he did so with the two credit card creditors. Applicant’s state income 
tax balance of $11,490 was paid off in December 2013 – approximately 18 months 
before the SOR was issued. His three remaining repayment plans call for automatic 
electronic transfers, and they have been continuously been made since those plans 
were made or modified. Applicant appears to have acted prudently and responsibly in 
bringing his financial problems under control, and his financial status has improved 
 
10 
                                      
 
significantly. Applicant’s actions, under the circumstances confronting him, no longer 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.25 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.26   
     
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant failed 
to make his monthly payments on a variety of accounts, and they became delinquent. 
Because Applicant failed to timely pay his state and federal income taxes, in August 
2010, the state department of revenue filed an income tax lien in the amount of 
$11,490, and in August 2011, the IRS filed an income tax lien, in the amount of 
$28,451, against Applicant. 
 
The mitigating evidence is more substantial and compelling. Applicant served 
honorably with the Army National Guard. There is no evidence of misuse of information 
technology systems, mishandling protected information, substance abuse, or criminal 
conduct. Applicant’s financial problems were not caused by his frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, and he did not spend beyond his means. Rather, they were largely beyond 
his control. Attempting to better his family life and financial situation, Applicant lined up 
a new job with a company in another state, and he relocated his family. Upon his arrival, 
the new company advised him that his new job was no longer available because a 
hiring freeze had been implemented. Periodic unemployment and underemployment for 
both Applicant and his wife ensued. He resolved a number of accounts and entered into 
                                                          
25
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
26
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966). See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. June 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
repayment plans well before the SOR was issued. In 2010, Applicant entered into 
repayment plans with the state and IRS, and in 2013, he did so with the two credit card 
creditors. The state tax lien has been resolved and the remaining IRS tax lien and the 
two credit card accounts are in the process of being resolved under repayment plans 
with automatic electronic transfers of funds. There are clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved and are under control.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 27 
 
Applicant’s credit reports include numerous positive entries indicating most debts 
are paid as agreed. Applicant has demonstrated a “meaningful track record” of debt 
reduction and elimination efforts, and he started to do so several years before the SOR 
was issued. Based on the evidence presented, I conclude that he will continue to do so. 
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
  
                                                          
27
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
