 Exhibit 1 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------ ) ISCR Case No. 12-11912
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Marvin Liss, Esq. 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for
access to classified information. He presented sufficient evidence to explain and
mitigate the concern stemming from his history of financial problems. Accordingly, this
case is decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on April 23, 2012.  Thereafter, on May 19, 2015,  after1
reviewing the application and information gathered during a background investigation,
the Department of Defense (DOD)  sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR),2
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
2
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant him eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a3
complaint. It detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline known as
Guideline F for financial considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge.
In August 2015, Department Counsel amended the SOR by adding ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e,
and 1.f. Applicant timely answered the amended SOR.
The SOR, as amended, contains the following allegations: (1) a charged-off loan
account for $233,281; (2) a charged-off credit card account for $15,529; (3) a pending
Chapter 7 bankruptcy case filed in April 2014; (4) a pending Chapter 13 bankruptcy
case filed in April 2015; (5) a failure to file individual federal income tax returns for tax
years 2012 and 2013 and  back taxes of about $88,718 for those years as well as 2014;
and (6) a failure to file individual state income tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2013
and back taxes of about $22,864 for those tax years.   
The case was assigned to me on September 18, 2015. The hearing was held as
scheduled on November 12, 2015. Department Counsel offered Exhibits 1–7, and they
were admitted. Applicant offered Exhibits A–K, and they were admitted. The hearing
transcript (Tr.) was received on November 23, 2015.  
The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation.
Applicant made timely submissions on November 13 and 17. Those matters are
admitted as Exhibits L, M, N, and O. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 56-year-old executive-level employee who is seeking to retain a
security clearance that he has held for many years. He has a history of financial
problems, which is related to a dispute over a business transaction from the time when
he was a principal and chief technical officer of a company during 2001–2007. The
company was acquired in 2007, and he assumed the role of an employee working as an
engineer during 2007–2011. He began working for his current employer in about
September 2011, initially as an independent contractor and then as an employee from
2014 to present.   
In 2006, Applicant participated in a business transaction to purchase a
commercial building outside of a military installation. The purchase was made by a joint
 Exhibit A. 4
 Exhibit K. 5
 Exhibit B. 6
3
venture (JV) consisting of Applicant’s then company (Company A), an engineering firm
(Company B), and an individual investor. To finance the transaction, each of the three
parties invested $140,000. The balance was covered by a loan obtained by Applicant
and the principal of Company B, who acted as guarantors for the loan. The JV, itself a
limited liability company, was intended to be the business entity that had ownership of
the property and responsibility for the loan. 
Consistent with the business plan, in August 2006, Applicant and the principal of
Company B transferred any interest they had in the property to the JV via a quit-claim
deed, subject to a mortgage recorded in April 2006 in county property records.4
Applicant understood from communicating with Company A’s legal counsel that the
transfer of ownership to the JV included the assumption of the loan by the JV. It was
never intended that Applicant would have ongoing financial responsibility for the loan or
the building. And Applicant never made a payment on the loan; never received an
invoice for payment; never received account statements on the loan; never received tax
records on the loan; and so on.   
About one year later in August 2007, Company B bought the assets of Company
A. The JV is mentioned in the official documentation (Form 8-K) that Company B filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).  Subsequently, Company B5
assumed repayment of the loan. 
At some point in late 2010, Applicant learned for the first time that he had not
been released from the loan. He described himself as completely blindsided by that
revelation. At the same time, Company B had stopped making the loan payments.
Applicant worked with the lender bank and Company B, which resulted in Company B
reinstating payments on the loan. Applicant believed the matter was resolved. 
Also in 2010, it was disclosed that Company C, a large aerospace company, was
to purchase Company B. Then in June 2011, apparently before the transaction was
completed, attorneys for Company B informed the lender bank that Company B would
discontinue making payments on the loan in July 2011.  Company B took the position6
that although they had acquired certain assets, including interests in the JV, it did not
assume any obligation on the loan, explaining that it had been making payments on the
loan as a voluntary accommodation to the JV. As a result, the loan went into default for
nonpayment. About the same time in September 2011, Applicant began working for his
current employer as a consultant. 
The lender bank brought legal action against Applicant in 2012 to foreclose on
the property. In December 2012, Applicant appeared, without counsel, in the state court
 Exhibits 6,7, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, L, and N. 7
 Exhibit D. 8
 Exhibit C. 9
 Exhibits I, J, M, and O.10
 Exhibit E. 11
4
and contested the case on the following grounds: (1) he had no ownership interest in
the property having signed the quit-claim deed in 2006, and thus he was prohibited from
listing the building for sale, repairing the building, or entering the building; (2) he was to
be taken off of or released from the loan, and that omission was a gross oversight; (3)
he enjoyed no financial gain or benefit from the property; and (4) those that had
historically made payments on the loan were responsible for the loan. He did not
dispute that he had signed the loan documentation, and he did not contend there was
any fraud in the inducement. He did not prevail, and the state court granted a judgment
against him in the amount of nearly $1.8 million in January 2013. 
After extensive review of the situation and consultation with a bankruptcy
attorney, Applicant concluded his only course of action was to seek relief in bankruptcy
court, which began in 2014 and is ongoing.  For purposes of this security clearance7
case, it is unnecessary to go into great detail on the bankruptcy proceedings or expound
on the nuances and complexities of bankruptcy law. Nevertheless, the process started
with a non-consumer Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in April 2014, because most of the
debt was business debt (or non-consumer debt), consisting of the nearly $1.8 million
business loan. In addition, the unsecured credit card account in SOR ¶ 1.b was pulled
into the Chapter 7 case due to the requirements of bankruptcy law. The Chapter 7 case
concluded with a discharge in February 2015.  8
The Chapter 7 case included, on Schedule E, $66,232 in state and federal back
taxes for tax years 2012 and 2013.  The back taxes came into existence during the two9
years when Applicant was working as a consultant as opposed to an employee and was
not having income taxes withheld from his pay. By the time the matter became apparent
to Applicant, which was about October 2013, because he had received an extension to
file 2012 tax returns, he was dealing with the fallout from the judgment. So, it made
sense to deal with the tax issues in the soon-to-be-filed bankruptcy case. Applicant has
since filed the necessary tax returns. And he made a lump-sum payment of $72,000 to
fully settle and resolve the back taxes as part of the Chapter 7 case during
September–November 2015.10
It was necessary to return to bankruptcy court in April 2015, albeit under Chapter
13, due to the complexities and circumstances of Applicant’s case.  The lender bank11
filed its claim in July 2015 for $730,233 as an unsecured claim stemming from a
deficiency on a commercial loan. As I understand it, the ceiling for the amount owed to
 Tr. 133–135. 12
 Exhibit F. 13
 Tr. 85–87. 14
 Exhibit L. 15
 Tr. 87–89. 16
 Exhibits 1 and 2. 17
 Tr. 103. 18
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to19
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.20
5
the lender bank is limited to the assets in the Chapter 7 estate.  The Chapter 1312
payment plan calls for Applicant to pay the sum of about $53,000 over a period of 48
months,  and he is making the required monthly payments.  He has sufficient income13 14
and cash flow to adhere to the payment plan.  In addition, Applicant has a second15
home that may be subject to a claim by the Chapter 7 trustee and if sold there may be
net proceeds paid into the plan. The intention is to sell the second home, which has a
market value of about $234,000, to repay the lender bank.   16
Applicant has been candid and up-front about these matters throughout the
security clearance process. He disclosed his adverse financial situation in his 2012
security clearance application, and he provided an extensive response to written
interrogatories in 2014.  He readily acknowledged his unusual financial situation and17
understands why concerns were raised, but he states that he is the same person who
has held a security clearance for many years without problems. He described his
situation as “one of those business situations that I didn’t see coming. I sort of
characterized it as I stepped in a pile of poo”; and “this isn’t a normal financial [situation]
- - it is a little nuts.”  Overall, I found Applicant’s hearing testimony to be credible and18
worthy of belief. 
 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As19
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt20
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 21
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 22
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).23
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.24
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.25
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.26
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 27
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).28
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.29
6
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An21
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  22
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting23
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An24
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate25
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme26
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.27
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.28
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it29
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 30
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant31
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  32
7
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant30
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 31
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  32
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly compromise
classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It encompasses
concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important qualities. A
person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or
negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.  
In analyzing the facts and circumstances of Applicant’s case, I have considered
the following disqualifying conditions (AG ¶ 19) and mitigating conditions (AG ¶ 20):
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
AG ¶ 19(g) failure to file annual federal, state, or local income tax returns
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the [person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances;
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).33
8
AG ¶ 20(c) . . .  there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control; and
AG ¶ 20(d) the [person] initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
Given the substantial-evidence standard, there is sufficient evidence to raise a
concern under Guideline F as well as the disqualifying conditions mentioned above.
With that said, a business transaction that goes awry does not necessarily rise to the
level of revoking an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. That is
especially so in a case like this one where the totality of facts and circumstances show
that Applicant was acting in good faith and reliance on others when he was involved in
the 2006 business transaction. It is simply unrealistic to think that Applicant transferred
ownership interests in the commercial property and knowingly accepted ongoing
personal liability for the business loan. The worst thing I can say about Applicant is that
he should have exercised more due diligence and caution before agreeing to the 2006
business transaction. For example, obtaining legal advice from a private attorney,
independent from Company A, with a duty to act solely in Applicant’s best interests may
well have been the more prudent course of action. 
Applicant incurred substantial indebtedness due to an unexpected dispute over a
business transaction that took place about ten years ago. There is no evidence that he
incurred delinquent debt due to frivolous or irresponsible spending, consistent spending
beyond his means, or other issues of security concern. A similar problem is unlikely to
recur because he is no longer in an ownership position as principal of a company. He is
resolving the indebtedness through bankruptcy court proceedings, which includes a 48-
month payment plan and the probable sale of a second home. It will take time to come
to a final resolution, but given the complexities of Applicant’s bankruptcy case, the time
period is not unreasonable. In addition, he made a lump-sum payment of $72,000 to
settle the state and federal back taxes. Viewing the evidence as a whole, there are clear
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved and under control. 
 
The concerns over Applicant’s problematic financial history do not create doubt
about his current reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole
and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice
versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I33
conclude that he met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified
information. 
9
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.    
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
