 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06124 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: [Applicant’s sister], Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 6, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 2, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 4, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 13, 2015, scheduling the hearing for December 9, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
and B, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant 
to submit additional information. She submitted documents that were marked AE C and 
D and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 16, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 2003. She seeks to retain a security clearance, which she 
has held since about 2004. She attended college for a period, but she has not earned a 
degree. She married and divorced three times. She has three adult children.1 
 
Applicant bought a house in 2007 that was financed through a mortgage loan of 
about $127,000. She had a cohabitant who was assisting with her mortgage loan 
payments, but he moved out a few months after the house was purchased. Applicant’s 
sister handled her finances. Applicant’s overtime hours at work were eliminated. 
Through a combination of lack of overtime hours, loss of her cohabitant’s financial 
assistance, medical problems, and miscommunication with her sister, the full amount of 
the mortgage loan payments were not made and other debts also became delinquent. 
The house lost value in the real estate collapse and could not be sold. The house was 
eventually lost to foreclosure, and a vehicle was repossessed.2 
 
The SOR alleges the past-due mortgage loan, five medical debts totaling about 
$6,000, and five miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling about $13,500. Applicant 
admitted owing all the debts at one time, but she stated that the $40 medical debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e had been paid and the other debts were being resolved through a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy case. The debts are all listed on a credit report from April 2014. 
The credit report also listed that the mortgage loan was “closed foreclosure redeemed,” 
and “credit grantor reclaimed collateral to settle defaulted mortgage.”3 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in August 2014. There were no 
claims under Schedules D and E, Creditors Holding Secured Claims and Creditors 
Holding Unsecured Priority Claims. Under Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured 
Nonpriority Claims, the petition listed debts totaling $146,702. That amount included 
$126,067 for the mortgage loan on Applicant’s foreclosed home, which did not account 
for the value of the house and what the mortgage holder would receive in the sale of the 
house.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 39-42; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 20-21, 30-39, 43, 49-56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 2-5; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
4 Tr. at 21; GE 4; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
 In September 2014, Applicant started paying under a plan approved by the 
trustee. The bankruptcy plan was approved by the court in April 2015 and modified in 
August 2015. The modified plan calls for $577 monthly payments for months 1 through 
9; $0 for month 10; $200 for month 11; $0 for month 12; and $70 monthly payments for 
months 13 through 46. The first payment was due in September 2014. The trustee 
confirmed that as of September 2015, Applicant had paid $5,472 into the plan. Applicant 
submitted documentation establishing that she made the required monthly payments 
from September 2015 through December 2015.5  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of the bankruptcy. Her 
current finances are stable. She is able to make her bankruptcy payments, pay her 
other bills, and not accrue additional delinquent debts. She credibly testified that she will 
continue with the bankruptcy plan until completion.6 
 
 Applicant submitted documents and letters attesting to her excellent job 
performance, loyalty, work ethic, security consciousness, responsibility, dependability, 
adherence to rules, and trustworthiness.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 21-27; GE 4; AE A, C, D. 
 
6 Tr. at 27-28, 55-57; GE 2-5. 
 
7 AE B. 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling to pay. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to a combination of lack of overtime 
hours, loss of her cohabitant’s financial assistance, medical problems, and 
miscommunication with her sister. The real estate collapse also was a factor because 
she could not sell the house for what was owed on the mortgage loan. 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in August 2014, and she has been 
consistently paying into the plan since the first payment in September 2014. As of 
December 2015, she had paid more than $5,700 into the plan. Her current finances are 
stable. She credibly testified that she will continue with the bankruptcy plan until 
completion. Applicant has a plan to resolve her financial problems, and she has taken 
significant action to implement that plan. All of the above mitigating conditions are 
applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
6 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and her steady 
employment record. I am convinced she will maintain her bankruptcy plan payments 
and resolve all her financial issues.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
