 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-05527 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by his connections and 
contacts in Nigeria. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 On February 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his circumstances raised security concerns under the foreign influence guideline.1 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his eligibility for 
access to classified information (Answer). 
 
 On November 10, 2015, a hearing was held. Applicant and his current manager 
testified. Both sides offered exhibits for admission into the record. Department Counsel 
offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2 and Applicant offered Ex. A – H. Post-hearing, Applicant 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
submitted additional exhibits, Ex. I – K. All exhibits were admitted into the record without 
objection.2 The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received by the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) on November 20, 2015, and the record closed on the same day. 
 
Federal Republic of Nigeria (Nigeria) 
 
Administrative notice may be taken of uncontroverted, easily verifiable facts 
regarding a foreign country set forth in a U.S. Government report. Additionally, the 
official position of relevant federal agencies or the pertinent statements of key U.S. 
Government officials may be appropriate for administrative notice. Generally, the party 
requesting administrative notice of a particular matter must provide the source 
document, either the full document or the relevant portion of the source document, to 
allow an administrative judge to assess the reliability, accuracy, and relevancy of any 
matter requested for administrative notice.3  
 
The parties requested that I take administrative notice of certain matters 
regarding Nigeria. The following pertinent facts are accepted for administrative notice:4  
 
Nigeria, a federal republic, gained its independence from Britain in 1960. Since 
gaining its independence, Nigeria has faced many challenges, including terrorist activity, 
sectarian conflicts, entrenched corruption, and widespread mistrust of the government. 
Nigerian security forces, particularly the police, have been accused of serious human 
rights abuses.  
 
Boko Haram, a U.S.-designated Foreign Terrorist Organization, is a violent 
Islamist movement in northern Nigeria. It has grown increasingly active and deadly in its 
attacks against state and civilian targets in recent years. In 2014, the group’s abduction 
of almost 300 schoolgirls drew international attention. The United States has 
established a strategic dialogue with Nigeria to address issues of mutual concern. 
 
In general, the security situation in Nigeria remains fluid and unpredictable. The 
U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens to avoid travel to a number of Nigerian 
states because of the risk of kidnapping, robberies, and other armed attacks. 
 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s exhibits were remarked to remain consecutive with those previously offered and admitted. 
Scheduling correspondence with the parties and the case management order (CMO) are attached to the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I. Department Counsel’s legal brief, Applicant’s list of exhibits, the notice 
of hearing, and post-hearing correspondence are attached to the record as Hx. II – V, respectively. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 08-09480 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2010); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007). 
 
4 Department Counsel and Applicant submitted summaries of the facts regarding Nigeria contained in 
their cited source documents. The summaries, Ex. 2, Ex. H, and Ex. I, were admitted without objection as 
accurate summaries of the facts contained in the source documents. See Tr. at 10-12. See also, 
Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.19 (Federal Rules of Evidence (F.R.E.) shall serve as a guide in DOHA 
proceedings and technical rules of evidence may be relaxed to permit the development of a full and 
complete record); F.R.E. 201; F.R.E. 1006. 
 
3 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, evidence, and transcript, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant, 35, was born in Nigeria. He earned an undergraduate degree and 
worked for a time in Nigeria before immigrating to the United States in 2010 to join his 
then fiancée, now wife. He and his wife have three children who were born in the United 
States. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2013, the same year he graduated with 
a dual master’s degree from a U.S. university. They own a home in the United States, 
and are deeply involved in their community through their church. 
 
 Applicant is a cybersecurity engineer, working for a federal contractor. His wife, 
who is also originally from Nigeria and a naturalized U.S. citizen, also works as a cyber 
security specialist with the same federal contractor. Combined, they make 
approximately $145,000 annually. Applicant’s employer and numerous references have 
a high opinion of his character. He was recently promoted following a mid-year review. 
His manager testified that Applicant is one of his top performers and is highly regarded 
by coworkers and clients alike. (Tr. at 12-19; Ex. F)  
 
 Applicant’s parents and sibling are residents and citizens of Nigeria. Both his 
parents are retired, and are in their late fifties or early sixties. Applicant’s mother worked 
as a nurse, while his father worked as a forester for a Nigerian government agency. 
Applicant does not provide his parents or sibling financial support. (The record is silent 
as to whether either of Applicant’s parents receives a pension or retirement benefits 
from the Nigerian government, or how they support themselves in retirement.) His 
sibling works as an administrative assistant for the director of a foreign company located 
and doing business in Nigeria.  
 
Applicant speaks with his family in Nigeria on a somewhat regular basis, i.e., at 
least twice a month by phone. He also communicates with his sibling through the 
internet. Applicant’s parents and sibling are unaware what he does for a living or that he 
is applying for a U.S. security clearance. Applicant has not traveled back to Nigeria 
since immigrating to the United States. His parents have traveled to visit him in the 
United States, and he is sponsoring their applications to immigrate to the United States. 
Applicant disclosed his foreign connections and contacts on his security clearance 
application. This is his first application for a clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that due process proceedings 
are conducted “in a fair, timely and orderly manner.” Directive ¶ E3.1.10. Judges make 
certain that an applicant receives fair notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable 
opportunity to litigate those issues, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case 
No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.5 
 
 Applicant’s relationship with his family in Nigeria, as alleged in the SOR, raises 
the foreign influence security concern and requires further analysis. An individual is not 
automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance because they have 
connections and contacts in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing an individual’s 
vulnerability to foreign influence, an administrative judge must take into account the 
foreign government involved; the intelligence-gathering history of that government; the 
country’s human rights record; and other pertinent factors.6  
 
The relationship between the United States and Nigeria can generally be 
categorized as friendly. However, foreign influence security concerns are not limited to 
countries hostile to the United States. The Appeal Board has cautioned DOHA 
administrative judge’s against overreliance on “simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ 
nations and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B,” because such 
“ignores the historical reality that (i) relations between nations can shift, sometimes 
dramatically and unexpectedly; (ii) even friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters that they view as important to their 
vital interests or national security; and (iii) not all cases of espionage against the United 
States have involved nations that were hostile to the United States.” ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
Applicant’s relationship with his parents and sibling in Nigeria, coupled with the 
facts administratively noticed regarding Nigeria, notably, the threat of terrorism, serious 
human rights issues, and the government’s inability to stem corruption, raise a 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 09-07565 at 3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2012) (“As the Supreme Court stated in Egan, a 
clearance adjudication may be based not only upon conduct but also upon circumstances unrelated to 
conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant’s close relatives.”) (emphasis added) (internal 
citation omitted).  
 
6 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors an administrative judge must 
consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
6 
 
 
heightened security concern. The record evidence also raises the following foreign 
influence disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
 Guideline B also sets forth a number of conditions that may mitigate the foreign 
influence security concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions in assessing 
the security concerns in the present case, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
 An individual with family members and other connections in a foreign country 
faces a high, but not insurmountable hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by 
such foreign ties. An applicant is not required “to sever all ties with a foreign country 
before he or she can be granted access to classified information.”7 However, what 
factor or combination of factors will mitigate security concerns raised by an applicant 
with family members in a foreign country is not easily identifiable or quantifiable.8  
 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
7 
 
 
 In a relatively short period of time Applicant has developed some strong ties to 
the United States. He has not traveled back to Nigeria since arriving in the United 
States six years ago, and his communication with his family in Nigeria is commensurate 
with what one would expect from a busy, working parent of three young children. 
However, Applicant’s relationship with his family in Nigeria is not so minimal that, in light 
of the matters administratively noticed, such relationship could not pose a potential 
conflict of interest with his obligations to safeguard the nation’s vital secrets.  
 
 Furthermore, in weighing Applicant’s ties to the United States with his familial 
connections in Nigeria, it is insufficient to fully mitigate the potential security concern at 
issue. Applicant was born and spent the first 29 years of his life in Nigeria. After arriving 
in the United States, he earned a graduate degree, started a professional career and 
family, bought a home, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen, as well as having 
become a pillar of his community. Notwithstanding, it would run counter to common 
sense and a basic understanding of human nature, as well as the evidence in this case, 
to expect Applicant to resolve potential attempts to coerce or influence him through his 
family in Nigeria in favor of U.S. national security based on his recently developed ties 
to the United States.  
 
 Accordingly, I find that AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) have some applicability but are 
insufficient, at this time, to fully mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 An administrative judge’s predictive judgment in the security clearance context 
must be guided by a commonsense assessment of the evidence and consideration of 
the adjudicative guidelines, as well as the whole-person factors set forth in the 
Directive.9 A judge’s ultimate determination must also take into account the overarching 
standard in all security clearance cases, namely, that any doubt raised by an applicant’s 
circumstances must be resolved in favor of national security. AG ¶ 2(b). I hereby 
incorporate my comments under Guideline B and highlight some additional whole-
person factors.  
 
 Applicant is a trustworthy, reliable, dependent employee, who is dedicated to his 
wife and children and heavily involved in his community through his church. He 
immigrated to the United States six years ago and, while going to school to earn a dual 
master’s degree, worked full time. All of which raise favorable inferences regarding his 
security clearance eligibility. However, after weighing the favorable and unfavorable 
evidence and considering the legal requirement that close cases must be resolved in 
favor of national security, I find that the favorable record evidence is insufficient, at this 
                                                          
9 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
time, to mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Consequently, the record 
evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s present eligibility for access to 
classified information. This adverse finding, however, is not a comment on Applicant’s 
patriotism, loyalty, or any other essential character trait expected of potential clearance 
holders, but merely an acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways 
when faced with choices that could be important to a loved one, such as a family 
member. ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information at 
this time. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
