 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06834 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Elias Bichachi, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 4, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86). On May 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B. The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that his 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance 
should be granted or denied.  
 
On June 5, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On September 9, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On September 28, 2015, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On October 30, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for November 17, 2015. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were received into evidence without 
objection. Applicant called one witness, testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, which were received into evidence without objection. On April 6, 2015, 
Applicant submitted AE D, which was received into evidence without objection. On 
November 25, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice (Exhibit (EX) 
I), requesting that I take administrative notice of the summary of facts contained in EX I 
as well as seven source documents pertaining to Cuba contained in website addresses 
listed in EX I. Without objection, I took administrative notice of the documents offered by 
Department Counsel, which pertained to Cuba. (Tr. 21)  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
Government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to 
Cuba were derived from EX I and source documents contained in EX I that are 
contained, in whole or in part, infra under the subheading “Cuba” of this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.d, and denied SOR ¶ 1.a. After a thorough 
review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
  
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old construction superintendent employed by a defense 
contractor since January 2002. He seeks a security clearance to enhance his position 
within his company. (GE 1; Tr. 23-24, 31)  
 
Applicant was born in Cuba in 1954. He went as far as the 11th grade in Cuba 
and did not graduate from high school. As a young boy, he was detained for having a 
Beatles record album. Applicant did not join the Communist party which precluded him 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
from pursuing professions such as medicine or engineering. His first job in Cuba was as 
a diver in an aquarium, but he was fired because he was not a member of the 
Communist party. With limited employment options, Applicant began working in the 
construction industry. Discouraged with the Cuban government and life in Cuba, 
Applicant, at age 24, was among 10,000 plus Cubans who stormed the Peruvian 
Embassy in April 1980 seeking asylum. In April 1980, Applicant left Cuba for Spain 
where he remained for over 14 years. (Tr. 16, 24-28. 49-50) 
 
In April 1994, at age 40, Applicant immigrated to the United States. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in August 2008, and was issued his most recent U.S. passport 
in January 2009. Applicant immediately began working in the construction field and 
continues to the present time. As a superintendent, Applicant is responsible for quality 
control, subcontractor scheduling, organization, project change orders, and tracking 
changes on drawings, and he is the company’s on-site representative. (GE 1; Tr. 29-32, 
38-41, 50-51) 
 
Applicant has been married three times and divorced twice. He had a child with 
each wife and all of his children are adults. (Tr. 32-33) Applicant’s wife is also Cuban, is 
a U.S. citizen, and part owner of a medical research center. Applicant has not served in 
the armed forces of the United States, but did serve mandatory military service when he 
lived in Cuba. (GE 1; Tr. 47-48, 56-57) 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
Security concerns were identified under this Guideline as a result of Applicant 
having family members who were resident citizens of Cuba or having a family member 
residing in the United States who is a Cuban citizen. Specifically, the SOR alleged that 
Applicant’s mother, son, daughter, son-in-law, and grandson are resident citizens of 
Cuba and his brother is a Cuban citizen residing in the United States. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.d) The status of Applicant’s relatives has changed substantially since the SOR was 
issued in May 2015, and those changes are discussed infra. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleged that Applicant’s mother was a resident citizen of Cuba. 
Applicant’s mother passed away May 2015, and this concern is no longer applicable. 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleged that Applicant’s daughter, son-in-law, and grandson were resident 
citizens of Cuba. When Applicant submitted his SOR answer, he stated that he had 
taken the necessary steps to sponsor his daughter, son-in-law, and grandson to 
immigrate to the United States. Post-hearing, Applicant submitted information that his 
daughter, son-in-law, and grandson have successfully immigrated to the United States. 
This concern is no longer applicable. (SOR response; Tr. 35-38, 53-55; AE A, AE D) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleged that Applicant’s son is a resident citizen of Cuba. SOR ¶ 1.d 
alleged that Applicant’s brother is a resident of the United States and a citizen of Cuba. 
Applicant has little or no contact with his adult son living in Cuba, stating that his last 
communication with him was “about two, three years” ago. Applicant is unsure whether 
his son in Cuba is currently married and believes that he is employed as a fisherman. 
(SOR response; Tr. 32-35, 41, 55) Applicant has no contact or communication with his 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
brother living in the United States. (SOR response) Applicant is unable to travel to Cuba 
because he does not have a valid Cuban passport. (Tr. 52-53) 
 
Applicant has an adult son living in the United States who owns a construction 
company. His son is married and has two children. Applicant sees his son and his family 
frequently, almost every week. Applicant also has an uncle and cousins living in the 
United States and maintains contact with them. (Tr. 42-44) All of Applicant’s assets are 
in the United States to include a home worth $300,000, a car worth $30,000, and a 20-
foot boat worth $5,000.  All of his bank accounts are in the United States. Applicant has 
no assets in Cuba. (Tr. 44-47, 56) Applicant intends to exercise his right to vote in the 
United States in the upcoming election. (Tr. 48) He spends his discretionary free time 
with his family and also enjoys fishing as a hobby. (Tr. 49)  
  
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted two company performance evaluations for projects 
completed for the Department of Defense in 2014 and 2015. Applicant’s performance as 
project supervisor on both projects was lauded and singled out as above average. 
Applicant has proven himself as a trusted and valued employee. (Tr. 57-60; AE B, AE 
C)  
 
Applicant’s personal representative and supervisor testified on his behalf. He 
described the nature of their construction business, which includes projects for the 
Department of Defense. Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation within his company for 
being trustworthy, having a good work ethic, and getting the job done. His supervisor 
strongly recommended Applicant for a security clearance. (Tr. 60-63)  
  
Cuba 
 
 Cuba is a totalitarian, communist state, now headed by General Raul Castro. 
Cuba’s totalitarian regime is a one-party system, with the Cuban Communist Party 
being the only legal political party. For the first time since 1961, the United States re-
established diplomatic relations with Cuba on July 20, 2015.  The U.S. has long had a 
broad embargo against trading with Cuba, and Americans traveling to Cuba must first 
obtain a license to engage in any travel-related transactions involving travel to, from and 
within Cuba. 
  
 According to the U.S. State Department’s current guidance on travel to Cuba, 
Cuba routinely employs repressive methods against internal dissent and monitors and 
responds to perceived threats to authority.  These methods may include physical and 
electronic surveillance, as well as detention and interrogation of both Cuban citizens 
and foreign visitors.  Human rights conditions in Cuba remain poor, as the Cuban 
government limits fundamental freedoms, including freedom of expression and peaceful 
assembly.  U.S. citizens visiting Cuba should be aware that any on-island activities may 
be subject to surveillance, and their contact with Cuban citizens monitored closely. 
   
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 In recent years, the Cuban government has detained U.S. citizens it suspects of 
engaging in activities perceived to undermine state security.  U.S. citizens traveling to 
Cuba should be aware that the Cuban government may detain anyone at any time for 
and purpose, and should not expect that Cuba’s state security or judicial systems to 
carry out their responsibilities according to international norms. 
 
 According to the State Department’s 2014 Human Rights Report on Cuba, the 
principal human rights abuses included those involving the abridgement of the ability of 
citizens to change their government and the use of government threats, extrajudicial 
physical assault, intimidation, violent government-organized counter-protests against 
peaceful dissent, and harassment and detentions to prevent free expression and 
peaceful assembly. Additional human rights abuses such as short-term, arbitrary 
unlawful detentions and arrests, selective prosecution, denial of fair trial and travel 
restrictions continue.  
 
 Authorities interfered with privacy, engaging in pervasive monitoring of private 
communications. The government also placed severe limitations on freedom of speech 
and press, restricted internet access, maintained a monopoly on media outlets, 
circumscribed academic freedom and maintained significant restrictions on the ability of 
religious groups to meet and worship. The government refused to recognize 
independent human rights groups or permit them to function legally. In addition, the 
government continued to prevent workers from forming independent unions and 
otherwise exercising their labor rights. 
 
Most human rights abuses were official acts committed at the direction of the 
government.  Impunity for the perpetrators remained widespread. Cuba has long 
targeted the United States for intensive espionage activities. Since the 1980's, there 
have been numerous reported cases of Cuban government-sanctioned and supported 
espionage against the United States. Most recently, in June 2009, a U.S. State 
Department official and his wife were arrested and indicted for conspiracy to provide 
classified information to the Cuban government. The official had access to U.S. 
Government top secret sensitive compartmented information for many years, and he 
and his wife served as clandestine agents for Cuba for 30 years, beginning in 1978.  In 
November 2009, both defendants pled guilty to spying charges and were later 
sentenced to life and 81 months, respectively.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contact with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). As a result of superseding 
events since Applicant’s SOR was issued, this concern has limited applicability given 
the fact that Applicant’s mother has since passed away and his daughter and her family 
have since immigrated to the United States. However, the fact that Applicant has a son 
living in Cuba with whom he occasionally has contact creates a potential risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion meriting a close 
examination of all circumstances. 
 
 The Government produced some evidence of these two disqualifying conditions 
under AGs ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) as a result of Applicant’s admissions and evidence 
presented. The Government established Applicant’s son is a resident citizen of Cuba, 
and that Applicant maintains some contact with him, albeit very limited. The burden 
shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigating conditions. As noted, 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
superseding events have negated the concerns alleged in the SOR as pertaining to 
Applicant’s mother and his daughter and her family. The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
 
 Two foreign influence mitigating conditions under Guideline B ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Applying commonsense and life experience, there is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, and or obligation to his immediate family. ISCR 
Case No. 04-07766 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has demonstrated minimum ties of affection for and or 
obligation to his son living in Cuba.  
 
Applicant’s son is not employed by or associated with the Cuban government. 
The record does not identify what influence, if any, the Cuban government could exert 
on Applicant’s son as a result of his being a resident citizen of Cuba. However, his 
presence in Cuba creates concerns under this Guideline. As such, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to show his relative in Cuba does not create security risks.  
 
“[T]he nature of the foreign government involved in the case, and the intelligence-
gathering history of that government are important evidence that provides context for all 
the other evidence of the record . . .” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-0776 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 26, 2006); see also ISCR Case No. 02-07772 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2003). As 
noted supra under the subheading “Cuba,” Cuba routinely employs repressive methods 
against internal dissent and monitors and responds to perceived threats to authority.  
These methods may include physical and electronic surveillance, as well as detention 
and interrogation of both Cuban citizens and foreign visitors.   
 
Applicant denies having “divided loyalties” between the United States and any 
foreign country. It should be noted Applicant’s allegiance to the United States was not 
challenged in this proceeding. The issue is rather a positional one. Guideline B hinges 
not on what choice Applicant might make if he is forced to choose between his loyalty to 
his family and the United States, but rather hinges on the concept that Applicant should 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
not be placed in a position where he is forced to make such a choice. ISCR Case No. 
03-15205 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005). 
 
On balance, Applicant has met his burden of showing there is little likelihood that 
his relationship with his remaining family member in Cuba could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. This may not have been the case if Applicant’s mother was still 
alive or his daughter and her family were still living in Cuba. However, Applicant’s very 
limited relationship with his son in Cuba does not, in all likelihood, place him in this 
position.  
 
Applicant is able to receive full credit under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b). His son 
maintains a non-political low-key position in Cuba. Applicant’s relationship with his son 
in Cuba is minimal when compared and contrasted with his immediate relatives in the 
United States. Applicant has “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the U.S., [h]e can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.” As noted, Applicant’s mother has since passed away and his daughter and her 
family have immigrated to the United States. 
 
Applicant’s wife, son, uncle, and cousins reside in the United States. Applicant 
has lived in the United States since 1994, and is fully vested in the United States. He 
has worked for a defense contractor with dedication and distinction since 2002. 
Applicant has substantial property and investments in the United States, and no 
property or investments in Cuba. He has many friends and colleagues in the U.S. He is 
a loyal, dedicated U.S. citizen. Applicant’s work-related record documents his 
contribution to the national defense and corroborates his loyalty and trustworthiness.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors (APF) listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The discussion in the 
Analysis section under Guideline B is incorporated in this whole-person section. 
However further comments are warranted. 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Because foreign influence does not involve misconduct, voluntariness of 
participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the eighth APF, “the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶ E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of 
the nine APFs to this adjudication.1 In addition to the eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
should be considered in reaching a determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.1. Ultimately, the 
clearance decision is “an overall common sense determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.3. 
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; 
and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). I have carefully considered Applicant’s family connections and 
personal connections to Cuba, discussed supra, which gave rise to foreign influence 
concerns.  
 
 There is significant mitigating evidence that weighs towards granting Applicant’s 
security clearance. Applicant left Cuba under rather dramatic circumstances at age 24. 
He immigrated to the U.S. at age 40 and immediately pursued a career in the 
construction field. Applicant has lived continuously in the United States for the past 21 
years. His wife, son, brother, uncle, cousins, and most recently his daughter and her 
family all live in United States. His assets consisting of approximately $350,000 in the 
United States are substantial in contrast to having no assets in Cuba. Applicant became 
a U.S. citizen in 2008, has a U.S. passport, and intends to exercise his right to vote in 
the United States.  
 
Applicant maintains much more frequent contact with his U.S.-based family 
members than he does with his son residing in Cuba. His ties to the United States are 
stronger than his ties to his son in Cuba. There is no evidence Applicant has ever taken 
any action which could cause potential harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to 
the United States very seriously, and he has worked diligently contributing to the 
national defense since 2002. The evidence contains no derogatory record evidence 
about the Applicant. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Cuba. Cuba and the United 
States have an evolving relationship that continues to improve. In the unlikely event that 
Applicant’s son in Cuba was subjected to coercion or duress from the Cuban 
government, I find that because of his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties 
in the United States, that Applicant would resolve any attempt to exert pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the United States. 
                                                          
1
 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the 
eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for 
exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that 
eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole-person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 This case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis. This analysis must answer the question whether there is a legitimate concern 
under the facts presented that Applicant may have divided loyalties or act in a way 
adverse to U.S. interests or some attempt may be made to exploit Applicant’s family 
members in such a way that this U.S. citizen would have to choose between his 
pledged loyalty to the United States and those family members. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and circumstances, in the context of 
the whole-person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns pertaining to 
foreign influence.   
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth 
in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole-person factors” and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
