 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02730 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the drug involvement concerns, including under 
personal conduct, but mitigated the falsification concern and the foreign influence 
concerns.  Overall, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
February 26, 2013.  On February 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR)2 to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H: Drug Involvement; E: Personal Conduct; and B: Foreign Influence.3 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 Item 1.  (SOR) 
 
3 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 2, 2015,4 and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on January 4, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit documentary material to refute, extenuate, 
mitigate or explain the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on January 7, 
2016.  He submitted a response to the FORM to include a letter of recommendation 
from his employer (marked as AE A), and a cover letter and personal statement labeled 
“Reasons for Granting a Security Clearance” (marked as AE B). He did not assert any 
objections to the Government’s evidence. Department Counsel did not object to 
Applicant’s submissions. AE A and AE B are admitted into evidence. 
 
The case was assigned to me on February 26, 2016. The Government’s exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 1 to 6) are admitted into evidence. Additionally, 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
concerning the country of the Ukraine, which I have done. Those specific facts are 
detailed later in this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges use of marijuana over a period of years to 2013; use of 
hallucinogenic mushrooms on several occasions to 2008; use of illegal drugs while 
holding a security clearance; personal conduct concerns regarding drug use and failing 
to report his past drug use on his SF 86 in 2002; and foreign influence issues related to 
his spouse and parents-in-law.  
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except for SOR ¶ 1.b, although he 
admits he used hallucinogenic mushrooms while in college and last in November 2008 
while in Amsterdam.  The SOR allegations are supported by Applicant’s SF 86’s, 
summary of interview (PSI), Answer, and his exhibits.5  Since Applicant and Department 
Counsel elected to proceed with a decision without a hearing, I was unable to evaluate 
Applicant’s credibility and demeanor, or to make further inquiry into the drug use and 
falsification allegations, and his personal status. 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old furniture installer/foreman for a Government contractor.  
He completed his bachelor’s degree in 1997 and is currently married with one child.6  
He was previously granted a security clearance in November 2002, and has been 
                                                                                                                                                                           
 
4 Item 3.  (Answer), notarized and submitted on March 3, 2015. 
 
5 Items 3-6; AE B. 
 
6 Items 3-4. 
 
 
3 
 
employed as an independent contractor to fulfill requirements to install or supervise 
furniture construction projects at U.S. embassies, consulate compounds and other 
smaller installations throughout the world.  He is employed by a U.S. consulting firm for 
jobs that last anywhere from a few days to a few months at a time.  From 2003 to 2013, 
Applicant reported working on jobs in 32 countries for two government contractors.  He 
has worked for his current employer since 2005 and completed 26 international 
installation projects.7  Applicant’s employer describes him in glowing terms, noting he is 
an “integral part” and their “singular focus” on international U.S. government work for 
the company.  He is viewed as a “highly valuable team member,” and possessing a 
“current security clearance is vital” to his future participation in the business.8   
 
 Applicant acknowledged his illegal drug use, including use after being granted a 
security clearance in 2002.  He explained that his marijuana use began while he was in 
college, and continued to May 2013.  He claimed that on most occasions, he obtained 
marijuana from his brother, who supplied it in return for work that Applicant did for him, 
or was purchased using a joint bank account intended to assist with maintenance of 
their father’s home.9  He claimed that he used marijuana about five times a week in the 
morning, while between jobs, to alleviate his “bad moods” which resulted from his 
chronic back pain.  He described his marijuana use as “self-prescribed medicinal use.”  
His last purchase and use of hallucinogenic mushrooms occurred in 2008 while 
Applicant was in Amsterdam, where he asserts it was legal.   
 
 Applicant did not report any past drug use when he completed his first SF 86 in 
2002.  He claimed that his failure to report was under the “guidance” of the company 
owner, who assisted him with the security clearance application.10  He indicated that he 
knew it was wrong and was looking forward to correcting the record.  He did not correct 
the record until he completed his second SF 86 in 2013. However, in his 2013 SF 86, he 
asserted that his marijuana use was private with only a few people knowing, that he 
used drugs only while unemployed between jobs, that current legislation has changed 
the way society looks at the use of THC,11 and that his use of THC never put any 
project or information at risk.  He stated in his Answer that since May 2013, he ceased 
all use of drugs for various reasons, and vowed to not use them again. 
 
                                                     
7 Item 4.  AE A indicates that Applicant completed 24 projects for his current employer since 2005. 
 
8 Item AE A. 
 
9 Applicant also described two occasions where he personally purchased marijuana in Jamaica and 
mushrooms in Amsterdam. 
 
10 Applicant does not describe the type of “guidance” he received, nor did he assert that he was coerced 
into falsifying his SF 86. 
 
11 THC is an abbreviation for tetrahydrocannabidinol: the active ingredient in cannabis, giving it its 
narcotic and psychoactive effects.  Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House, Inc. 
http://www.dictionary.com/browse/thc (accessed: March 11, 2016). 
 
 
4 
 
 While working in the Ukraine from May 2011 to October 2011, Applicant met his 
spouse. She is 27 years old and was a former concierge manager for a hotel. She was 
born and resided in a town in western Ukraine, where the pro-Ukrainian movement is 
strongest. Applicant returned to the Ukraine in February 2012 to propose. His spouse 
entered the United States in October 2012 on a fiancée visa, and they were married in 
November 2012. Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of Ukraine, but holds the status of a 
U.S. permanent resident. At the conclusion of the three-year waiting period, she intends 
to apply for U.S. citizenship. Applicant notes that his spouse has submitted herself for 
investigation by the U.S. Government for a security clearance or trustworthiness 
determination, and to obtain a U.S. green card.12 They have a child, recently born in the 
U.S., who is an American citizen and resides with them in the United States.   
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law, a restaurant worker, and father-in-law, who is self-
employed, are citizens and residents of northwest Ukraine. They have no reported 
relationships with the Ukrainian or Russian governments, allegiance to Russia, or 
anyone involved in the conflict in eastern Ukraine. They speak little to no English, and 
do not receive support from Applicant or his spouse. Applicant’s spouse has regular 
contact with them by phone and they occasionally visit the Ukraine, but Applicant has 
little meaningful contact over the phone or in person because of the language barrier. 
 
Administrative Notice: Ukraine 
 
 Ukraine is a republic with a political system composed of three branches of 
government. In February 2014, the parliament voted to remove President Yanukovych 
from office after he fled the country. This followed three months of massive anti-
government protests on Kyiv’s central square (the Maidan) over his decision to 
postpone signing political and trade agreements with the EU, in favor of closer ties with 
Russia, as well as his violent responses to the protests.  In February, Russian armed 
forces intervened militarily in Crimea, which Russia occupied and purported to “annex” 
in March. Additional unrest and civilian deaths occurred when pro-Russian protesters in 
eastern and southern Ukraine seeking more autonomy from the national government, 
clashed with government forces. In May 2014, President Poroshenko was elected, 
which signaled a strong democratic mandate for change in Ukraine. 
 
 The Russian occupation of Crimea has displaced more than 18,000 Crimeans 
and caused numerous human rights abuses. Russia has been accused of orchestrating 
attacks by Ukrainian separatists. Ukraine has also been cited for abuse of persons in 
custody, harsh prison conditions and a corrupt judiciary, societal violence against 
women, children, and ethnic minorities, and human trafficking. 
 
  Despite attempts to cease hostilities and establish peace through political dialog, 
the government’s efforts have been largely rejected and the situation in Ukraine remains 
precarious. Violent clashes between Russia-backed separatists and Ukrainian forces 
continue in eastern regions of the country. In addition, Russian military forces continue 
                                                     
12 Item 3, AE B.  Applicant noted that his spouse has been “investigated by DSS (with an SF 86)” and by 
“USCIS for immigration status.” 
 
5 
 
to occupy the Crimean Peninsula, supply weapons and material support to the 
separatists, and are present on the eastern border of Ukraine. 
 
 In December 2015, the State Department issued a warning to U.S. citizens to 
defer all travel to Crimea and the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts. 
Separatist groups have threatened, detained or kidnapped persons, including U.S. 
citizens, and violent clashes have caused over 9,000 deaths. There are reports of 
abuse against local populations that oppose separatist goals.   
 
 The United States has stood by Ukraine as Russia has sought to stymie its new 
democratic government. The leaders of the past who controlled Ukraine for decades are 
fighting back using their control of the media, state owned enterprises, Rada 
(parliament) deputies, the courts and the political machinery, while holding old loyalties 
and threats over the heads of decision-makers to block change.13 
 
 Since the start of the crisis, the United States has committed over $760 million in 
assistance to Ukraine, in addition to two, $1 billion loan guarantees.  U.S. advisors 
serve in almost a dozen Ukrainian ministries and localities and help deliver services, 
eliminate fraud and abuse, improve tax collection, and modernize Ukraine’s 
institutions.14 
 
 Since November 2015, the United States has noted that Ukraine has largely 
stabilized its currency and is rebuilding its reserves; seen some modest growth in the 
economy; approved a 2016 budget in-line with IMF requirements; passed civil service 
reform to create competition and transparency; stood up an independent Anti-
Corruption Bureau and Special Prosecutor; and, has begun to decentralize power and 
budget authority to local communities to improve services and policing for its citizens.15  
The Ukrainian government has not been recently cited for targeting U.S. citizens for 
human rights abuses or intelligence collection. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                     
13 Statement of Victoria Nuland, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs before the  
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Washington, DC, March 15, 2016. 
 
14 Id. 
 
15 Statement of Victoria Nuland, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs before the  
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Washington, DC, March 15, 2016. 
 
 
 
6 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.16 In Department of Navy v. Egan,17 the Supreme Court stated that the burden 
of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.18 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.19 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to sensitive and classified information. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive or classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of sensitive or classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
                                                     
16 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan.27, 1995). 
 
17 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to 
a security clearance). 
 
18 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ Drugs are 
defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, 
stimulants, and hallucinogens). 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  
Based on the evidence, I find that the following disqualifying conditions apply: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction”;  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant has a long history of marijuana use, including use through May 
2013. Additionally, he has used hallucinogenic mushrooms and marijuana after 
being granted a security clearance in 2002. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
 
8 
 
 Based on the record evidence, mitigation conditions is not applicable. Although 
Applicant provided a statement of intent to discontinue drug use and claimed his last 
use was in 2013, Applicant has a long history of marijuana use, to include periods of 
renewed situational use. His claim of regular, near-daily use to alleviate his poor mood 
caused by back pain only while between jobs, is troubling. Since he elected a decision 
without a hearing, I am unable to make a determination as to his current circumstances, 
or his views with regard to substance abuse. Although Applicant claims that he stopped 
using illegal drugs after completion of his recent SF 86, the circumstances in which he 
used drugs in the past remain the same today. He has not provided evidence from close 
friends, family or co-workers with knowledge of his past drug use to substantiate his 
claims of abstinence, nor has he undergone a drug treatment program or drug 
counseling to assist him to refrain from future use or to aid me to determine his current 
status. His long history of substance abuse and relatively recent use of marijuana while 
holding a security clearance outweigh his claim of abstinence from illegal drug use. 
 
Guideline E:  Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Based on the 
evidence, I find that the following disqualifying conditions apply: 
 
 AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations . . . 
[or] determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness . . . ; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant admitted to intentionally falsifying his 2002 SF 86 by not disclosing his 
past drug use (SOR ¶ 2.a), and the underlying allegations related to SOR ¶ 1.a-c20 (Use 
                                                     
20 Although he denied SOR ¶ 1.b, he admitted to use of illegal mushrooms while in college and in 2008; 
clarifying that he used mushrooms once in the last 18 years. See Item 3. 
 
 
9 
 
of marijuana and hallucinogenic mushrooms, including while possessing a security 
clearance). Although Applicant claimed that he completed the 2002 SF 86 under the 
“guidance” of his employer, he acknowledged that his false response to the SF 86 
question involving past illegal drug use was improper. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(b): the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process.  Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 While not disclosing his past drug use as a young adult when completing his SF 
86 in 2002, Applicant voluntarily disclosed his illegal drug use when completing his SF 
86 to renew his security clearance. Recognizing that the guidance provided by his 
former employer may have improperly influenced his decisions at the time, he 
acknowledged his previous failure to disclose and forthrightly provided corrected 
information when the opportunity presented itself. I find that mitigating factors AG ¶ 
17(a)-(d) apply with regard to SOR ¶ 2.a. Mitigation is not appropriate for SOR ¶ 2.b. 
Applicant’s relatively recent use of marijuana, his use of mushrooms and illegal drug 
use while holding a security clearance, has not been mitigated. The amount of time 
since his last use of mushrooms may invoke some mitigation credit, however overall, his 
current use of illegal drugs after being granted a clearance weighs heavily on his overall 
reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 
 
10 
 
Guideline B:  Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of the Ukraine, and his 
mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of the Ukraine. 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b):  connections  to  a  foreign  person,  group,  government,  or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation   to   protect   sensitive   information   or   technology   and   the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
 When foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a 
foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered.21 Thus, I have 
considered not only Applicant’s relationships to his spouse and in-laws in the Ukraine, 
but also the citizenship and residency of family members who may be vulnerable to 
kidnapping or exploitation by insurgent and terrorist elements. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”22 
                                                     
21 ISCR Case No.01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). 
   
22 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
11 
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.”23 Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, 
the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the 
nature of the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist 
activity in the country at issue.24 
 
 AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. I am satisfied that the activities of Russian 
supplied separatist groups and activity of Russian elements inside of eastern Ukraine 
and the Crimea, are sufficient to establish the “heightened risk” in AG ¶ 7(a) and the 
potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 A finding that Applicant’s circumstances raise the above listed disqualifying 
conditions does not end the foreign influence analysis. However, Applicant’s burden in 
mitigating concerns that he could be influenced or coerced through his foreign family 
members must be examined under the “very heavy burden” standard that the Appeal 
Board has usually reserved for cases involving hostile foreign countries.25 Although U.S. 
relations with the current Ukrainian government are good, foreign-backed forces with 
interests inimical to the United States operate freely in parts of Ukraine and pose a 
significant threat not only to Ukraine’s sovereignty, but also to U.S. national security 
interests. In light of these circumstances, the serious security concerns that are raised 
by an individual with family members in a hostile foreign country are also present in the 
current case. Accordingly, Applicant’s mitigation case must be examined through the 
lens of this heightened scrutiny.   
 
                                                     
23 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at 15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
24 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where family members 
resided). 
 
25 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011) (“an applicant with family members in a country 
that is hostile to the U.S. bears a ‘very heavy burden’ to show that the family members are not a means of 
coercion or exploitation.”). See also ISCR Case No. 11-12202, n. 10 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014) (after 
declining to extend heightened scrutiny to cases involving punitive discharges or dismissals from the 
military, Appeal Board reaffirmed use of heightened standard in cases involving hostile foreign countries).  
  
 
12 
 
 In meeting this higher standard of proof and persuasion, an individual is not 
required “to sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access 
to classified information.”26 However, what factor or combination of factors will mitigate 
security concerns raised by an applicant with family members in a foreign country is not 
easily identifiable or quantifiable.27 An administrative judge’s predictive judgment in 
these types of cases must be guided by a commonsense assessment of the evidence 
and consideration of the adjudicative guidelines, as well as the whole-person factors set 
forth in the Directive.28 A judge’s ultimate determination must also take into account the 
overarching standard in all security clearance cases, namely, that any doubt raised by 
an applicant’s circumstances must be resolved in favor of national security.29 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant is a natural-born U.S. citizen with a child born in the United States, and 
all of his financial interests and personal family ties are in the United States.  He 
sponsored his spouse for a fiancée visa, and it was granted. They married in the United 
States in 2012, and she has resided in the U.S. since. She is a U.S. permanent resident 
and must wait three years before she can apply for U.S. citizenship. Applicant and his 
spouse have expressed a desire to apply for U.S. citizenship for her as soon as it is 
legally permitted. 
 
 Applicant’s in-laws are Ukrainian citizens living in western Ukraine, and speak 
little to no English. Applicant and his spouse do not provide financial support to these 
                                                     
26 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
27 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
28 Directive, ¶ 6.3. 
 
29 AG ¶ 2(b); ISCR Case No. at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2014). 
 
13 
 
relatives. Neither his spouse nor his in-laws have reported any affiliations with the 
Ukrainian or Russian government or ties to the Ukrainian separatist movement within 
the eastern part of Ukraine. There was no evidence to suggest that his spouse or in-
laws are influenced by the politics of the Ukraine. It is clear that even in the unlikely 
event a risk should arise, Applicant would choose in favor of the interests of the United 
States. Outside of typical telephone contact between his spouse and her parents, and 
occasional visits, Applicant’s contact with his in-laws is minimal. 
 
 After carefully weighing the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, and 
considering the heightened risk of potential foreign influence raised by Applicant’s 
foreign contacts and connections in Ukraine, I find the he met the standards set forth 
above and mitigated the foreign influence concerns.  AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  I have incorporated the evidence, my findings of 
fact and comments under Guidelines H, E and B in this whole-person analysis. 
 
 Although I find that Applicant has mitigated the Government’s concerns in SOR 
¶¶ 2.a, 3.a and 3.b, I am not convinced that his illegal use of drugs, including while 
holding a security clearance, and his concomitant lack of judgment to participate in 
these activities, have been sufficiently mitigated at this time.  Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance.  Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
