 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04235 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations, 
handling protected information, and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance 
and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 9, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security 
clearance application.1 On September 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated January 9, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR, as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated October 7, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations, but he failed to indicate if he was requesting a hearing before an 
administrative judge or a decision based on the administrative record without a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On July 1, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued an Amendment to the SOR. The Amended SOR alleged 
security concerns under Guidelines K (Handling Protected Information) and E (Personal 
Conduct). Once again, it is unclear when Applicant received the Amended SOR, as the 
receipt in the case file is undated. Applicant responded to the Amended SOR on July 
10, 2015, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on September 9, 2015. The case 
was assigned to me on September 18, 2015. A Notice of Hearing was issued on 
September 28, 2015, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 29, 2015. 
 
 During the hearing, six Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 6) and one 
Applicant exhibit (AE A) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on November 12, 2015. I kept the record 
open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that opportunity. 
He submitted additional documents which were marked as AE B through AE Q and 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record closed on November 23, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answers to the SOR and Amended SOR, Applicant admitted one of the 
factual allegations pertaining to handling protected information (¶ 2.a.), and one of the 
factual allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶ 3.b.). He denied the remaining 
allegations with explanations. Applicant’s answers and explanations are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the 
record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been with 
the company since July 1987, and currently serves as a communications security 
(COMSEC) custodian and manager.2 A 1977 high school graduate, Applicant received 
an associate of arts degree in basic electronics in 1983, and he completed three years 
of university courses but did not earn another degree.3 While in high school, Applicant 
entered the delayed enlistment program of the U.S. Army, and upon his high school 
                                                          
2
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
3
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
graduation, he enlisted in the U.S. Army. In 1980, he transferred to the U.S. Army 
Reserve, and he has remained in the active reserves and currently is in the grade of 
master sergeant (E-8).4 He was granted secret or top secret security clearances since 
October 1987, and in May 1998 he also was granted access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI). He currently holds a top secret security clearance.5 
Applicant was married in July 1987, and divorced in July 2011.6 He and his wife have 
three daughters (born in 1981, 1982, and 1987) and two sons (born in 1985 and 1989).7  
 
Military Service, Awards, and Decorations 
 
 During his military service, Applicant was deployed overseas on two occasions. 
He was a participant in Operation Desert Storm in 1991 and he was in Iraq from 
December 2006 until January 2008.8 He was awarded the Bronze Star Medal, the 
Combat Action Badge, the Joint Service Commendation Medal, the Meritorious Service 
Medal (3 awards), the Army Commendation Medal (3 awards), the Joint Service 
Achievement Medal, the Joint Meritorious Unit Award, the Army Superior Unit Award, 
the Army Good Conduct Medal (8 awards), the National Defense Service Medal (bronze 
service star), the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, the Armed Forces Service 
Medal, the NCO Professional Development Ribbon (4 awards), the Presidential Unit 
Citation Award, the Army Service Ribbon, the Overseas Service Ribbon (2 awards), the 
Overseas Training Ribbon, the South West Asia Service Medal, the Armed Forces 
Reserve Medal (with M  device (2 awards) and 10-year bronze hourglass), the 
Humanitarian Service Medal, the Rifle Qualification Badge, the Pistol Qualification 
Badge, the Grenade Qualification Badge, the Kuwait Liberation Medal (Saudi Arabia), 
and the Kuwait Liberation Medal (Kuwait).9 Applicant was assigned for treatment 
purposes to the Wounded Warrior Transition Unit from September 2011 until March 
2012.10 
 
  
                                                          
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10-11; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated February 25, 2014), at 4; AE B 
(Biographical Summary, dated April 1, 2015), at 1. 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 41-43; GE 2, supra note 4, at 8-9, 15; Tr. at 6. 
 
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 24-25, 49; GE 2, supra note 4, at 14-16. Applicant was unaware that the divorce 
had been finalized, for he and his wife had reconciled in May 2010, and he told his attorney to terminate the 
proceedings. The attorney apparently failed to do so, and neither Applicant nor his wife was ever notified that the 
divorce was final. They continue to cohabitate as husband and wife. See GE 2, supra note 4, at 14-16. 
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 27-29. 
 
8
 Tr. at 35; AE D (Personnel Qualification Record, dated October 15, 2011). 
 
9
 AE C (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty, dated April 10, 2012); AE F (Official Photo, 
dated June 6, 2011); AE B, supra note 4, at 2. 
 
10
 Tr. at 37. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations11 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 2013. In 2001, 
Applicant and his wife obtained a home mortgage in the amount of $71,006, and during 
the ensuing years they routinely made their timely monthly mortgage payments. In 
2013, their mortgage loan account was sold to another mortgage lender. The transition 
from one creditor to another did not go smoothly, and, in fact, was devastating to 
Applicant’s financial record. Applicant referred to the transition as an “accounting 
nightmare.” For some unexplained reason, the normal mortgage account from the 
original lender was altered to an escrow account by the new creditor. Applicant’s routine 
monthly mortgage payments to the new creditor were misapplied by it, and funds were 
diverted as property taxes and homeowners insurance, items which he generally paid 
separately. The actions of the new creditor diminished the amounts credited as 
mortgage payments. In August 2008, the remaining balance was $46,929. Applicant’s 
February 2014 credit report reflects the account was past due $3,926 with a remaining 
balance of $20,425 (SOR ¶ 1.a.). The new creditor finally acknowledged the problem 
and isolated its errors to correct the situation. Applicant’s June 2015 credit report 
reflects a remaining balance of $9,476 with zero past due. As of October 30, 2015, the 
new creditor reported that the remaining loan balance was $6,583.59. There is no past-
due balance. Applicant has made larger than required payments each month in an effort 
to accelerate his payoff because the new creditor is so inconsistent. The errors and the 
status of the account have been corrected and the alleged issues have been resolved.12  
In approximately 2003 or 2004, Applicant co-signed for two student loans for his 
son, an individual who has the same name as Applicant. For the first five years, while 
his son was actively enrolled in college, the student loans were in forbearance or 
deferred status. In 2009 or 2010, when his son completed college, he was supposed to 
commence his payments. One loan, in the amount of $13,420, was with 
DirectLoans/U.S. Department of Education, and the other loan, in the amount of 
$18,200, was with Central Credit Services/Sallie Mae. Applicant’s son was residing in 
the family residence and working for minimum wage. Nevertheless, Applicant expected 
his son to make the required loan payments. At some point, Applicant received a 
telephone call regarding the smaller of the two loans, and he was informed that the loan 
had become delinquent due to non-payment. In order to resolve that status, Applicant 
agreed to make the payments himself. He made monthly payments of $120 for about 
one year. At the end of the year, Applicant informed his son that he was again going to 
be responsible for making the payments.13  
                                                          
11
 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated September 12, 2008); 
GE 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated February 11, 2014); GE 5 (Equifax Credit 
Report, dated June 30, 2015); GE 1, supra note 1, at 44-48; GE 2, supra note 4. More recent information can be 
found in the exhibits furnished and individually identified. 
 
12
 AE A (Proof of Electronic Payment, various dates); AE Q (Detail Transaction History, dated October 29, 
2015); AE P (Mortgage Payoff Statement, dated October 30, 2015); Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated October 7, 
2014), at 1; GE 2, supra note 4, at 11-12; Tr. at 40-44. 
 
13
 GE 2, supra note 4, at 9-10; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 1-2; Tr. at 44-45. 
 
5 
                                      
 
In September 2013, Applicant’s son returned to school, and the student loans 
should have gone into either forbearance or deferred status. In November 2013, 
Applicant’s son set up a monthly repayment plan under which he agreed to make 
monthly payments of $75 for each of the two loans. Applicant hoped to make his son 
responsible for his own student loans, but he acknowledged that if his son cannot 
accept that responsibility, Applicant will assist him and take over the payments. In 
January 2014, Applicant was advised that the balance of the loans owed was 
approximately $18,200. All of Applicant’s son’s student loans, including the two for 
which Applicant was a co-signer, were subsequently consolidated and Applicant was 
advised that the loans total $52,000. He was also advised that if he paid $20,000, his 
name would be removed from his son’s student loans, and those loans would be 
transitioned to Applicant’s son’s sole ownership for repayment responsibility. A new 
repayment plan was put into effect, and, at least as early as October 2014, or before, 
Applicant’s son was making monthly payments of $250.14  
A review of Applicant’s credit reports reflects inconsistent information pertaining 
to the various student loans. Applicant’s September 2008 credit report lists four 
separate student loans: one was opened in September 2003 associated with the U.S. 
Department of Education, reflecting a high credit of $11,279 and a deferred balance of 
$10,454; the remaining three were associated with Sallie Mae, with one opened in 
September 2004, reflecting a high credit of $12,000 and a deferred balance of either 
$15,580 according to two credit reporting agencies, or $15,652 according to another 
credit reporting agency; one opened in August 2005 with a high credit of $5,000 and a 
deferred balance of either $6,689 according to two credit reporting agencies or $6,736 
according to another credit reporting agency; and one opened in September 2005 with a 
high credit of $12,500 and a deferred balance of either $17,577 or $17,414, depending 
on the credit reporting agency.15 Since Applicant co-signed for the first two loans, with 
two different agencies, at appears that he co-signed for one loan for $11,279 and 
another loan for $12,000. 
Applicant’s June 2015 credit report reflects a churning of student loan accounts 
by various lending agencies and servicing agencies. The previously referenced 
September 2003 student loan with the U.S. Department of Education is listed four times, 
with three different high credit numbers which differ from the information listed in the 
2008 credit report. There are four different account numbers, only one of which matches 
the one from 2008. One listing shows a past-due balance of $11,451, another shows a 
remaining balance of $7,353, and two other listings reflect a zero balance. The account 
was either assigned or sold, depending on which listing is being examined. The 
previously referenced September 2004 student loan with Sallie Mae, now Navient, is 
listed once, with an entirely different account number. The account has a remaining 
balance of $19,051, of which $5,467 is past due, although $17,077 was previously 
                                                          
14
 GE 2, supra note 4, at 10; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 1-2; Tr. at 46-48. 
 
15
 Account numbers reflected for each of the loans described above are also inconsistent. For example, one 
account has either ten digits or six digits listed, depending on the credit reporting agency; another has either 23, 18, 
or 16 of the same digits; another account has either 23, 18, or 16 digits; and another account has either 23 or 16 
digits. See GE 3, supra note 11, at 9-12. 
  
 
6 
                                      
 
charged off. The previously referenced August 2005 student loan also with Navient is 
listed once, with an entirely different account number from the earlier listing, but which is 
identical to the one now listed for the 2004 loan. The account has a remaining balance 
of $9,436, of which $3,106 is past due, although $7,848 was previously charged off. The 
previously referenced September 2005 student loan also with Navient is listed once, 
with an entirely different account number from the earlier listing, but which is identical to 
the one now listed for the 2004 loan. The account has a remaining balance of $28,421, 
of which $10,734 is past due, although $21,790 was previously charged off.16 
Applicant believes all the student loans have been incorrectly associated with his 
personal finances, and not properly segregated as to himself or to his son. He is 
seeking the assistance of a credit repair firm to resolve the student loan issues. On 
October 30, 2015, Applicant received a monthly bill from FedLoan Servicing, 
purportedly handling the student loan account(s). The account number listed differs 
from all of the other student loan accounts that are reflected in the various credit 
reports. The bill indicates an original balance of $8,895.93 (which differs from the high 
credit for all of the other reported student loans) and a current balance of $9,422.97. 
The last payment received is shown as April 1, 2014, and there is a past-due amount of 
$500.76. The total due in November 2015 was $542.49.17  
The SOR alleged that there are three delinquent accounts that were charged off 
by Sallie Mae (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. through 1.d.) as well as three delinquent accounts that were 
placed for collection by the U.S. Department of Education (SOR ¶¶ 1.e. through 1.g.). 
One of those accounts was charged off. No account numbers appear in the SOR. With 
the exception of only one allegation (SOR ¶ 1.f.), the alleged delinquent balances and 
amounts charged off do not comport with any of the accounts listed in the credit reports 
or other documentary evidence presented. The amount alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. ($9,400) 
is not the amount placed for collection, but rather the high credit of the account. The 
evidence presented is inconsistent and frequently garbled. While Applicant has taken 
steps to resolve the student loan issues, it appears that the matter has not yet been 
resolved.18 
On November 16, 2015, Applicant completed a Personal Financial Statement 
which reflected a net monthly income of $6,602; normal monthly expenses of $5,565; 
and other financial obligations (credit cards and loans) of $1,190. His net monthly 
                                                          
16
 GE 5, supra note 11, at 2-6. 
 
17
 AE O, dated October 30, 2015). 
 
18
 Because there are no consistent, market-wide federal standards for student loan servicing and servicers 
generally have discretion to determine policies related to many aspects of servicing operations; and because student 
loan borrowers encounter servicing problems or practices that discourage utilization of alternative repayment plans, 
including income-driven repayment plans, in September 2015, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), 
the U.S. Department of Education, and the U.S. Department of the Treasury issued a Joint Statement of Principles on 
Student Loan Servicing. That same month, the CFPB issued a lengthy analysis entitled Student Loan Servicing. That 
analysis discussed many aspects of the problems involved in student loan borrowing and servicing facing borrowers. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
remainder was approximately $1,847, available for discretionary savings or spending.19 
He has no other delinquent accounts. 
Handling Protected Information 
As the COMSEC custodian and manager, Applicant works in a secured “closed 
area” containing several containers of classified or proprietary materials. About one 
dozen employee personnel also have access to the area. On June 10, 2013, at about 
9:22 a.m., Applicant opened a particular COMSEC container and signed the 
open/closed sign-off sheet. The section was manned by COMSEC personnel until 4:15 
p.m. At the end of the day, Applicant closed the container but failed to spin the dial 
which locks it. He then became involved in other activities and failed to properly secure 
the container. At about 4:30 p.m., that same day, while conducting security rounds of 
classified containers, a security officer discovered that the container in the COMSEC 
office was not properly secured. The following day, an investigation was conducted by 
the facility security officer (FSO): the container was unattended for approximately 15 
minutes; there was a 100 percent inventory of the container and it was determined that 
all COMSEC material was accounted for; all persons involved were cleared to the level 
of the involved material; and the location where the material was stored is a restricted 
access area. Based on all of the above, “[t]he possibility of compromise cannot be ruled 
out, but is highly unlikely.” Applicant was re-briefed on safeguarding and end-of-day 
check procedures. The employer reported the “improperly secured Keying material” 
incident and requested that it be considered a final report (SOR ¶ 2.a.). Although the 
report does not mention any written warning being given to Applicant, he acknowledged 
receiving a written counseling.20 There is no copy of the written counseling in evidence. 
Based on the evidence, I conclude that the incident constituted a “security infraction” 
rather than a “security violation.”21  
 
Applicant accepted responsibility for the security infraction and admitted the 
allegation. He noted that he had previously spent ten years in a proprietary closed area 
and had never incurred any security infractions. He returned to the employer after a 
lengthy absence, and about three weeks before the incident, he was assigned to his 
new position as COMSEC custodian, something that he was not used to doing, while 
learning the responsibilities, policies, and procedures of the position.22 The Joint 
Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) Incident History indicates that Applicant 
received proper training on how to secure a safe and closed area prior to June 10, 
2013. However, there is no documentary evidence to reflect his completion of such 
                                                          
19
 AE G (Personal Financial Statement, dated November 16, 2015). 
 
20
 GE 7 (COMSEC Insecurity Report, dated June 10, 2013); GE 6 (Incident History, dated March 17, 2015); 
GE 2, supra note 4, at 16-17; Applicant’s Answer to the Amended SOR, dated July 10, 2015; Tr. at 48-52, 57-58, 73. 
 
21
 “A security violation is any incident that involves the loss, compromise, or suspected compromise of 
classified information.” DOD 5220.22-M-Sup 1, National Industrial Security Program (NISPOM) Operating Manual 
Supplement, § C1.3.2.1.1. “A security infraction is any other incident that is not in the best interest of security that 
does not involve the loss, compromise, or suspected compromise of classified information.” DOD 5220.22-M-Sup 1, 
NISPOM Operating Manual Supplement, § C1.3.2.1.2. 
 
22
 Applicant’s Answer to the Amended SOR, supra note 20; Tr. at 51-52; GE 2, supra note 4, at 16-17. 
 
8 
                                      
 
training, the timeframe of such training, or any signed acknowledgment by him of such 
training.  
 
A second incident occurred ten days later. On June 20, 2013, at about 1 p.m., 
Applicant opened a COMSEC storage closed area/room and signed the intrusion alarm 
log sheet.23 At 1:45 p.m., he departed the closed area/room; notified the security control 
center; believed he had properly spun the lock; set the intrusion alarm; and signed the 
open/closed sign-off sheet. At about 4:55 p.m., that same day, while conducting security 
rounds of closed areas, a security officer discovered that the lock was not properly 
secured. The following day, an investigation was conducted by the FSO: the intrusion 
alarm was properly set; the closed area was not entered between 1:45 p.m. and 4:55 
p.m.; there was a 100 percent inventory of the closed area and it was determined that 
all COMSEC material was accounted for; all persons involved were cleared to the level 
of the involved material; the intrusion alarm was properly activated; and the location 
where the material was stored is a restricted access area. Based on all of the above, 
“[t]he possibility of compromise cannot be ruled out, but is highly unlikely.” Applicant 
was re-briefed on Closed Area procedures and he was to be issued a written warning.24 
The written letter of counseling was supposedly to cover both security infractions, but 
Applicant said the incident may have been written up, but the counseling was done 
orally.25 There is a copy of a formal written warning in evidence, but Applicant refused to 
sign it because he denied responsibility for the second incident.26 It is unclear if 
Applicant received a copy of the document. The document states on its face that it is 
intended for the use of Human Resources to document the result of an investigation. It 
is a confidential form that should not be placed in an employee’s personnel file.27 The 
employer reported the “improperly secured closed area” incident and requested that it 
be considered a final report (SOR ¶ 2.b.). Based on the evidence, I conclude that the 
incident constituted a “security infraction” rather than a “security violation.” 
 
Applicant had engaged all of the supplemental protection security measures of 
the closed area but purportedly failed to activate the primary lock. He was adamant that 
he had also spun the lock, and he denied the allegation. The written letter of counseling 
was to remain in his personnel file for a one-year period, and if after that year there 
                                                          
23
 There is a multi-step procedure to gain access to the storage area/room: the security desk must be 
notified; the dial must be spun from the locked position; a security code must be entered; and the badge must be 
scanned. See GE 2, supra note 4, at 17. It should be noted that the Incident History incorrectly identified the date of 
the incident as June 24, 2013, when, in fact, the incident occurred on June 20, 2013, but was reported on June 24, 
2013. See GE 6, supra note 20; Tr. at 72-73.  
 
24
 GE 7 (COMSEC Insecurity Report, dated June 24, 2013); GE 6, supra note 20; GE 2, supra note 4, at 17; 
Applicant’s Answer to the Amended SOR, supra note 20; Tr. at 52-60. 
 
25
 GE 2, supra note 4, at 17; But see Tr. at 60, 74-76 where Applicant denied receiving a written warning 
about the second incident. 
 
26
 AE N (Disciplinary Action Process Investigation Summary Form, dated June 26, 2013). 
 
27
 AE N, supra note 26, at 1. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
were no other security violations or infractions, it would be removed.28 There is no 
evidence of any additional security violations or infractions.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On January 9, 2014, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he responded to a 
question pertaining to his employment activities. The question in § 13A asked, for his 
current employment, “in the last seven (7) years have you received a written warning, 
been officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the workplace, 
such as a violation of security policy?” Applicant answered the question with “no.” He 
certified that the response was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his 
knowledge and belief. The SOR alleged that Applicant’s response was a deliberate 
falsification of a material fact, supposedly because he had received written warnings for 
his security infractions (SOR ¶ 3.a.).   
 
 As noted above, the first incident report does not mention any “written warning” 
being given to Applicant. Neither does the JPAS Incident History. No such document 
was offered as evidence of a written warning. He acknowledged receiving a “written 
counseling.” After the second incident, Applicant was re-briefed on Closed Area 
procedures and was to be issued a written warning. The JPAS Incident History does not 
mention that a written warning or a written letter of counseling was issued to Applicant. 
The written warning was supposedly to cover both security infractions, but Applicant 
contended it was merely an oral counseling. No such document was offered as 
evidence of a written warning. His boss told him not to worry about the incidents. 
 
 When he was completing his e-QIP, Applicant did not think the incidents were 
applicable to the question that was being asked until he was informed by the 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) that they were 
violations that should have been reported. Applicant claimed he did not know that. He 
did not realize that the incidents were serious enough to warrant that they be reported. 
In fact, he was unaware that the incidents had triggered incident reports. He specifically 
denied intentionally omitting the two security infractions. When Applicant returned to his 
employer from active duty, he was selected to replace a retiring COMSEC custodian. 
Although the JPAS Incident History indicates that Applicant received proper training on 
how to secure a safe and closed area prior to June 10, 2013, Applicant denied he was 
ever briefed or guided through the routines and responsibilities of the position by his 
predecessor. They merely checked the safes and the COMSEC office. Applicant simply 
focused on learning the duties of his position and processing all the over 25,000 
COMSEC materials in his inventory. Applicant’s performance and development 
summary for 2012 noted that with the impending retirement of a veteran COMSEC 
custodian, Applicant was “training-by-doing.”29 
 
 On February 25, 2014, when Applicant was interviewed by the OPM investigator, 
the issue of security was raised without any confrontation taking place. Applicant did not 
                                                          
28
 GE 2, supra note 4, at 17. 
 
29
 AE H (Performance & Development Summary, dated February 26, 2013). 
 
10 
                                      
 
hesitate in setting forth the two security infractions. He denied receiving written 
warnings, but did acknowledge receiving a written letter of counseling. No disciplinary 
actions were taken against him for the security infractions. The SOR alleged that 
Applicant’s responses were deliberate falsifications of material facts, supposedly 
because he had denied receiving written warnings for his security infractions and 
otherwise deliberately failed to report them (SOR ¶ 3.b.). Although Applicant admitted 
the SOR allegation, such admission was not an admission of his deliberate falsification, 
but rather an acknowledgment, based upon the guidance furnished by the OPM 
investigator, that Applicant’s responses were incorrect. 
    
Work Performance and Character References 
 Applicant’s immediate supervisor, the COMSEC Team Lead, has known 
Applicant for approximately 14 years, initially as a coworker. He characterized Applicant 
as honest, loyal, trustworthy, and highly respected. He noted in Applicant’s annual 
performance report for 2013 that Applicant had become accountable for the production 
and accountability of over 25,000 COMSEC controlled items, and that it was a big role 
considering Applicant’s “limited experience working with COMSEC.” He acknowledged 
that Applicant had two security infractions over his 20-plus years with the company, but 
he would still not hesitate to recommend Applicant for a position that required protection 
of material or information vital to national security.30 A member of the COMSEC team 
who is supervised by Applicant said that he has observed Applicant always go the extra 
mile to ensure the COMSEC material entrusted to the COMSEC office is never out of 
proper storage controls and always handled by appropriately cleared and currently 
briefed facility personnel.31 Two long-time friends and neighbors, one a retired New 
York City Police Officer, and the other a former U.S. Marine, find him to be a man of 
integrity who is helpful, honest, faithful, courageous, trustworthy, knowledgeable, 
responsible, and approachable. Applicant is a good parent who has also coached little 
league baseball.32 Applicant’s military senior rater wrote that Applicant “sets and 
maintains the highest standards of honor and trustworthiness.”33 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”34 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
                                                          
30
 AE K (Character Reference, dated November 3, 2015); AE H, supra note 29, at 3. 
 
31
 AE L (Character Reference, dated November 3, 2015). 
 
32
 AE J (Character Reference, dated November 5, 2015); AE I (Character Reference, dated November 10, 
2015). 
 
33
 AE E (NCO Evaluation Report, dated July 26, 2010). 
 
34
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”35   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”36 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.37  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
                                                          
35
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
36
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
37
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”38 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”39 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. A home mortgage loan was reported as delinquent and several 
student loans were placed for collection or charged off. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
                                                          
38
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
39
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”40 Under AG ¶ 20(e) it is potentially mitigating if “the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) apply. Applicant’s financial problems 
were not caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending, and he did not spend beyond 
his means. Instead, as noted above, Applicant attributed his home mortgage problems 
to the transition of his account from the original lender to a new creditor. For some 
unexplained reason, the normal mortgage account from the original lender was altered 
to an escrow account by the new creditor. Applicant’s routine monthly mortgage 
payments to the new creditor were misapplied by it, and funds were diverted as property 
taxes and homeowners insurance, items which he generally paid separately. The 
actions of the new creditor diminished the amounts credited as mortgage payments. 
Those actions were beyond Applicant’s control. The new creditor finally acknowledged 
the problem and isolated its errors to correct the situation. As of October 30, 2015, the 
new creditor reported that the remaining loan balance was $6,583.59. There is no past-
due balance. Applicant has made larger than required payments each month in an effort 
to accelerate his payoff because the new creditor is so inconsistent. The circumstances 
under which this situation occurred, and Applicant’s accelerated payments, minimize the 
likelihood that such a situation will recur.  
The problem with the student loan accounts can be attributed to several factors: 
Applicant and his son share the same name; Applicant co-signed for two student loans; 
Applicant’s son obtained additional student loans; the loans went into default at a time 
when they should have been in forbearance or deferred; Applicant was trying to get his 
son to accept some financial responsibility for the loans; the student loans were 
incorrectly combined to reflect that they were all Applicant’s; the student loans were 
churned by the various lending agencies and servicing agencies, making it appear that 
there were more loans than there actually were; and the information in the credit reports 
is garbled and inconsistent. Applicant made loan payments for the two co-signed loans 
                                                          
40
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (internal citation and footnote omitted, quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
and has attempted to resolve the erroneously reported status of those loans with the 
various lenders and servicing agencies. While it appears that Applicant is making 
substantial progress, and most of the student loans should be in forbearance or 
deferred status, it does not appear that everything regarding the identification of the co-
signed student loans has yet been sorted out and resolved. 
With the possible exception of the student loan accounts – an issue that appears 
to still be unresolved – Applicant has no delinquent accounts. Furthermore, as 
Department Counsel conceded, “Applicant doesn’t have a history of not paying his 
bills.”41 He has a monthly surplus of approximately $1,847 available for discretionary 
savings or spending. There are clear indications that Applicant’s alleged financial 
problems are under control. Applicant’s actions under the circumstances confronting 
him, do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.42 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Handling Protected Information 
is set out in AG ¶ 33:       
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern.  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 34(g) “any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, “negligence or lax security 
habits that persist despite counseling by management” may raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 34(h). Applicant’s employer determined that his actions on June 10, 2013 
(improperly securing Keying material) and June 20, 2013 (improperly secured closed 
area), violated various security policies, and procedures. Those two incidents 
constituted “security infractions,” and none of them constituted “security violations” 
under the NISPOM Supplement. Nevertheless, AG ¶¶ 34(g) and 34(h) have been 
established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from handling protected information. Under AG ¶ 35(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where “so much time has elapsed since the 
behavior, or it has happened so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that 
it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, AG ¶ 35(b) may apply if “the individual 
responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training and now demonstrates 
a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities.” Applicant has had 
                                                          
41
 Tr. at 100. 
 
42
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
two security infractions in ten days in the nearly 29-year period during which he has 
held a security clearance. Both of the security infractions involved his failure to activate 
or engage all of the supplemental protection security measures available in the security 
system.  
 
 After conducting security investigations for each of the cited incidents, the FSO 
concluded that there was no compromise or attempted compromise of classified 
material because most of the supplemental protection security measures were engaged 
or activated and functional, and there were no signs of attempted entry or missing 
items. The FSO seemingly concluded that neither of the incidents resulted from 
deliberate disregard, gross negligence, or a pattern of negligence under the NISPOM, 
for he requested that each of the incident reports be considered final reports.  
Both security incidents – security infractions – occurred when Applicant either 
failed to fully spin the dial on a COMSEC container lock within a secured room, or 
purportedly failed to spin the dial on the locking mechanism of a COMSEC storage 
room. In both instances, he did engage the various supplemental protection security 
measures associated with the container and the room. He accepted responsibility for 
the initial infraction, but was adamant in his denial of the second infraction. Applicant 
noted that he had returned to his employer after a lengthy absence while on active duty, 
and about three weeks before the first incident, he was assigned to his new position as 
COMSEC custodian. He was not used to the position and was still learning the 
responsibilities, policies, and procedures of the position. As noted above, Applicant was 
“training-by-doing.”   
Both incidents occurred in June 2013, approximately two and one-third years 
before the date of the hearing. Applicant was counseled and re-briefed as to his 
responsibilities regarding safeguarding and end-of-day check procedures as well as on 
Closed Area procedures, and with the exception of counseling, a warning, and the 
internal Disciplinary Action Process Investigation Summary Form (which was not to be 
placed in Applicant’s personnel file), he has not received any subsequent written 
warnings for practices dangerous to security or violations of the NISPOM. 
Furthermore, Applicant expressed his contrition for the first incident and made 
tangible efforts to avoid repeating the lapses involved by increasing his level of 
vigilance. Applicant has acknowledged that he was careless, at least related to the first 
incident, and has taken a variety of steps to insure that his inadvertent failures do not 
recur. There are two incidents involving a failure to complete all of the associated 
safeguarding procedures with the COMSEC container and the COMSEC storage room. 
Under those circumstances, it might be argued that they constitute a pattern of behavior 
that might warrant adverse adjudicative action. However, Applicant’s other 
characteristics under my whole-person analysis reflect a positive attitude towards 
compliance with rules and regulations and security consciousness. Applicant is a 
careful, conscientious individual who simply, and unintentionally, failed to lock a 
container or secure a room. He attributed part of his failure to his newness on the job 
and because he was still going through the learning process after returning from his 
military assignment. Applicant has demonstrated a positive attitude to the discharge of 
 
16 
                                      
 
his security responsibilities and embraced security consciousness. Considering the 
totality of the evidence, I find that AG ¶¶ 35(a) and 35(b) apply to mitigate the security 
concerns. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Also, “deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to 
an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official 
government representative” is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(b). 
 
 On January 9, 2014, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he responded to a 
question pertaining to his employment activities. The question in § 13A asked, for his 
current employment, “in the last seven (7) years have you received a written warning, 
been officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the workplace, 
such as a violation of security policy?” Applicant answered the question with “no.” He 
certified that the response was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his 
knowledge and belief. The SOR alleged that Applicant’s response was a deliberate 
falsification of a material fact, supposedly because he had received written warnings for 
his security infractions.   
 
 Applicant’s response provides sufficient evidence to examine if his submission 
was a deliberate falsification, as alleged in the SOR, or merely the result of oversight or 
misunderstanding of the true facts on his part. I have considered the somewhat limited 
period Applicant had held the position of COMSEC custodian, as well as the available 
information pertaining to Applicant’s background, reputation, professional civilian career, 
and his military service, in analyzing his actions. Proof of an omission, standing alone, 
does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the falsification 
or omission occurred. As administrative judge, I must consider the record evidence as a 
 
17 
                                      
 
whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning 
Appellant’s intent or state of mind at the time the falsification or omission occurred.43   
 
 As noted above, the first incident report does not mention any “written warning” 
being given to Applicant. Neither does the JPAS Incident History. No such document 
was offered as evidence of a written warning. He acknowledged receiving a “written 
counseling.” After the second incident, Applicant was re-briefed on Closed Area 
procedures and was to be issued a written warning. The JPAS Incident History does not 
mention that a written warning or a written letter of counseling was issued to Applicant. 
The written warning was supposedly to cover both security infractions, but Applicant 
contended it was merely an oral counseling. No such document was offered as 
evidence of a written warning. His boss told him not to worry about the incidents. 
 
 When Applicant was completing his e-QIP, he did not think the incidents were 
applicable to the question that was being asked until he was informed by the OPM 
investigator that they were violations that should have been reported. Applicant claimed 
he did not know that. He said he did not realize that the incidents were serious enough 
to warrant that they be reported. In fact, he was unaware that the incidents had 
triggered incident reports. He specifically denied intentionally omitting the two security 
infractions. Applicant’s explanations for his omissions and failure to report that he had 
received some sort of communication (whether it was a written warning, written 
counseling, oral warning, or oral counseling) pertaining to the two security infractions 
appear to be genuine and not fabricated. He was not reprimanded, suspended, or 
disciplined for misconduct in the workplace, which appears to be the focus of the e-QIP 
question. Because he was unaware of the significance of his two infractions, and the 
fact that his boss had told him not to worry about them, Applicant would have little, if 
any, motivation for the omission, concealment, or falsification. Furthermore, given 
Applicant’s reputation for honesty and integrity, as well as his military history, an 
intentional lie or falsification by Applicant would be considered aberrant behavior. AG ¶ 
16(a) has not been established. 
 
 On February 25, 2014, when Applicant was interviewed by the OPM investigator, 
the issue of security was raised without any confrontation taking place. Applicant did not 
hesitate in setting forth the two security infractions. He denied receiving written 
warnings, but did acknowledge receiving a written letter of counseling. No disciplinary 
actions were taken against him for the security infractions. The SOR alleged that 
Applicant’s responses were deliberate falsifications of material facts, supposedly 
because he had denied receiving written warnings for his security infractions and 
otherwise deliberately failed to report them. Although Applicant admitted the SOR 
                                                          
43
 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10390 at 8 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
 
18 
                                      
 
allegation, such admission was not an admission of his deliberate falsification, but 
rather an acknowledgment, based upon the guidance furnished by the OPM 
investigator, that Applicant’s responses were incorrect. AG ¶ 16(b) has not been 
established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant failed to 
fully comply with his responsibilities as COMSEC custodian on two separate occasions 
and he had two security infractions in June 2013. He denied ever having received 
anything that would apply to the question. A home mortgage loan was reported as 
delinquent and several student loans were placed for collection or charged off. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial than 
the disqualifying evidence. Applicant is a decorated combat veteran. Applicant’s 
immediate supervisor, as well as other co-workers and friends, have characterized 
Applicant as a man of integrity who is helpful, honest, faithful, courageous, trustworthy, 
knowledgeable, responsible, approachable, loyal, and highly respected. In 2013, 
Applicant had become accountable for the production and accountability of over 25,000 
COMSEC controlled items. It was a big role considering Applicant’s “limited experience 
working with COMSEC.” A member of the COMSEC team has observed Applicant 
always go the extra mile to ensure the COMSEC material entrusted to the COMSEC 
office is never out of proper storage controls and always handled by appropriately 
cleared and currently briefed facility personnel. Applicant is a good parent who has also 
coached little league baseball. Applicant’s military senior rater wrote that Applicant “sets 
and maintains the highest standards of honor and trustworthiness.” 
Applicant’s financial problems arose when his home mortgage loan was 
transferred from his original lender to another creditor. Applicant’s routine monthly 
 
19 
                                      
 
mortgage payments to the new creditor were misapplied by it, and funds were diverted 
as property taxes and home owners insurance, items which he generally paid 
separately. The new creditor eventually acknowledged its errors and corrected them. 
The account’s status is back to being current. The other financial issue arose when 
Applicant co-signed for two student loans for his son. The loans went into default at a 
time when they should have been in forbearance or deferred, incorrectly combined with 
his son’s other student loans to reflect that they were all Applicant’s. They were churned 
by the various lending agencies and servicing agencies, making it appear that there 
were more loans than there actually were. Applicant made loan payments for the two 
co-signed loans and has attempted to resolve the erroneously reported status of those 
loans with the various lenders and servicing agencies. He has no other delinquent 
debts. Applicant’s actions under the circumstances do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations, handling protected information, and personal conduct. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) 
through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR 
and Amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:    For Applicant 
 
     
  
 
20 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
