 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
          
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03120 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
raised by his unresolved delinquent debt. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 6, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 In April 2015, Applicant 
withdrew his request and requested that the case be decided on the written record.3 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
  
2 GE 3. 
 
2 
 
The Government submitted its written case on August 11, 2015. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He 
received the FORM on September 6, 2015, and provided a response. The case was 
assigned to me on November 2, 2015. The documents appended to the FORM are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 14 through 5, without objection. The Applicant’s 
documents are admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B.5  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 65, has worked as a federal contractor since December 2003. 
Applicant, who retired from the military after 22 years of service, was granted a security 
clearance in 1981. The record does not contain any information about a more recent 
clearance. Applicant completed his most recent security clearance application in April 
2013. The ensuing investigation revealed several delinquent accounts. The SOR 
alleges that Applicant owes $38,500 on 10 delinquent accounts.6 
 
 Applicant has lived and worked abroad since December 2003. He manages his 
U.S.-based accounts by e-mail or through the internet and pays his financial obligations 
on time. Applicant did not learn of the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR until his 
background investigation. He admitted co-signing for a student loan for his daughter 
(SOR ¶ 1.j $18,000), but did not know the loan had gone into default. Applicant resolved 
the account in November 2013. Applicant claims that he was unaware of the other 
accounts alleged in the SOR, but takes responsibility for them because they were likely 
opened by his ex-wife or another one of his family members. All of the alleged accounts 
were opened between 2008 and 2012.7 
 
 Although Applicant has expressed his intent to pay the delinquent accounts 
alleged in the SOR, he has not yet done so, blaming the difficulty of corresponding with 
creditors while living outside the United States.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
3 GE 5.  
 
4 In the FORM, the Government indicates that GE 1 is Applicant’s response to the SOR. However, GE 1 
also contains the SOR.  
 
5 In his response, Applicant included a copy of the FORM, the SOR, and his answer to the SOR. These 
documents are not admitted as Applicant’s exhibits because they are duplicative of the Government’s 
Exhibits. However, the copies remain in the correspondence file.  
 
6 GE 2-4. 
 
7 GE 1, 3-4; AE A-B.  
 
8 AE A. 
 
3 
 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”9  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $38,500 on 10 delinquent 
accounts. However, the credit reports in the record do not support SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. 
Accordingly, I find for Applicant on these two allegations. The evidence supports SOR 
allegations ¶¶ 1.a–1.b and 1.e–1.j, totaling $29,750. Applicant admits responsibility for 
these debts. This is sufficient evidence to determine that Applicant has demonstrated a 
history of not meeting his financial obligations.10  The record contains some evidence in 
mitigation, but not enough to overcome the security concerns raised by the delinquent 
accounts alleged in the SOR.  
 
                                                          
9  AG ¶ 18. 
 
10 AG ¶ 19(c). 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant has resolved the largest alleged account, SOR ¶ 1.j for the $18,000 
student loan he co-signed for his daughter, showing a good-faith effort to repay his 
delinquent accounts.11 Although Applicant has not specifically claimed that he is a victim 
of identity theft, it is plausible, given that Applicant has not lived in the United States for 
the past 13 years, that he did not open the other accounts alleged in SOR. While 
delinquent debt resulting from identity theft is beyond Applicant’s control, he has not 
acted responsibly in light of his circumstances. He has not challenged the debts with the 
credit reporting agencies or notified them of potential identity theft. Nor has Applicant 
taken any steps to confront his family or prevent them from illegally obtaining credit in 
his name in the future. As a result, his finances remain an ongoing source of 
vulnerability and exploitation and cannot be considered to be under control. This 
assessment is not changed by the fact that Applicant is able to pay many of his 
recurring accounts timely. 
  
After reviewing the record, I conclude that despite the favorable evidence in the 
record, Applicant has failed to mitigate the concerns raised by his current finances. In 
reaching this decision, I have considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. 
Ultimately, Applicant failed to meet his burdens of production and persuasion. Because 
the security concerns raised in the SOR remain, following Egan12 and the clearly-
consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b and 1.e-1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d, and 1.j:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
12 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
