 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-03020 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On October 20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
In a February 25, 2015, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations. 
He also requested a determination based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On 
April 8, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained 
five attachments (“Items”). Applicant did not respond within the 30 days provided. The 
case was assigned to me on March 3, 2016. Based on my review of the case file and 
submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old welder who has worked for the same defense 
contractor since mid-2013. Before that, he worked as a mechanic for approximately a 
year after being employed for about two years as a part-time retail salesman. From 
June 2010 to September 2010, he was unemployed. He has been married for about five 
years. Applicant has a high school diploma.  
 
At issue are 15 past due debts amounting to about $19,500. These delinquent 
debts were discovered in credit bureau reports from 2013 and 2014. Almost half of the 
debt balance consists of two student loans now in collection. (SOR allegations 1.a-1.b, 
representing approximately $10,800) He has neither claimed nor provided documentary 
evidence that any of the debts at issue are in repayment, in dispute, or have otherwise 
been addressed. There is no evidence he has received financial counseling. When 
completing Section 26 (Financial Record) of his security clearance application (SCA), 
he denied having had any delinquent debts in the preceding seven years. In his SOR 
response, he admitted deliberately failing to disclose such information in his SCA. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
 
 
 
3 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
nearly $20,000 in delinquent debts, as reflected in his 2013-2014 credit bureau reports. 
Applicant admits all the debts noted in the SOR allegations related to these debts. This 
is sufficient to invoke two of the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
4 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
           Applicant provided no background as to the origin of his delinquent debts. He 
described no efforts to address any of the accounts. He failed to dispute any of the 
credit report entries. In short, he made no attempt to mitigate or otherwise explain the 
continued neglect of these delinquent obligations. There is no evidence he has received 
financial counseling, nor is there any indication that progress is being made toward 
alleviating his financial distress. Lacking some information from Applicant regarding 
these accounts, none of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct   
 
 AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern relating to personal conduct. It states 
that conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 Here, Applicant admits that he deliberately failed to disclose any delinquent debts 
on his August 2013 SCA, despite the fact his credit reports indicate he has delinquent 
debts amounting to approximately $19,500. Guideline E disqualifying condition AG ¶ 
16(a) and 16(e) would apply:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities . . . ; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant offers no explanation for denying the existence of his debts and he provides 
no facts in mitigation of his falsification. Therefore, no mitigating conditions apply.   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based on consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old welder who has been continuously employed for nearly 
four years. Before that time, he worked part-time in retail for two years. He is married 
and has a high school diploma. In the past few years, he has acquired approximately 
$19,5000 in delinquent debts. At least half of that debt is in the form of late student 
loans, although little is known of any attempts at post-secondary matriculation.  
 
In admitting responsibility for them, Applicant shared no new or relevant 
information about his delinquent debts. He also admitted that he intentionally falsified 
his SCA when he denied having had any past-due accounts in the past seven years. No 
information was provided regarding these accounts or any attempts to address them.  
 
This process does not require that an Applicant satisfy all of his past-due 
obligations. It does, however, expect an Applicant to articulate a reasonable plan for 
addressing those accounts and provide some documentary evidence indicating that 
such a plan has been implemented. Here, there is no evidence of any efforts to address 
the account balances at issue. Such facts, considered in conjunction with the scant 
information available for a whole-person analysis, fail to overcome the financial 
considerations and personal conduct security concerns raised in the SOR.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
                    Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
