 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-06841 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On July 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 In an August 14, 2015, answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted the 16 allegations raised under Guideline F and, with brief 
comments, the sole allegations raised under Guideline H and Guideline E. He also 
requested a determination based on the written record.  
 
     On November 30, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) 
with nine attachments (“Items”). Applicant did not respond to the FORM. In the FORM, 
the Government moved to withdraw SOR paragraph 3, subparagraph 3.a. Noting no 
objection, that allegation is struck from the SOR, eliminating concerns related to 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The case was assigned to me on April 12, 2016. 
Based on my review of the case file and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate 
financial considerations and drug involvement security concerns. 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old applicant for work or recent hire at a defense 
contractor. From 2003 through at least 2014, he was a small business owner. Applicant 
is a naturalized United States citizen and has earned a college degree. He was divorced 
in 2005, has four minor children, and has a current cohabitant. There is no documentary 
evidence indicating he has received financial counseling. At issue are 16 delinquent 
debts, at least seven of which are medical accounts and one is an adverse judgment. In 
addition, he tried marijuana in 2013 and failed to disclose it in his 2014 security 
clearance application.  
 
The judgment and delinquent debts at issue amount to approximately $39,350, 
including an adverse 2012 judgment for $1,488 and about $14,100 in medical debt. The 
delinquent debts range from $90 to $12,310, eight of which range between $90 and 
$611. In his SOR answer, Applicant merely admitted the related allegations without 
further comment. The record includes scant references to the medical-related debts, 
including their origin, although there are notations that they were unpaid due to lack of 
funds. Lack of sufficient income is cited elsewhere as being the reason for his 
delinquent debts. The record is devoid of documentary evidence showing any progress 
on the delinquent debts at issue, including plans to repay them, disputes regarding their 
accuracy, or efforts to address them. At best, he references the intent to work with a 
counseling or debt management service in the future. (FORM at 4 of 7) 
 
To be social, Applicant took one or two “hits” of marijuana at his 40th birthday 
party in October 2013. (SOR answer and FORM, Item 6 at 9) He had only used the 
illegal drug on two previous occasions, in college. He concedes it was a poor decision 
and writes in response to the SOR that he does not intend to use it again. He did not 
disclose his recent drug use in his March 2014 SCA.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations – Guideline F 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
numerous delinquent debts, including one adverse judgment. Applicant admits the 
allegations related to these obligations. This is sufficient to invoke two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
           Applicant presented scant information, and no documentary evidence, regarding 
the origin of these debts or of any efforts to dispute, address, repay, or otherwise 
resolve these accounts. There is no documentary evidence indicating that he has 
sought or received financial counseling. The majority, if not all, of the delinquent debts 
appear to be the result of insufficient income and financial resources. There is no 
documentary evidence of progress on the debt, or suggesting that the debt is in any 
manner under control. Moreover, Applicant presented no documents suggesting he is 
presently formulating a plan for addressing these debts. In light of these considerations, 
I find that none of the mitigating conditions are AG ¶ 20 apply.  
 
Drug Involvement - Guideline H  
 
          The concern under Guideline H is that use of an illegal drug or misuse of a 
prescription drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Here, 
Applicant used marijuana in 2013 that he ultimately disclosed in 2014 or 2015. Under 
these facts, the following disqualifying condition applies:   
 
          AG ¶ 25(a) any drug abuse.  
 
          I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under drug involvement and found the following relevant:  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
             (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
             (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,  
 
   (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of    
        clearance for any violation;  
 
          Applicant’s marijuana use was less than three years ago. Scant elaboration has 
been provided showing systemic lifestyle changes that would prevent such voluntary, 
spontaneous, and “sociable” recurrences from happening again in the future. Less than 
three years is insufficient time for a man of Applicant’s age with a long, albeit sporadic, 
history of illegal drug use to demonstrate his commitment to continued abstinence.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge will consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) and conduct a whole-person evaluation. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under the 
guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old and was a small business owner from 2003 through at 
least 2014. He is a naturalized United States citizen and has a college degree. He was 
divorced in 2005, has four minor children, and has a current cohabitant. There is no 
documentary evidence indicating he has had financial counseling. He has about 
$40,000 in delinquent debts, including several in the $90 to $650 range. He presented 
no documentary evidence tending to mitigate the security concerns these delinquent 
debts have raised, either in terms of their creation or their continued neglect. He 
addresses these obligations by writing that he simply lacks the income to address them.  
 
 Applicant admitted that he used marijuana on occasion in college. Years later, he 
again used the illegal drug, taking one or two “hits” of the drug to be “sociable” at his 
40th birthday party. While subsequently open about his abuse of the substance, he did 
not disclose it on his 2014 SCA. In responding to the 2015 SOR, he wrote that he had 
 
 
 
 
6 
no intention to use the drug again in the future. Given his erratic and spontaneous use 
of a known illegal drug over the course of his adult life, however, more than three years 
of abstinence is needed to acknowledge the severity of his illegal behavior and 
demonstrate his commitment to staying clear of illegal drugs. In light of the foregoing, I 
find that Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under the applicable 
financial considerations and drug involvement guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
