KEYWORD: Guideline K; Guideline B; Guideline D
DIGEST: The Directive presumes there is a nexus between proven circumstances under any
Guideline and an applicant’s security eligibility  The disqualifying conditions listed under each
Guideline are illustrative only, not exhaustive and exclusive.  In analyzing cases, Judges must be
guided by common sense and with a view toward making a reasoned determination consistent
with national security.  A duty to report ongoing contact with a foreign national bears a rational
relation to the protection of classified information within the meaning of Guideline K.  The
Directive provides that “any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified
information” could raise a concern about an applicant’s clearance eligibility. Adverse decision
affirmed
CASENO: 14-0441.a1
DATE: 04/08/2016
DATE: April 8, 2016
In Re:
-------- 
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04441
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Claire Shapiro, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 15, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline K (Handling Protected Information), Guideline
B (Foreign Influence), Guideline D (Sexual Behavior) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). Applicant requested
a hearing.  On January 14, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors; whether Applicant’s conduct raised security concerns; and whether the Judge’s
adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Defense contractor since 1996 and has held a clearance since
early 1998.  Applicant’s SOR alleges several infractions, many of which were cross-alleged under
the four Guidelines at issue.  The Judge found that Applicant had signed a log sheet certifying that
the front door to the workplace was secure when, in fact, he had not checked the door.  The door was
later found not to have been properly secured.  Applicant sent a classified email that was not
encrypted.  Applicant received a written warning for this inadvertent violation.  In 2014, he was
reprimanded for failing to complete checkout procedures for securing access to a classified storage
room.  
During 2012, Applicant engaged in an affair with a married woman from Japan.  They had
sexual relations about six times during the course of the affair.  He made attempts to contact her by
means of his work email account.  The emails were discovered during an investigation of an
unrelated problem.  Applicant also had sexual contact with three other women, two from Japan and
another from the Philippines.  He maintained email contact with them on a quarterly basis, although
he stated that the messages were of a general nature, such as holiday greetings, etc.  Applicant’s
employer required that continuing contacts with non-U.S. citizens be reported to the facility security
officer (FSO).  Applicant was made aware of this requirement but did not inform his FSO of his
relations with the woman with whom he had the affair.  Neither did he inform his wife about this
relationship.  
Applicant has received pay raises and bonuses for the high quality of his work.  He also
received an award for having developed a means for discovering “a spill of classified information.” 
Decision at 5.  
2
Japan is a major U.S. ally who cooperates with the U.S. on a broad range of issues.  It has
a good human rights record.  The Philippines is a top trading partner with the U.S.  The country has
certain human rights problems, however, such as warrantless arrests, torture and abuse by security
forces, violence against women, etc.  Terrorist organizations are active in the Philippines, and U.S.
citizens are advised to use caution when traveling to certain parts of the country.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved each of the Guidelines against Applicant.  He concluded that Applicant’s
conduct, viewed as a whole, was recent.  He noted that Applicant began to comply with a duty to
submit written reports of foreign travel as soon as he became aware of the obligation and that he
disclosed his affair with the Japanese woman when he completed his SCA.  However, the Judge
concluded that Applicant’s having sent a classified email unencrypted was not due to inadequate
training.  He noted that Applicant’s contact with the Japanese woman was neither casual nor
sufficiently infrequent to mitigate concerns arising from it.  He found that this affair was not minor
and that Applicant had not terminated it himself.  He stated that Applicant had provided no evidence
of counseling or other remedial measures, nor had he disclosed this misconduct to his wife.
Discussion
Applicant has challenged the Judge’s conclusion that his failure to report the affair raised
concerns under Guideline K, in that it did directly involve the handling of protected information. 
He also challenged the Judge’s conclusion that his conduct raised Guideline E concerns.  Among
other things, he argues that his conduct does not constitute a pattern of rule violations such as would
implicate Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 16(d)(3).1  
The Directive presumes there is a nexus between proven circumstances under any of its
Guidelines and an applicant’s security eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04648 at 3 (App. Bd.
Sep. 9, 2015).   The disqualifying conditions listed under each Guideline are illustrative only, not
exhaustive and exclusive.  In analyzing cases before them, Judges must be guided by common sense
and with a view toward making a reasoned determination consistent with the interests of national
security.  See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 12-01698 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2014).   
A duty to report ongoing contact with a foreign national bears a rational relation to the
protection of classified information within the meaning of Guideline K.2  Indeed, the Directive
provides that “any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified information” could
raise a concern about an applicant’s clearance eligibility.  Enclosure 2 ¶ 34(g).  (emphasis added) 
1This provision addresses information that “supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations . . . this includes but
is not limited to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations[.]”  
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 33: “Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for protecting
classified or either sensitive information raises doubt about an individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or
willingness and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern.”  (emphasis added)
3
Therefore, Applicant’s argument that the infraction bore only an indirect relation to national
security, even if true, is not enough to rebut the presumption of nexus.   
Moreover, Applicant’s various infractions are sufficient to impugn his judgment and
willingness to comply with rules and regulations, thereby raising a concern under Guideline E about
his ability to protect classified information.  See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 15.3  Applicant’s failures
to comply with various security and reporting requirements possess a common feature, a laxity in
following procedures designed to protect classified information.  Accordingly, they can reasonably
be understood as a pattern of rule violations rather than a series of isolated acts, as Applicant argues. 
Under the facts of this case, the Judge’s application of Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 16(d)(3) is
supportable.  Moreover, Applicant’s failure to report his affair with a married woman from a foreign
country could create a vulnerability to exploitation, duress, etc. within the meaning of Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 16(e).4  In any event, even if Applicant’s conduct did not satisfy the explicit criteria
of Guideline K or E disqualifying conditions, the Judge could still have concluded that it raised
security concerns.  See ISCR Case No. 12-01698, supra. We find no reason to disturb the Judge’s
treatment of the mitigating conditions.
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he had failed to ensure that both doors of his
employer’s facility were secure.  He argues that persons in the building after Applicant left could
have been responsible.  The Judge’s finding on this matter, however, is supported by Applicant’s
answers during his clearance interview (Summary, Interview Conducted on January 8, 2014, at p.
3, included in Government Exhibit 3, Answers to Interrogatories) and by his testimony beginning
at p. 36 of the Transcript.  We conclude that the Judge’s material findings are based upon “such
relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of
all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
Applicant cites to various pieces of evidence that he contends are sufficiently mitigating as
to warrant a favorable clearance decision.  Among other things, he notes his many years of holding
a clearance without incident or concern.  Regarding his security record, even those with good prior
records can encounter circumstances in which their judgment and reliability might be called into
question.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04648 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2015);  Adams v. Laird, 420 F.
2d 230, 238-239 (D. C. Cir. 1969), cert. denied 397 U.S. 1039 (1970).  Applicant has not rebutted
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 14-06093 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2015).  Applicant’s argument consists in large measure of an
alternative interpretation of the record, which is not enough to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016).  
3“Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.”  
4“[P]ersonal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress[.]”  
4
In summary, the record contains substantial evidence that Applicant made a false
certification regarding the locking of a secure facility; sent a classified email unencrypted; failed to
complete checkout procedures for a classified storage area; conducted extramarital affairs with four
foreign women; and failed to report his security significant conduct as he knew that he had an
obligation to do.  These infractions, viewed cumulatively, support the Judge’s conclusions under
each of the Guidelines covered by the SOR.  After evaluating the record evidence as a whole, we
conclude that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  In particular, security violations “strike at the
heart of the industrial security program.”  Once it is established that an applicant has committed
security violations, the applicant has “a very heavy burden” in mitigation.  Accordingly, a Judge
must give any claims of reform or rehabilitation “strict scrutiny.”  ISCR Case No. 11-09219 at 3
(App. Bd. Mar. 31, 2014). “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan                
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                    
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
