 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-04825 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
         For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On February 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline J (Criminal 
Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
In her SOR Response of February 21, 2015, Applicant admitted all allegations 
without elaboration. She also requested a determination based on the written record in 
lieu of a hearing. On July 6, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) containing seven attachments (“Items”). Applicant timely submitted a     
Response containing additional information. The case was assigned to me on October 
9, 2015. Based on my review of the case file and submissions, I find Applicant mitigated 
alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old assembly technician with special industry certifications 
in advance proficiencies. She has worked for the same defense contractor since 2006.1 
Applicant earned a high school diploma. Divorced in 2013, Applicant raised two 
children; one of her children died and the other is an adult. Applicant has maintained a 
security clearance since 1992. She has a history of alcohol-related incidents and legal 
violations. She was first cited for a legal infraction at age 32, when, in January 1987, 
she was cited for Failure to Comply Restricted Driving and Failure to Wear Seatbelt.   
 
 From about age 15 through December 2012, Applicant consumed alcohol, at 
times to excess and to the point of intoxication. In April 1986, she was arrested and 
charged with Driving While Impaired (DWI) and Hit-Run Property. The following month, 
she pled guilty and was sentenced to 60 days (suspended), two years probation, 
community service, $137 in fines and costs. Nearly a decade later, in September 1995, 
she was again arrested and charged with DWI, as well as Civil Revocation Driver’s 
License. The following month she pled guilty and was sentenced to 60 days 
(suspended), one year probation, and $165 in fines and costs. In December 2004, she 
was arrested and charged with DWI, Possessing an Open Container-Alcohol, and Civil 
Revocation of Driver’s License. In March 2005, she pled guilty and was sentenced to 
120 days (suspended), one year probation, and charged $238 in fines and costs.  
 
More recently, in February 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with Fail to 
Stop Sign/Flashing Red Light and Reckless Driving to Endanger. That May, she pled 
guilty to a lesser charge and was sentenced to $238 in fines and charges. In December 
2012, Applicant stated she consumed three or four whiskey and sodas, went to the 
grocery store, and was pulled over by police en route. A breathalyzer test revealed a 
blood alcohol content of 0.20. She was arrested and charged with DWI, Possessing an 
Open Container, and Failure to Maintain Lane Control. In December 2013, she pled 
guilty to those charges and was sentenced to 120 days jail (suspended), one year 
probation, suspension of driver’s license 45 days, 48 community service hours, and 
charged $690 in fines and costs.  
 
 From August 2013 to November 2013, Applicant, on her own initiative and before 
sentencing, received out-patient treatment at a counseling facility staffed with licensed 
alcohol clinicians. She was diagnosed with Alcohol Abuse. Applicant admits she abused 
alcohol. She then availed herself of her employer’s employee assistance program (EAP) 
regarding her alcohol abuse. In December 2013, however, she had three or four 
cocktails before bed. In the morning, she received a reprimand at her workplace stating 
that she smelled like alcohol. She then revisited the EAP counseling, enlarging the 
scope of her counseling to address belated grief issues related to her 20-year-old son’s 
untimely death in 2010.  Today, she attributes her ability to deal with her son’s death to 
that counseling. (FORM Response) Around the same time, she began attending 
                                                          
1 Applicant experienced a brief layoff from her work in early 2013 before resuming the same or a similar 
position. (FORM, Item 4 at 10-12/40) 
 
 
 
 
3 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). During this timeframe, she also was forced to deal with the 
end of her marriage and the ultimate divorce. 
 
In her January 2014 security clearance application (SCA), Applicant disclosed 
the majority of the incidents described above. As of that time, she was still receiving 
counseling for both alcohol abuse and grief. She has not abused alcohol since at least 
December 2013, nearly two-and-a-half years ago. Due to her positive prognosis, she 
completed the year long period of probation imposed in December 2013 by March 2014, 
over two years ago.  
 
The “real test of Applicant’s progress toward rehabilitation would occur when 
Applicant is off probation and not subject to monitoring or supervision.”2 Here, she has 
been incident-free for over two years, continues with EAP support counseling and AA, 
and, in almost three-and-a-half years (since December 2012), and has only had one 
incident indicating probable alcohol use or abuse (December 2013). She has found 
solace and effective support through EAP counseling and AA support group. She 
continues with those resources. Now age 61, Applicant understands how her acts have 
compromised her long and successful career, and fully appreciates the seriousness of 
her past conduct. She regrets her past abuse of alcohol. She credibly wrote of her 
commitment to comport her behavior in such a manner that she will not again 
jeopardize her position or security clearance.  
 
At her job, Applicant is a well-regarded worker. Her superiors are aware of her 
past alcohol and legal issues, which were also disclosed on her recent security 
clearance application (SCA). Applicant told her employer that she wanted and needed 
help, noting that her life and her belated grief had made her life unmanageable. (FORM, 
Item 6 at 3) While it advised Applicant that it had an EAP program, the company did not 
require her to attend. Applicant attended EAP on her own volition.  
 
In response to a questionnaire regarding her last DWI, the company wrote: 
“[Applicant] is a long-standing employee working on classified hardware. She 
possesses critical assembly skills which are vital in meeting customer requirements for 
high reliability classified hardware. . . . [She] does not pose a threat to classified work. 
The Company recommends that she retain her clearance at this time.” (FORM, Item 6 
at 2) It also noted that Applicant was truly remorseful about her behavior and that she 
understood the seriousness of her situation with regard to her continued employment 
and the ability to retain a security clearance. While the report noted that a supervisor 
cited Applicant for having the smell of alcohol on her breath, her employer noted that 
she has never exhibited behavior that she was impaired or that adversely affected her 
work. (FORM, Item 6 at 2) 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 96-0710 at 2 (App Bd. Jun. 20, 1997); DISCR OSD Case No. 90-1115 at 2 
(App. Bd. Oct. 6, 1992). 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
Applicant has a long history of alcohol abuse, of which she was diagnosed by 
licensed clinical staff. As a result of this condition, she was convicted of alcohol-related 
driving incidents multiple times in the past 20 years. Except for one incident where she 
reported as having smelled of alcohol at her workplace, her other alcohol-related 
incidents were while driving. There are three Disqualifying Conditions that apply to this 
case under AG ¶ 22:  
 
AG ¶ 22(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or 
duty in an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent;  
 
AG ¶ 22(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
AG ¶ 22(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program.  
 
Applicant admits she abused alcohol. She notes that she has not abused alcohol 
in nearly two-and-a-half years. She was released from her last period of probation early, 
over three years ago, due to her progress. She sought help through an out-patient 
facility, then through EAP counseling complemented by AA. She extended her 
counseling to grief counseling, which she credibly urges was needed to help address an 
underlying problem. Following her out-patient program in November 2013, however, 
Applicant was accused of having alcohol on her person at work a couple of weeks later. 
Applicant has not specifically addressed this. It is, therefore, unclear if this was the 
result of a true relapse, poor hygiene, or another reason besides alcohol abuse. 
Regardless, the following mitigating conditions are available:  
 
AG ¶ 23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 23(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
AG ¶ 23(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a 
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and 
relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; and  
 
AG ¶ 23(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of [AA] or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.  
 
Because it is unclear whether Applicant’s workplace incident was the result of a 
relapse or happenstance, AG ¶ 23(c) cannot apply. However, AG ¶ 23(b) does apply.  
The rest are inapplicable.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern regarding criminal conduct is explained at AG ¶ 30. 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations. Applicant’s multiple arrests between 1986 
and 2012, including multiple convictions, are sufficient to raise criminal conduct security 
concerns. They trigger application of the following Guideline J disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, and  
 
AG ¶ 31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted.  
 
The guideline also sets forth a number of conditions that may mitigate the 
criminal conduct concern. Under AG ¶ 32, there are three conditions that may apply: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a) so much time has passed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 32(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and   
 
AG ¶ 32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community development. 
 
 
 
 
7 
Applicant has not been involved in any illegal activity since 2012. Due to her 
positive progress, she finished her year of probation over two years ago after only 
serving only two months of the court-ordered year of probation. She no longer abuses 
alcohol and now comports her behavior appropriately. She is remorseful of her past 
difficulties with the law and alcohol. She continues with EAP and AA on her own volition. 
She understands the gravity of her past behavior, how it can jeopardize her remaining 
years in her present career track, and is committed to maintaining sobriety. In light of 
the facts in this case, AG ¶ 23(d) applies. The rest are inapplicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based on consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old assembly technician with special area skills who has 
worked for the same defense contractor since 2006. Her employer values her special 
talents and has not seen alcohol ever adversely affect her work or behavior. She has a 
high school diploma, recently divorced, and has one grown child. Another child died a 
couple of years ago at age 20. His death still leaves her grief-stricken and has 
necessitated counseling.  
 
Between 1987, when the 32-year-old Applicant was cited for failure to comply 
with a driving restriction and failing to use a seatbelt, and 2012, when the 58-year-old 
Applicant was arrested for her fourth DWI in the past 30 years, Applicant had multiple 
arrests. In 2013, she received out-patient counseling and treatment, possibly had one 
relapse of drinking to excess, and started to take her alcohol and behavioral problems 
seriously. She reentered her EAP program with a fresh zeal, now addressing both her 
abuse of alcohol and her grief over her son’s loss. She has complemented this 
counseling with AA. She openly discussed her problems with her employer, admitted 
her need for help, and noted that she is now receiving effective counseling. She also 
expressed her intent to do what it takes to keep her job and security clearance, and 
related genuine remorse over her past behavior.  
 
Applicant has managed her alcohol consumption, if any, responsibly for, at least, 
the past two-and-a-half years. The court ended her last probation because of the 
“positive progress” she demonstrated. She also has earned the support of her 
employer, which recommends she continue to maintain a security clearance. Given 
 
 
 
 
8 
where she is at this point in her career, and her credible descriptions of both her 
contrition and her desire to continue working, I find it highly unlikely she will again 
jeopardize her employment or her security clearance by abusing alcohol or violating the 
law. I find Applicant mitigated alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a- 2.f:   For Applicant 
 
           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
