KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all the evidence.
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-04553.a1
DATE: 04/13/2016
DATE: April 13, 2016
In Re:
-----
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04553
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 5, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the
written record.  On January 28, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant was fired from a job in 2006 for reprimanding a coworker and having lied about
a hospital stay.1  This was not alleged in the SOR.  From 2008 until 2011, Applicant worked for a
Defense contractor, which required him to deploy in support of U.S. military operations overseas. 
During a deployment, it was suggested to him that he carry a personal firearm for safety and
protection of assets, and someone gave him a pistol.  Applicant knew that this violated a military
general order.  While on a visit to the U.S., Applicant purchased a pistol of his own, disassembled
it, and shipped it overseas, so that it would be available to him upon his return to the deployed
location.  After his return, he reassembled the pistol and carried it with him on trips off base.  He
stored and concealed it when it was not in use.  During a subsequent period of leave by Applicant,
personnel opened a case searching for supplies, leading to the discovery of Applicant’s unauthorized
weapon.  Applicant was ordered to surrender his identification card, was debarred from his
employer’s contracts, and ordered to leave the country.  Applicant subsequently resigned his
employment.  Applicant’s SOR also alleged that Applicant had not disclosed this infraction in his
security clearance application (SCA).  The Judge noted that Applicant had not mentioned it when
answering a question about whether he had left a job due to misconduct.  However, he also noted
that Applicant had disclosed it in another part of the SCA.  Applicant attributed the apparent
discrepancies to “two different terminations.”  Decision at 3.  In his response to the SOR, Applicant
stated that he had resigned in 2011 due to circumstances beyond his control.  He stated that he had
carried the weapon with full knowledge of his supervisors, managers, and military commanders. 
He provided no documentation in support of this contention.
The Judge’s Analysis
1Applicant stated that he had covered for a fellow employee who claimed he was taking the day off to visit his
girlfriend in the hospital.  In fact, the girlfriend was not in the hospital and did not know where the employee was. 
Applicant later engaged in a heated argument with this employee, after hours on the job site.  This argument was reported
to management as being unprofessional, with the result that Applicant and the employee were both fired.  Clearance
Interview Summary at 2-3, included in Item 3, Answers to Interrogatories.  The record contains evidence that Applicant
was also terminated from a job due to violating his employer’s “zero tolerance” policy regarding sexual harassment,
although he states that a subsequent EEO investigation concluded that the charge was not substantiated.  Item 2, Security
Clearance Application (SCA), at 23; Interview Summary, supra, at 3. 
 
2
Though noting that Applicant’s various statements about his 2011 job termination were not
totally consistent, the Judge found that he had provided enough information about the incident so
that his SCA answers, viewed as a whole, were not objectively false.  However, he concluded that
this job termination itself raised Guideline E concerns about Applicant’s judgment and reliability. 
In concluding that Applicant had not mitigated this concern, the Judge stated that Applicant was
aware that his conduct was prohibited and that there was no evidence that he had been granted an
exemption.  The Judge also found that there was no evidence corroborating Applicant’s claim that
he had voluntarily relinquished the gun prior to its discovery.  In the whole-person analysis, the
Judge reiterated many  of his comments, noting in addition that there was no evidence that
supervisors or commanders had tolerated Applicant’s possession of a weapon.  The Judge also stated
that Applicant had not provided enough evidence to show rehabilitation.  
Discussion
Applicant reiterates in detail information from the record concerning the circumstances
underlying his unlawful possession of a weapon, his reasons for having done so, and his contention
that the chain of command was aware of it.  Applicant’s argument is not sufficient to rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Neither is it sufficient to
show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06093 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2015).  Applicant’s argument
includes matters from outside the record, which we cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
3
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
