The Government submitted seven items for the record.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-05330
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On January 29, 2015, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations)  and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September
2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on March 3, 2016.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant material (FORM), dated November 3,
2015.   Applicant received the FORM on November 12, 2015. Applicant did not respond1
2
to the FORM. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under
Guideline F (1.a through 1.n), and he provided explanations. Applicant denied the
falsification allegation under Guideline E. 
Applicant is 30 years old. He is separated from his wife and in the process of
divorce. He has two children. He  obtained his high school diploma in 2004, and he
attends college courses. He served in the United States Marine Corps (USMC) from
2004 until 2013 on active duty and received an honorable discharge. Applicant
completed his most recent security clearance application in 2014 and has been
employed as a federal contractor since 2013. (GX 1) He has held a security clearance
since 2004. (Item 3)
The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts, including five medical accounts, five
collection accounts, and three charged-off accounts. (GX 5-7) The approximate total for
the delinquent debts is $81,000. Applicant cites his financial difficulties to supporting
extended family members and his recent marital separation. In 2008, he and his wife
took responsibility for his ill mother-in-law, who was unemployed. During that time,
Applicant and his wife fell behind on their bills.  When he completed his active duty in
the USMC, it became more difficult to support the extra family. His priority was to pay
housing bills and food expenses. Other bills were delayed.(Item 2) 
Applicant did not provide any documentation concerning any payments or
payment plans addressing the debts. He and his estranged wife have decided to file for
bankruptcy together. He has not provided any details as to when this might occur. He
intends to learn from his mistakes.
Applicant responded that in regard to intentionally falsifying his security
clearance application by not listing any debts under Section 26: Financial Record, he
did not attend to detail. He stated that he had just completed a follow-up investigation to
a security upgrade and his debts were detailed on that application. When he completed
this application, he just changed addresses and phone numbers. He admits being
careless in not checking other areas of the application. When Applicant was
interviewed, he discussed this with the investigator and told him that he accidentally
overlooked the answer. He states that he had no intention of being dishonest abut any
information. He spoke with the investigator and was told that a note would be made
concerning the omission. He takes responsibility for his lack of attention. (Item 2)
The report of investigation, dated May 2014, confirms Applicant’s explanation
about the omission of debts. He also responded that he has been working on his debts
to get caught up. He voluntarily reported his delinquent debts to the investigator.  He
also explained that when his mother-in-law came to live with his family, he incurred
$30,000 in medical debts. He has used loans from the Navy Relief Program. Also, in
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
3
2012, he was ill and incurred additional medical expenses.  He states that he has
contacted his creditors and sought credit counseling online through the military. He
intends to resolve his debts. (Item 4)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance of2
evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The following condition is relevant here.
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
In this case, AG ¶ 16 (a) does not apply. Applicant answered his 2014 security
clearance application and made required changes, but he was careless. He listed the
debts in his followup investigation. He discussed this with the investigator, as reflected
in the report. He denied that his answer was a falsity and admitted that he was
careless. He was candid that he was careless with the second questionnaire. Some of
the accounts he did not know about at the time. I do not find that he intentionally
falsified his 2014 security clearance application.  
5
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. It also states that an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted that he has debts and had delinquencies due to caring for his
mother-in-law and medical expenses. After his separation from the military, his financial
problems were exacerbated. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions
raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security
concerns.  
Applicant has not provided any documentation to show that he has resolved any
debts. He is now thinking about filing for bankruptcy, but no action has thus far been
taken. His separation and future divorce also led to indebtedness. However, he has not
provided any documentation to show what actions he has taken. He states that  caring
for his mother-in-law created a large amount of medical debt. He could not pay for his
own bills due to her situation.  He intends to pay his bills but a promise to pay in the
future is not sufficient for mitigation. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating
Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) only
receives partial application.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
partially applies. Applicant’s separation, medical condition, and other medical expenses
were beyond his control. However, he has not produced documentation that he is
resolving his debts or has a plan in place. The filing for bankruptcy is a legitimate
means of resolving debt, but he has not yet started the process.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has no application. He has not provided any
documentation that he has resolved his debts or has the means to do so. There is
information that he has received some financial counseling. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
6
indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control), however, does not
apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 30 years old. He has held a security clearance for many years. He has
served in the military. He provided for his family and took in his mother-in-law, who was
ill and unemployed. However, he was not able to continue to pay her large medical bills
as well as his own. He had a separation and divorce that impacted his financial status.
There is nothing in the record concerning any criminal behavior. He has worked hard for
many years.  Despite the fact that he intends to pay all his debts, he has not provided
any evidence that he has paid any SOR debts or is in a position to pay them. Moreover,
given the fact that none of the debts in the SOR have been resolved or in a repayment
plan, I have doubts that there are clear indications that his financial problems have
been resolved. He has not mitigated the security concerns under the financial
considerations guideline.
He has, however, mitigated the personal conduct concern. I do not find that
Applicant intentionally falsified his security clearance application. Applicant omitted
information about his finances in his responses to Section 26. However, he detailed
information about his debts in a follow-up investigation. His explanation that he was
careless and acted in haste when he did the application is credible. 
Applicant has not provided sufficient information to establish mitigation under the
financial considerations guideline. He has mitigated the security concerns under the
personal conduct guideline.  
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                       AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-.n: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
