 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 14-06821  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated over $31,000 in delinquent debts that she incurred 
between 2010 and 2014. She provided evidence that she resolved or is resolving about 
$10,000 of that amount. She did not demonstrate that she has a workable plan or 
budget to resolve the remaining debts. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.   
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On April 22, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On August 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 9 and 10, 2015 (Answer), and 
requested that her case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record 
without a hearing. (Item 1.) On November 19, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing six Items, was mailed to Applicant on November 20, 2015, and received by 
her on December 27, 2015. The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days 
of her receipt of the FORM. She timely submitted a letter with attachments, which I 
marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and admitted into the record without objection. 
Applicant did not submit any objections to the Government’s Items; hence, Items 1 
through 6 are admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on March 29, 
2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer Applicant admitted 19 of the 51 allegations of delinquent debts 
contained in Paragraph 1 of the SOR, and denied the remaining 32 allegations. (Item 1.)  
 
 Applicant is 43 years old, and divorced for the second time in 2009. She has 
three children, ages 22, 11, and 3. She obtained a bachelor’s degree in 2005. Since 
2014 she has worked for a federal contractor. She was unemployed from April 2013 to 
February 2014, some of which time she was pregnant with her third child. (Item 2.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from May 2014, July 2015, and 
November 2015, the SOR alleged 51 delinquent debts, which totaled $31,072. The 
debts became delinquent between 2010 and 2014. (Items 3, 5, 6.) Applicant disclosed 
several delinquent debts in her April 2014 SF-86 and attributed them to a period of 
financial hardship. She indicated that she unsuccessfully attempted to work with a debt 
advisor to help resolve some debts. She stated that she was contacting all of her 
creditors and was making payments on her debts. (Item 2.) 
 
 In her October 2015  Answer, Applicant denied 32 debts on the basis that she 
paid some, was paying others, or could not locate the creditor or the debt. She included 
proof that she paid the state tax lien for $1,916 in March 2014. (SOR ¶ 1.x; SOR ¶ 1.yy 
is a duplicate of said debt.) In her response to the FORM, she submitted proof that she 
paid: SOR ¶ 1.a for $2,311 (AE A at 7.); SOR ¶ 1.z for $1,745 (AE A at 11.); and SOR ¶ 
1.aa for $1,745 (AE A at 4.). She provided proof that she is paying the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.kk for $388 (AE A at 9-10.). She also submitted proof of payment of a judgment owed 
to Portfolio Recovery, but that document does not reference an amount or identify the 
original creditor. (AE A at 2-3.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In her Answer and response to the FORM, Applicant stated she is paying her 
delinquent debts when money is available. She said she could not find all of the 
documentation pertinent to her various payments. (AR; AE A at 1.)    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of incurring delinquent debt. From 2010 to 2014, she 
accumulated at least 50 delinquent accounts totaling over $31,000. Her ongoing pattern 
of delinquent debt, and history of inability or unwillingness to pay lawful debts, raise 
security concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts have been ongoing since 2010, the majority of 
which remain unresolved, and cast some doubts about her reliability. The evidence did 
not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant stated that she accumulated delinquent debts as a consequence of a 
financial hardship and a period of unemployment. Those may have been circumstances 
beyond her control. However, in order to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b), she 
needed to produce evidence that she acted responsibly under those conditions, which 
she did not do. Nor did she submit evidence of financial counseling, a budget, or other 
information from which to determine a track record of debt resolution and show 
indications that her financial problems are under control. Hence, AG ¶ 20(c) does not 
apply. She submitted evidence that she paid or is paying 6 of the 51 SOR-alleged 
debts, indicating that she is trying to initiate a good-faith effort to resolve some debts. 
AG ¶ 20(d) has application as to those debts. Although she denied many debts, she did 
not provide sufficient evidence that she formally disputed them or is resolving them as 
she stated which evidence is necessary to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
 
6 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 43-year-old 
woman, who has worked for a federal contractor since 2014. The SOR listed 51 
delinquent debts that arose between 2010 and 2014 totaling about $31,000, of which 
Applicant provided proof that she has resolved or is resolving about $10,000 of that 
amount. She stated in her Answer that she has payment plans or paid several other 
debts but is unable to locate the pertinent documentation. While she demonstrated that 
she has taken important steps toward resolving some debts, she has not yet 
established a track record of resolving debt or provided a budget or organized plan 
demonstrating an ability to continue addressing them. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling. The potential for pressure, coercion, and duress from her financial situation 
remains undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with sufficient doubt as 
to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. She did not meet 
her burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
      Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.w:       Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.x:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.y:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.z and 1.aa:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.bb through 1.jj:       Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.kk:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.ll through 1.xx:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.yy:    For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
