KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings were supported by substantial evidence. the Appeal
Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Applicant did not rebut the presumption that the
Judge considered all of the evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 14-02619.a1
DATE: 04/07/2016
DATE: April 7, 2016
In Re:
--------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02619
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 7, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant  requested a hearing. 
On January 14, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge John Grattan Metz, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has been employed by a Defense contractor since 2013.  He served in the military,
retiring as an E-7.  Applicant’s wife resigned from Government employment and currently works
in a job that pays her on commission.  She makes between $80,000 and $120,000 a year.    
In 2009, Applicant received an SOR that alleged $66,000 in delinquent debt, including a tax
debt to the IRS.  Applicant presented his case to a DOHA hearing and received a favorable clearance
decision.  Some of the findings in the case before us are based upon those in the 2009 decision.
Of the seven debts contained in the 2009 SOR, Applicant paid three and entered into
payment plans for three others.  Two of the debts were to the same creditor and were combined.  The
IRS  garnished Applicant’s wages.  He entered into a payment agreement, but he missed some of
the monthly payments.  Another debt was a Home Equity Line of Credit (HELOC)/credit card. 
Applicant entered into an agreement to pay this debt over a course of time, with a balloon payment
at the end.  Applicant was not able to make these payments.  The Judge in the prior case made
conclusions that turned out to have been overly optimistic regarding Applicant’s financial condition.
Applicant’s current SOR contains eight delinquent debts, all but two of which occurred after
the 2009 hearing.  Applicant states that he has experienced financial hardship over the last several
years, including expenses associated with caring for elderly parents and providing for his son. 
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for honesty and trustworthiness.  He has about $655 each month
after expenses and has set aside about $4,000 to pay debts.  He promised to pay off his debts but
acknowledged that he had made similar promises in the past without following through.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant had led the previous Judge to overestimate his financial
health.  He stated that, after the earlier favorable decision, Applicant did not resolve all of his
problems and in fact acquired new ones.  He also concluded that none of the mitigating conditions
applied.  He stated that Applicant had not shown responsible action in regard to his debts, insofar
as they have “lingered for many years with incomplete resolution or inconsistent efforts toward
resolution.”  Decision at 6.  He reiterated his finding that Applicant had made promises in the past
to resolve debts yet failed to act upon them in a meaningful way.  
Discussion
 Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings of fact.  He contends that the loan in
question was not a HELOC but a personal loan.  He also asserts that the Judge erred concerning his
IRS debt and denies that all of the debts in his current SOR are new.  We have considered the totality
2
of Applicant’s challenge to the Judge’s findings.  We conclude that the findings are based upon
“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in
light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  Applicant has not
demonstrated the Judge committed any error that affected the overall disposition of the case.  The
Judge’s material findings are sustainable.  Applicant’s brief refers to matters from outside the record. 
We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant notes that without a
clearance he may not have a job.  The Directive does not permit us to consider the impact of an
unfavorable decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04202 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 24, 2015). 
Applicant’s citations to favorable evidence, such as his having become current on his mortgage, the
expenses associated with caring for his parents, and losses in his and his wife’s pay are not sufficient
to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Neither are they
sufficient to undermine the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04202,
supra, at 3.  Applicant strenuously denies that he intentionally misled the Judge in the earlier case. 
However, the Judge in the case before us did not find that Applicant had deceived the earlier Judge,
only that his presentation in the 2009 case had overstated his financial health.  We find no error in
the challenged comment.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
