 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06927 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
Desiree Demers, Personal Representative 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has 
demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts. He has also 
demonstrated financial reform and rehabilitation. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 24, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision on  the written 
record. Department Counsel timely converted the case to a hearing as allowed under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.7.2 On December 29, 2015, I issued a prehearing order to the parties 
regarding the exchange and submission of discovery, the filing of motions, and the 
disclosure of any witnesses.3  Department Counsel complied with the terms of the 
order.4 At the hearing, convened on January 13, 2016, I admitted Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, without objection.  
After the hearing, Applicant submitted AE E through Q, which are also admitted without 
objection.5 I received the transcript (Tr.) on January 19, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 29, has worked for a federal contractor since June 2013. Initially hired 
as a general maintenance worker, Applicant received a promotion to a carpenter 
position in October 2015. Applicant submitted a security clearance application in June 
2013. The ensuing investigation revealed several delinquent accounts in Applicant’s 
name. The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $28,900 on 14 accounts.6  
 
  Applicant incurred the debts alleged in the SOR between 2006 and 2010. From 
2005 to 2006, Applicant attended a trade school. He financed his education with three 
student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.l – 1.n). In 2013, Applicant entered a rehabilitation program for 
the defaulted loans. Since completing the 10-month rehabilitation program, Applicant 
has made all of his loan payments on time and the accounts are in good standing.7  
 
The largest delinquent account alleged in the SOR is for a set of repossessed 
tools Applicant initially purchased in 2010 for $4,100. Applicant made payments on the 
tools until March 2012, when the tools were repossessed. The account, which now has 
a balance of $6,600 because of accruing interest, has bounced between the original 
creditor and a collection agency. Applicant believes that SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.g, and 1.k are 
the accounts held by the collection agencies. Applicant has been working with the 
original creditor, who now holds the account, since 2012 to reach a repayment 
agreement. The crux of Applicant’s dispute with the creditor is that he believes the tools 
were wrongfully repossessed by one of the creditor’s franchisees, who is no longer in 
business. Applicant’s most recent contact with the creditor occurred in January 2016. 
                                                          
2 Tr. 6. 
 
3 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
4 The discovery letter, dated November 30, 2015, is appended to the record as HE II. 
 
5 Correspondence regarding Applicant’s post-hearing submission is appended to the record as HE III. 
 
6 Tr. 19, 35; GE 1-5.  
 
7 Tr. 29, 42-43; AE Q.  
 
 
3 
 
The account remains unresolved, but Applicant plans to pay it once he and the creditor 
are able to reach mutually acceptable terms.8  
 
From 2008 to 2010, Applicant was married to his first wife. He believes that his 
financial problems and the majority of the debts alleged in the SOR occurred during this 
marriage. Applicant was the only source of income for the couple. He supported his wife 
while she was in school. Because she was unable to obtain credit on her own, Applicant 
opened several credit accounts for her benefit, including the accounts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.j ($1,044), 1.c ($2,759), and 1.d ($488).  Applicant paid SOR ¶ 1.j in 2013. Initially, 
Applicant thought that his ex-wife should bear responsibility for the accounts he opened 
for her. He has come to understand that he is solely responsible for any accounts he 
opens in his name. Accordingly, he also paid SOR ¶ 1.d and has entered into a 
payment plan for the debt alleged in ¶ 1.c.9 
 
Applicant began dating his current wife in 2011 and they married in 2014. They 
have a household income of $130,000 and a monthly disposable income between 
$2,500 and $3,000. Applicant and his wife have been working to resolve Applicant’s 
delinquent accounts and rehabilitate his finances. In addition to SOR ¶ 1.c and 1.d, 
Applicant has also resolved ¶¶ 1.e – 1.f, and 1.h -1.i. Applicant and his wife live within 
their means. They are able to pay their recurring bills timely in addition to accruing short 
term and retirement savings.10  
 
Applicant is performing well in his position. He is well regarded by his supervisors 
and has received several awards for his work. He has also received a letter of 
appreciation from his military client. Applicant is viewed by all to be trustworthy, and 
dependable.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
8 Tr. 26, 40-42, 46-48; AE D, F.  
 
9 Tr. 21, 37, 49-59; AE H. 
 
10 Tr. 19-20, 30-32, 43-44; AE I, O.  
 
11 AE B-C, K, M-N. 
 
4 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”12 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $28,900 in delinquent accounts. However, 
the record supports Applicant’s contention that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.g, 
                                                          
12  AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
and 1.k are duplicates of the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b for the repossessed tools.13 
Accordingly, those allegations are decided in Applicant’s favor. Applicant’s admissions 
and the credit reports in the record establish a prima facie case that Applicant had a 
history of not meeting his financial obligations and that he demonstrated an 
unwillingness to pay his bills.14 However, Applicant has submitted sufficient information 
to mitigate the security concerns. Applicant resolved the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j 
two years before the SOR issued. He has rehabilitated his student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.l-
1.m) and demonstrated a positive payment history. With the help of his wife, Applicant 
has made a good-faith effort to repay his creditors. He has entered in to a payment plan 
for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and paid the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.d- 1.f and 1.h and 
1.j.15 Only one debt, SOR ¶ 1.b, remains unresolved. However, Applicant has been in 
contact with the creditor since 2012 to negotiate terms of a payment plan. I am 
confident he will follow through with any payment arrangement. Applicant’s finances are 
now under control. Furthermore, the amount of the debt, $6,600 is unlikely to be a 
source of vulnerability or exploitation.16 
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about his suitability for access to 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant’s wife is a good influence on him. He is now in a 
relationship where he is able to share the financial responsibilities of running a 
household with a responsible partner. With his wife’s help, Applicant has been able to 
rehabilitate his finances. Given the state of their current finances, it is unlikely that 
Applicant will find himself in similar financial trouble again. This, along with the favorable 
information in the record about Applicant’s job performance mitigates the security 
concerns alleged in the SOR.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:    For Applicant 
                                                          
13 AE F, L, P. 
 
14 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
15 AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
16 AG ¶ 20(c).   
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
