 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03038 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement security concerns, but she did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and H (drug involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 7, 2015, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on August 20, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
 
2 
 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on December 11, 2015. As of February 1, 2016, she had not 
responded. The case was assigned to me on April 22, 2016. The Government exhibits 
included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 2013. She is applying for security clearance for the first time. 
She has a bachelor’s degree awarded in 1996, a master’s degree awarded in 2004, and 
a Ph.D. awarded in 2013. As of March 2014, she had never married and she had no 
children.1   
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana periodically from 1997 to 1999 when she was in 
college. She smoked marijuana at a friend’s birthday party in 2011. She smoked 
marijuana with the friend again the next day. She has not used any illegal drugs since 
the two occasions in 2011. She no longer associates with her friends who used drugs. 
She signed a statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.2   
 
 Applicant intentionally failed to report her illegal drug use on her Questionnaire 
for National Security Positions (SF 86), which she submitted in August 2013.3 Above 
her signature, she certified: 
 
My statements on this form, and on any attachments to it, are true, 
complete, and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and are 
made in good faith. . . . I understand that a knowing and willful false 
statement on this form can be punished by fine or imprisonment or both 
(18 U.S.C 1001). I understand that negatively withholding, 
misrepresenting, or falsifying information may have a negative effect on 
my security clearance, employment prospects, or job status, up to and 
including denial or revocation of my security clearance, or my removal and 
debarment from Federal service.4   
 
 Applicant was interviewed for her background investigation in April 2014. The 
interviewer asked her if she had used any illegal substances in the last seven years. 
Applicant reported her marijuana use in 2011 and also her use while in college. She 
stated that she did not report her marijuana use on her SF 86 because she thought it 
would reflect poorly on her.5 Applicant wrote in her response to the SOR: 
                                                          
1 Item 3.  
 
2 Items 2, 4.  
 
3 Items 2-4.  
 
4 Item 3.  
 
5 Item 4.  
 
3 
 
I would like to state that I was anxious and apprehensive about providing 
information about illegal activities on the [SF 86] because I did not know 
what the consequences of such an admission would be. I was afraid that 
an admission of drug use would lead to an automatic termination of my 
employment, which I value and enjoy and did not want to lose. However, 
upon meeting with the examiner in-person, it became clear to me that 
honesty and truthful answers to the examiner’s questions were needed in 
order to eliminate my vulnerability to external pressure, coercion, or 
exploitation. 
 
 Applicant submitted letters from supervisors attesting to her excellent job 
performance, fidelity, trustworthiness, honesty, work ethic, judgment, reliability, integrity, 
and willingness to abide by rules and regulations. Applicant informed her supervisors 
that she was untruthful about her marijuana use on her SF 86, but she reported it to the 
investigator.6   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
6 Item 2.  
 
 
4 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
 (a) any drug abuse;7 and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana when she was in college and again on two occasions 
in 2011. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) are applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
                                                          
7 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
5 
 
 
  (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 Applicant has not used any illegal drugs since 2011. She no longer associates 
with her friends who used drugs. She signed a statement of intent not to use illegal 
drugs in the future with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. I find that 
she demonstrated an appropriate period of abstinence and that illegal drug use is 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant intentionally provided false information about her marijuana use on her 
SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.   
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant corrected her false SF 86 during her background interview eight 
months later. She stated that she did not report her marijuana use on her SF 86 
because she thought it would reflect poorly on her. She also stated that she was afraid 
that she would lose her job, which she values and enjoys.  
 
 The correction was not prompt, but Applicant is credited with disclosing the 
information to the investigator. AG ¶ 17(a) is partially applicable. She informed her 
supervisors about her marijuana use and that she was untruthful on her SF 86. AG ¶ 
17(e) is applicable. Notwithstanding, I have continuing concerns. Applicant certified that 
she was aware that she was committing a criminal offense punishable by fine, 
imprisonment, or both, and that falsifying information could cause her to be denied a 
security clearance and lose her job. Despite those certifications, she decided to falsify 
her SF 86. I am unable to determine that the conduct is unlikely to recur. It continues to 
cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 
17(c) and 17(d) are not applicable. I find that personal conduct security concerns remain 
despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and H in this whole-person analysis.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. However, Applicant 
smoked marijuana and then lied about it on her SF 86 because she was afraid it could 
affect her job. Self-reporting is a fundamental requirement for clearance holders. I am 
concerned that she may again choose her job over the truth.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the drug involvement security concerns, but she did not mitigate the personal 
conduct security concerns  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
