 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-06876 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 17, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on December 4, 2015, and reassigned to me on January 15, 2016. The Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 15, 2016, 
scheduling the hearing for February 1, 2016. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
A letter from Department Counsel to Applicant was marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
2 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without 
objection. The record was held open until March 7, 2016, and extended to April 4, 2016, 
for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted documents that were 
marked AE B through H and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on February 9, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2011. He is applying for eligibility to hold a public trust 
position. He has a bachelor’s degree that was awarded in 2006 and a master’s degree 
that was awarded in 2010. He is married without children.1 
 
 Applicant did not file federal income tax returns for tax years 2009 and 2011 
through 2014 when they were due. He stated that he did not file some years because of 
an oversight, but he also admitted that “other years, it was just [him] being lazy and not 
getting them done.”2   
 
 Applicant reported on his February 2014 Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) that he did not file his tax return for tax year 2012. When he was 
interviewed for his background investigation in March 2014, he stated that he missed 
the deadline to file his 2012 return. He stated that he would file the return with his 2013 
return. Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories in November 2014. He still had not 
filed his late returns.3 
 
 Applicant filed his federal income tax returns for 2009 and 2011 through 2014 in 
about July 2015. He owed taxes for every year. As of January 2016, he owed $21,500 
in taxes, penalties, and interest. In January 2016, he entered into an installment 
agreement with the IRS to pay $300 per month. He established that he made the $300 
monthly payments in January, February, and March 2016.4 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 21-22, 26, 30; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 14-19, 25-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. The SOR only alleged that Applicant did not 
file income tax returns in 2012 and 2013. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for 
disqualification purposes. It may be used in the application of mitigating conditions, and in the whole-
person analysis. 
3 GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 14-25, 32; AE A-H. 
 
3 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
4 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant did not file his 2012 and 2013 federal income tax returns when they 
were due. AG ¶ 19(g) is applicable.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 Applicant admitted that laziness contributed to him not filing his tax returns. He 
knew when he submitted the SF 86 that his unfiled returns were a problem. During his 
background interview in March 2014, he stated that he would file the 2012 return with 
his 2013 return. He still had not filed his late returns when he responded to DOHA 
interrogatories in November 2014. He finally filed the returns in about July 2015. He 
entered into an installment agreement with the IRS in January 2016 to pay $300 per 
month, and he made the first three required payments. However, he still owes more 
than $20,000. 
 
 Applicant’s financial issues are recent. They continue to cast doubt on his 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to comply with laws and regulations. AG  
¶ 20(a) is not applicable. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable because the returns have 
been filed. Nonetheless, financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence 
of some mitigation.5   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
                                                          
5 See ISCR Case No. 12-05053 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014).  
 
5 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
   
 
 
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
