 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 14-04803 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant made sufficient progress resolving the debts alleged in his statement of 
reasons (SOR), which alleges 14 delinquent debts totaling $37,955. While additional 
sustained financial effort is necessary, he has established a track record of debt 
payment and resolution. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
Access to classified information is granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On February 5, 2014, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On March 28, 2015, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. 
 
 
2 
                                         
 
On May 7, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a hearing. 
On February 11, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On February 25, 
2016, the case was assigned to me. On March 9, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for March 29, 2016. 
(HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits, and Applicant 
offered seven exhibits. (Transcript (Tr.) 16-19; Government Exhibit (GE) 1-5; Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A-G) All proffered exhibits were admitted without objection. (Tr. 17, 19; GE 
1-5; AE A-G) On April 6, 2016, DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m, and he 
discussed the other SOR allegations without admitting or denying them. He also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted 
as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 5) He has been 
employed by the defense contractor for the previous three years in a position relating to 
aircraft maintenance. (Tr. 8, 27) In 1994, Applicant received a diploma of general 
education development (GED). (Tr. 5) In 2000, he married, and in 2008, he was 
divorced. (Tr. 7) His children are ages 10 and 14. (Tr. 7) 
 
From 2000 to 2012, Applicant served in the Navy, and his specialty was aviation 
electronics technician. (Tr. 5-6) He left active duty as a petty officer second class, and 
he received an honorable discharge. (Tr. 6, 20) He was deployed three times to the Iraq 
theater of operations. (Tr. 27, 49-50) In 2010, he received an associate’s degree in 
electronic engineering technology. (Tr. 6, 13; GE 1) He is attending college to earn a 
degree in computer science. (Tr. 6, 28-29)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, SF 86, 
SOR response, and hearing record. From March 2012 to September 2012, Applicant 
was unemployed. (Tr. 20; GE 1; GE 2) His unemployment and his spouse’s abuses of 
his credit were the primary genesis of the negative information in his credit reports.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is a telecommunications collection debt for $506. 
Applicant said he never had an account with the original creditor. (Tr. 30) His credit 
report included addresses where he never lived, and he disputed his responsibility for 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Tr. 31) He requested that the creditor provide documentation 
showing his signature to show he opened or originated the account. (Tr. 31) Applicant’s 
March 16, 2016 credit report shows the debt is disputed. (AE A at 2; AE G) 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is a charged-off credit card debt for $2,718. The last 
action on the account was in 2008. (Tr. 33) Applicant believes his wife opened the 
account without his permission. (Tr. 33) His spouse declined to accept responsibility for 
the debt. (Tr. 34) Applicant elected to pay the debt in full even though he believed he 
was not responsible for it. (Tr. 34) The debt no longer appears on his credit report. (Tr. 
34; AE G) On March 16, 2016, the creditor wrote the debt was settled in full. (AE E) 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is a vehicle-related debt for $7,199. Applicant’s girlfriend 
took his vehicle to another state without his permission. (Tr. 35) She made some 
payments on the vehicle loan; she stopped making payments; and the vehicle was 
repossessed. (Tr. 34-36) The debt was removed from Applicant’s credit report, and 
Applicant believed the creditor had determined she was responsible for this debt. (Tr. 
36; SOR response; GE 3) He is credited with successfully disputing this debt. 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d for $452 and the debt in SOR ¶ 1.l for $557 are the same 
bank-collection debt. (Tr. 37) Applicant disputed his responsibility for the debt. (Tr. 37) 
The dispute is documented in his March 16, 2015 credit report. (AE G at 9) 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e is a charged-off bank debt for $1,275, and SOR ¶ 1.h is a 
charged-off debt for $1,987. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h originated with the same 
bank creditor. Applicant believed the two debts owed to the creditor were resolved. (Tr. 
39; AE A at 2) On his 2014 federal income tax return, he disclosed income of $958 as 
documented in an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) form 1099-C for one of the debts. (Tr. 
39-40; AE A at 2; AE C) He anticipates receiving an IRS form 1099-C for the other debt. 
(AE A at 2; AE G at 5)   
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f is a retail-collection debt for $257. Applicant believed his 
spouse opened the account without his consent, and he disputed his responsibility for 
this debt. (Tr. 40; AE A at 2; AE G at 8) 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g is a charged-off bank debt for $8,623. Applicant’s March 
16, 2016 credit report shows the debt was paid and closed. (AE A at 2; AE G at 6) It 
indicates the creditor wrote off $2,718. (AG G at 6) On his 2013 federal income tax 
return, he disclosed income of $6,427 as documented in an IRS form 1099-C, as the 
amount the creditor wrote off. (Tr. 39; AE D; AE G at 6) 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i is a judgment relating to an apartment complex for $1,205. 
Applicant said he was not living in the apartment complex, and the creditor indicated the 
debt was a mistake, and the judgment was satisfied. (Tr. 42) The judgment does not 
appear on his current credit report. (GE 3)    
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j is a bank-collection debt for $6,627. Applicant never had 
an account with the original creditor bank. (Tr. 48) Applicant did not recognize the debt; 
his credit repair company successfully disputed it; and it was removed from his credit 
report. (Tr. 44)  
 
 
4 
                                         
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k is a utilities-collection debt for $384. Applicant said the 
debt became delinquent while he was deployed; when he returned from deployment, 
the debt was paid; and it does not appear on his credit report. (Tr. 43-44; AE G) 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.m is a child-support arrearage for $5,678. After leaving 
active duty, Applicant received unemployment compensation; however, fifty percent was 
used to pay his child support debt. (Tr. 21) Fifty percent of his unemployment 
compensation was insufficient to fully pay his child support, and an arrearage resulted. 
(Tr. 24) He informed the state and his former spouse that once he became employed, 
he would pay his child support and make payments on his arrearage. (Tr. 25-26) He 
made some payments, and on April 24, 2015, he reached a formal payment 
arrangement with the state to address his arrearage. He pays $600 monthly in child 
support and $150 monthly to address his child support arrearage. (Tr. 30; AE A at 2; AE 
B) 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.n is a telecommunications-collection debt for $517. 
Applicant never had an account with the original creditor, and he disputed his 
responsibility for the debt. (Tr. 44) His credit repair company was able to have the debt 
successfully removed from his credit report. (Tr. 44) 
 
Applicant’s October 16, 2015 credit report shows eight negative entries relating 
to the following specific SOR paragraphs:  ¶ 1.a for $506 (GE 3 at 2); ¶ 1.b for $2,718 
(GE 3 at 5); ¶ 1.e for $1,275 (GE 3 at 5); ¶ 1.f for $257 (GE 3 at 4); ¶ 1.g for $8,598 (GE 
3 at 6); ¶ 1.h for $1,987 (GE 3 at 4); he paid the non-SOR debt for $103 (GE 3 at 4); 
and ¶ 1.m for $5,091. (GE 3 at 5) As indicated previously, all of these negative entries in 
his October 16, 2015 credit report, except for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, and 1.l, were 
resolved through successful disputes or payment. 
 
Applicant’s current annual income is $70,000. (Tr. 29-30) He is current on his 
taxes and on his student loans. (Tr. 45) He has not had formal financial counseling; 
however, he utilizes a budget, and he has learned about finances and debt payment. 
(Tr. 47) He has saved $1,000 for a contingency fund. (Tr. 48) His car payment is 
current. (Tr. 49) 
 
Since January 2014, Applicant has been paying a credit repair company $73 
monthly to help him dispute or establish the legitimacy of debts on his credit report. (Tr. 
36-38, 45; AE C; AE D) His former spouse’s address was listed on Applicant’s credit 
report. (Tr. 41) Applicant suspected his spouse of forging his name on credit card 
agreements. (Tr. 41)  
 
 In sum, Applicant settled and paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.g, and 1.k totaling 
$11,725. His child support debt in SOR ¶ 1.m is in an established payment plan. He 
successfully disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.n. totaling 
$18,780. He has disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.l totaling $1,772. 
Several debts were paid as agreed. He assures that if his debt disputes are 
unsuccessful, he will pay the debts.   
 
 
5 
                                         
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
 
6 
                                         
 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SF 86, SOR response, and hearing record. 
Applicant’s SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts totaling $37,955. Applicant has an 
admitted history including a repossessed vehicle, delinquent child support, and at least 
one delinquent credit card debt. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
 
7 
                                         
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e) apply. Applicant’s financial problems resulted from 
fraudulent activity on several of accounts attributed to him on his credit reports, divorce, 
and unemployment after he left active duty. His SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts 
totaling $37,955. He settled and paid three SOR debts totaling $11,725. His child 
support debt is in a state-approved payment plan. He successfully disputed six SOR 
debts totaling $18,780. He has disputed four SOR debts totaling $1,772, and he is 
awaiting the results of the disputes. He assures that if his disputes are unsuccessful, he 
will pay the debts. SOR ¶ 20(e) applies to the disputed debts.     
 
                                            
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
8 
                                         
 
Applicant is communicating with his creditors, and has assured he intends to pay 
his debts. I am confident that Applicant will conscientiously endeavor to resolve his 
debts. Based on Applicant’s credible and sincere promise to timely pay his debts, future 
new delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” His payments of some of his debts 
showed good faith. He has sufficient income to keep his debts in current status and to 
continue making progress paying his remaining delinquent or unresolved debts. His 
efforts are sufficient to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Even if 
Applicant provided insufficient information to mitigate security concerns under AG ¶ 20, 
he mitigated security concerns under the whole-person concept, infra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed by the defense contractor for the previous three years in a position relating to 
aircraft maintenance. From 2000 to 2012, Applicant served in the Navy, and his 
specialty was aviation electronics technician. He left active duty as a petty officer 
second class, and he received an honorable discharge. He was deployed three times to 
the Iraq theater of operations. In 2010, he received an associate’s degree in electronic 
engineering technology. He is attending college to earn a degree in computer science.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems resulted from circumstances beyond his control 
including fraudulent activity on several of accounts attributed to him on his credit 
reports, divorce in 2008, and unemployment after he left active duty. His credit reports 
show several non-SOR accounts were paid as agreed. His SOR alleges 14 delinquent 
debts totaling $37,955. He settled and paid three SOR debts totaling $11,725, and his 
 
9 
                                         
 
child support debt is in a state-approved payment plan. He successfully disputed six 
SOR debts totaling $18,780. He has disputed four SOR debts totaling $1,772, and he is 
awaiting the results of the four disputes.  
 
Applicant communicates with his creditors, and has assured he intends to pay his 
debts. He understands that he needs to pay his debts, and the conduct required to 
retain his security clearance. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the 
whole-person analysis in financial cases stating:  
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment. Applicant needs to continue to pay his creditors, to continue to monitor his 
credit reports, and to resolve any negative financial entries that arise on his credit 
report. Applicant should continue his efforts to establish and maintain his financial 
responsibility.3  
 
                                            
3The Government has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s finances. 
The Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, 
investigation, and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from 
subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security 
significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security 
significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation of a promise made in a 
security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and may 
support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not have “authority to 
grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 
2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or 
probationary security clearance to allow [the applicant] the opportunity to have a security clearance while 
[the applicant] works on [his or] her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this decision to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
 
10 
                                         
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.n:   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
