KEYWORD: Guideline J
DIGEST: Applicant challenged the Judge’s finding that he engaged in theft.  The Judfge’s
material findings are based upon substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences that
could be drawn from the evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-02154.a1
DATE: 04/25/2016
DATE: April 25, 2016
In Re:
--------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02154
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On   June
10, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the
written record.  On February 9, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Francisco Mendez denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings were based
upon substantial evidence and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law. Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has a master’s degree and has worked for a Federal contractor since 2002.  He has
held a clearance for 15 years and has previously been granted access to sensitive compartmented
information.  In 2013, Applicant and friends went to a strip club.  Applicant was arrested for stealing
the purse and cell phone belonging to a dancer.  The dancer told the police that she saw Applicant
walking away “suspiciously” from where she had left her belongings, after which she confronted him
and removed the items from his pocket.  Another worker corroborated the dancer’s accusation.
Applicant was arrested on felony charges and entered a plea of no-contest.  He was placed
on three years probation, although the court granted him early termination.  Applicant reported this
to his facility security officer.  Applicant contends that he is innocent and that he pled no-contest in
order to keep his job and his clearance.  He believes that the dancer was vindictive but did not
provide any motive for her to have falsely accused him.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted Applicant’s claim of innocence.  He stated that Applicant provided no
corroborating evidence to substantiate this claim or to undercut the evidence provided by the
Government, particularly a police report that includes statements by the victim and the witness. The
Judge stated that Applicant suggested no motive for two employees to have fabricated charges against
a paying customer.  Regarding mitigation, the Judge found that Applicant’s misconduct was recent
and that at the time of the Decision Applicant had been off probation for only a little over a month.
Though noting favorable evidence, such as Applicant’s having properly reported this incident, the
Judge stated that Applicant had failed to acknowledge his criminal conduct.  He stated that the
misconduct continues to raise concerns about the extent to which Applicant has shown rehabilitation.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he had stolen the items in question.  He claims
that the evidence shows that he had found the purse and phone and was attempting to locate the
owner.  The Judge’s findings are based in large part on the contents of the law enforcement report. 
This report contains written statements by the victim and by the witness, which are clear and mutually
consistent and which implicate Applicant in an act of theft.  Neither his Answer to the SOR nor his
interview summary mention an effort to return property left unattended.1  Therefore, to the extent that
Applicant’ appeal brief contains new evidence, we cannot consider it.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant
1Compare Applicant’s Appeal Brief with his clearance interview, included in the record as Item 6: “Security
approached [Applicant] and told him he stole the dancer’s purse. [Applicant] did no such thing and does not remember
seeing a purse.  It could have been someone else.  The dancer told security that the purse was afterward located and
nothing was taken.”  
challenges the Judge’s use of the word “suspiciously” in describing how the victim characterized his
behavior on the evening in question.  He also contends that he did not state that the victim was
vindictive.  Rather, he argues that he was referring to another dancer at the club.  We conclude that
the challenged statements constitute reasonable characterizations of the law enforcement report and
of Applicant’s SOR Answer.  The Judge’s material findings are based upon substantial evidence or
constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
