                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-----------------------------------                  )       ISCR Case No. 14-01185
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding his finances, alcohol consumption, drug
involvement, and personal conduct issues associated with his omission of his alcohol
and drug-related incidents in the security clearance application he completed. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On August 26, 2014, Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 30, 2015, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 3, 2015, and responded  to the FORM
within the time permitted with a handwritten letter and copies of the FORM materials.
Applicant’s submissions were admitted as Items 14 and 15. The case was assigned to
me on September 1, 2015.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated five delinquent debts
exceeding $28,000. Allegedly, the debts remain outstanding.
Under Guideline G, Applicant allegedly (a) abused alcohol and was involved in
seven alcohol-related incidents between 1975 and 2013; (b) received treatment in 2007
and diagnosed alcohol dependent; and (c) consumed alcoholic beverages with varying
frequency until at least June 2014.  
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly (a) was involved in two drug-related
incidents between April 2002 and August 2004 (as set forth in subparagraphs 1.c and
1.d); (b) used marijuana from at least approximately 2005 until at least June 2014; and
(c) used marijuana on various occasions while holding a security clearance.  
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified his security clearance application
of September 2013 by omitting his delinquent debts, use of illegal drugs while holding a
security clearance, and his alcohol-related offenses and use of illegal drugs. Applicant’s
omissions were allegedly made deliberately. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations. He
provided information about the status of his debts and his financial circumstances, but
furnished no specific explanations or information about his alcohol and drug-related
offenses. Nor did he provide any explanations why he omitted information in his security
clearance application about his alcohol and drug-related incidents.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 58-year-old board member of a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in July 2005 and has three children from prior relationships.
(Item 5) Applicant earned his high school diploma in August 1979 and claimed no post-
high school education. (Item 5).  He enlisted in the Navy in November 1981 and served
22 years of active duty. (Items 2-4) 
3
Applicant has been employed as a member of the board of directors of a limited
liability corporation (LLC) since February 2006. (Items 5 and 6) He was granted a
security clearance in October 2009 and applied for a top secret clearance in October
2009. (Items 5 and 13) Previously, he was employed as a laborer for a tribal company
between November 2004 and November 2012. (Item 5) Preceding six months of
unemployment, he reported employment as a bus driver between September 2001 and
May 2004. 
Applicant’s finances
Between 2006 and 2013, Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts.
Altogether, he accrued over $28,000 in delinquent debts.  (Items 8-9) In his response,
he attributed some of his financial difficulties to unemployment, but furnished no details
of his difficulties. All of Applicant’s admitted debts in the SOR remain unsatisfied with no
documented plan to resolve them.  
Applicant’s alcohol consumption
Applicant presents with a significant history of excessive drinking and alcohol-
related incidents. Records document his involvement in eight alcohol-related incidents
over a period of 32 years. (Items 6-13) In an interview with an agent from the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) in July 2014, he disclosed his eight alcohol-related
arrests, beginning with his first arrest in 1975 for disorderly conduct. (Item 7) 
In an OPM interview of July 2009, Applicant confirmed he was ordered by the
court presiding over his July 2006 alcohol-related conviction to seek alcohol counseling.
(Item 6) When evaluated and treated on an outpatient basis in November 2007, he was
diagnosed alcohol dependent and left with the impression there is little chance of
remission. (Item 6) Since completing this counseling, he has continued to consume
alcohol and was involved in other alcohol-related arrests between 2000 and 2013. (Item
7)
Records document that in 2007 or 2008 (precise dates unclear), Applicant was
diagnosed alcohol dependent and received outpatient treatment and alcohol counseling
at an identified local facility. (Items 6 and 7) Details of his treatment, diagnosis, and
prognosis are not available.
Applicant’s alcohol counseling consisted of weekly sessions. He completed 16
weeks of counseling at this treatment facility. (Item 7) Despite his counseling, he never
felt much improvement or chance of remission. Records document that Applicant has
held a security clearance between June 2009 and the present. (Items 6 and  13) 
 Between 2002 and 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with alcohol-
related arrests on five occasions. (Items 6 and 7) His earliest arrest in 1975 involved
public intoxication. (Item 6) Records of the legal disposition are not available. In a series
of alcohol-related incidents between 2002 and 2007, Applicant was charged with driving
under the influence (DUI), driving while intoxicated, and actual control of a vehicle while
4
intoxicated. He was convicted on each of these charged offenses and either fined,
placed on probation, or ordered to do  both. (Items 6 and 7)  
As a result of his 2006 conviction, Applicant was required to get an alcohol and
drug evaluation. (Item 6) Records show that Applicant was evaluated in November
2007 at a substance abuse center in his home state. (Item 6) He attended weekly
outpatient counseling sessions between November 2007 through May 2008 and was
diagnosed to be alcohol dependent. 
After completing his counseling sessions, Applicant returned to abusive drinking
and was detained by police on two occasions between 2007 and 2013 for public
intoxication. (Item 6) He admits to drinking once a month, and consuming at least 16
beers per setting. Still, he assured the interviewing agent from the OPM  Office of
Personnel Management (OPM), who interviewed him in January 2014, that he does not
feel he has an alcohol problem. Others, he acknowledged, do feel he has a problem
with alcohol. (Item 6)  He provided no details, though, of their assessments of him. 
Afforded an opportunity to provide updated information on his alcohol
consumption and drinking habits, Applicant declined to do so. (Item 14) Without more
information, no changes in his drinking status can be inferred from the evidence in the
record.
Applicant’s drug use   
Besides alcohol, Applicant used illegal substances (marijuana) over the course
of seven years spanning 2006 and 2013 while holding a security clearance. (Item 6) He
admitted to using marijuana twice weekly, which he characterized as part of his self-
medicating regiment for insomnia and depression. He enjoys smoking marijuana and
looks forward to the passage of legislation in his state that legalizes the use of the
substance. (Item 7)
He assured the interviewing OPM agent that he never purchased his marijuana,
but obtained it from friends. He admitted to consistently using marijuana over the past
seven years while holding a security clearance. (Item 6) Applicant furnished no
assurances that he has any intention of ceasing his use of marijuana in the foreseeable
future. 
Applicant’s security clearance application omissions
Asked to complete an electronic questionnaires for investigations processing (e-
QIP) in September 2013, Applicant answered “no” to questions inquiring about the state
of his finances in section 26. (Item 5) In so answering, he deliberately failed to disclose
the requested information about his finances. 
Applicant answered “no’ as well to questions inquiring about his drug use in
section 23, and to questions in section 22 inquiring whether he had ever been charged
with an offense involving alcohol or drugs. (Item 5) In answering “no’ to each of the
5
questions covered by sections 22 and 23 of his e-QIP, he deliberately failed to disclose
his alcohol and drug-related information covering his alcohol and drug incidents. When
interviewed by an OPM agent in January 2014, Applicant provided information
concerning his finances, alcohol consumption, and alcohol-drug offenses. Whether he
provided this information voluntarily or after being confronted by the agent is unclear.
(Item 6) 
Based on a review of Applicant’s e-QIP omissions and OPM interview
responses, good-faith explanations of his omissions cannot be inferred or implied from
the record. Considering Applicant’s responses and the materiality of his omissions,
inferences of knowing and wilful omissions cannot be averted.  
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
6
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Alcohol Consumption
The Concern: excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
AG ¶ 21.
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations. AG, ¶ 24
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
7
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is an employed board member of a corporation and has no full-time
position with this firm. Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accrual of
delinquent debts, abuse of alcohol, drug use (including his use while holding a
security clearance), and falsification of his e-QIP. 
Financial concerns
Over the course of a seven-year period (2006 through 2013) he accumulated a
number of delinquent debts that he has not addressed to date. His collective
accumulation of delinquent debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying
conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts,” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply to
Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his accumulation of
unaddressed delinquent debts covered in the SOR negate the need for any
independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of
Applicant’s listed filing lapses and debts are fully documented in his credit reports.
Some judgment problems persist over Applicant’s insufficiently explained accrual of
mortgage debts with his principal lender and other consumer creditors. To date, he
has taken insufficient corrective steps to resolve his delinquencies and demonstrate
8
he acted responsibly in addressing his listed debts. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3
(App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
                                         
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
To some extent, Applicant’s delinquent debts are attributable to his lack of full-
time employment. Based on the documented materials in the FORM, some identified
extenuating circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay or otherwise
resolve his debts. Partially available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly.”  
Without any evidence of addressing his debts, no MC ¶ 20(b) credit can be
accorded him for acting responsibly in paying or otherwise resolving his listed debts in
the SOR.  Because of the lack of record evidence  of financial counseling and specific
steps he has taken to address his past-due debts, Applicant is not entitled to any
mitigation credit. 
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent consumer debts and
failure to resolve them. Resolution of his listed delinquent accounts is a critical
prerequisite to his regaining control of his finances. 
Overall, clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited
amount of information available for consideration in this record does not enable
Applicant to establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security
concerns arising out of his lapses in judgment associated with his accumulation of
delinquent consumer debts. 
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s accrual of delinquent consumer debts, his lack of more specific
explanations for his debt accruals, and his lack of documented resolution of them, it is
still too soon to make safe predictions of  Applicant’s ability to satisfactorily resolve his
debts. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e of Guideline F.  
Alcohol concerns
Applicant’s recurrent problems with abusive drinking over the course of many
years raise considerable security concerns over the risk of his returning to abusive
drinking in the foreseeable future. On the strength of the evidence presented, four
9
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs for alcohol consumption may be applied; DC
¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the
influence, fighting, child abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent;  DC ¶ 22(c),“habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent;.” DC ¶ 22(d), “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical
professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or
dependence;” and DC ¶ 22(f), “relapse after diagnose of alcohol abuse or
dependence and completion of an alcohol education, evaluation, treatment, or
abstinence.” 
Taking into account Applicant’s lengthy history of alcohol-related incidents
(mostly between 2002 and 2013), his outpatient counseling, his diagnosed alcohol
dependency without any diagnostic updates or meaningful long-term rehabilitative
program, and a corresponding lack of probative evidence of his abstaining or
moderating his drinking since receiving an alcohol dependence diagnosis in 2009,
Applicant has failed to demonstrate enough improvements in his maturity level and
understanding of the dangers of excessive drinking to facilitate safe predictions he
can avoid recurrent alcohol abuse in the foreseeable future. Unfavorable conclusions
are warranted with respect to the allegations contained in Guideline G.
Drug Use concerns
Applicant’s past use of illegal drugs (marijuana) consumed a substantial period
of Applicant’s life, spanning 2006 through 2013. During his inclusive period of using
marijuana, he admitted to using it twice a week for self-medicating of insomnia and
depression. Based on the evidence presented, three disqualifying conditions of the
Adjudicative Guidelines for drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,”
DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” and DC ¶ 25(g),
“any illegal drug use  after being granted a security clearance.” 
Because Applicant’s marijuana use is barred by state law in Applicant’s state of
residence as well as federal law, his use of marijuana is fully covered by Guideline H.
Applicant’s use and possession of illegal drugs while holding a security clearance are
resolved unfavorably to Applicant. 
Personal Conduct concerns
Security concerns are raised as well over Applicant’s failure to list his
delinquent debts, his drug use and possession, and his alcohol and drug-related
offenses. Such concerns are raised when an applicant has committed conduct that
reflects questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations.
Looking at the developed facts and circumstances of this case, one of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) under the personal conduct guideline has some initial
10
application to Applicant’s situation. DC ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts to any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” DC ¶ 16(a) may be considered in
evaluating Applicant’s September 2013 e-QIP and his September 2013 OPM
statements in response to the agent’s questions about his finances, drug use, and
alcohol and drug-related incidents.
Under the facts and circumstances of this case, Applicant’s omissions of his
multiple delinquent debts, drug use, and alcohol and drug-related incidents are
difficult to reconcile with principles of honesty and good-faith misunderstandings. The
questions contained in sections 22, 23, and 26 of his September 2013 e-QIP are
straightforward and easy to comprehend. Applicant made no claims of mistaken
understanding of any of the questions, and no implied mistakes of omission are
supported by the proofs. Inferences of knowing and wilful omission cannot be averted.
Afforded an opportunity to correct his omissions in his January 2014 OPM
interview, he failed to provide any clear evidence of voluntary corrections before
responding  to the OPM agent’s questions. None of the mitigating conditions covered
by Guideline E apply.  
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant’ overall efforts are not sufficient to
mitigate questions about his demonstrated honesty and integrity arising from his e-
QIP omissions. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations
covered by Guideline E.  
 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.e:      Against Applicant
GUIDELINE G (ACOHOL CONSUMPTION):          AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 2.a through 2.h      Against Applicant
GUIDELINE H (DRUG INVOLVEMENT)                AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 3.a through 3.c:     Against Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT)               AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 4.a through 4.e:     Against Applicant
11
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
12
  
