 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06340 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence and financial considerations security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 11, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 6, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
12, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 3, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 10, 2016.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through G, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted documents that were marked 
AE H through K and admitted without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about the Republic of Korea (South Korea). The request was not admitted in evidence, 
but was included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) II. Applicant did not object, and I 
have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in HE II. Of note is that South 
Korea is one of the most active countries engaging in foreign economic collection and 
industrial espionage against the United States. The South Korean government has 
generally respected the human rights of its citizens, but some problems persist. I also 
note that the United States and South Korea share a long history of friendship and 
cooperation based on common values and interests. The United States has maintained 
military personnel in South Korea in support of its commitment under the U.S.-R.O.K. 
Mutual Defense Treaty to help South Korea defend itself against external aggression. 
South Korea is the United States’ sixth-largest trading partner with a trillion-dollar 
economy.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2013. He served in the U.S. military from 1985 until he 
retired in 2008. He has an associate’s degree. He married in 1989 and divorced in 
1992. He married his current wife in 1997. He and his wife have a child together, and 
Applicant adopted his wife’s child.2 
  
 Applicant met his wife, a citizen of South Korea, when he was serving in the 
military there. She went through the vetting process that was required by the military 
before the marriage. She is a U.S. permanent resident. Applicant’s adopted child is a 
U.S. citizen. His wife’s parents are deceased. His wife has seven siblings. Two of her 
siblings are married to U.S. citizens. One lives in the United States, and the other 
recently moved to South Korea with her husband who retired from the U.S. military and 
accepted a job in South Korea. The remaining siblings are citizens and residents of 
South Korea. Applicant has sporadic contact with them by telephone. Applicant has not 
visited South Korea in more than ten years. None of Applicant’s wife’s siblings are 
                                                          
1 See http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2800.htm.  
 
2 Tr. at 30-35; GE 1, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
associated with the South Korean government. Applicant credibly stated that he would 
report any attempt to use his wife’s family in South Korea against him.3 
 
 After he retired from the military, Applicant worked for a defense contractor in the 
same geographic area as his last duty station. The contract expired in 2011, and 
Applicant had to look for another job. He accepted a job more than halfway across the 
country. Applicant paid for the moving costs. That contract ended in September 2013, 
and he accepted his current position in October 2013.4 
 
 The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling about $18,400; however, at least 
two of the alleged debts are duplicates (SOR ¶ 1.a - $2,409 and SOR ¶ 1.m $2,408), 
which reduces the amount of the debts to about $16,000. The debts are listed on credit 
reports obtained in December 2013 and November 2014. There may be additional 
duplications as the bank alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($805) and 1.i ($548) was acquired by 
the bank alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($979) and 1.j ($493).5 
 
 Applicant has been paying his debts since at least 2013 when he accepted his 
current job. He moved to a smaller house where the rent was much less. He paid a 
number of debts before the SOR was issued. The December 2013 credit report lists 
multiple debts that had been in collection, but were reported as paid. The November 
2014 credit report lists additional paid accounts. Applicant’s repayment efforts were 
significantly hampered by a car accident in October 2015, resulting in serious injuries. 
He was out of work on disability until January 2016.6 
 
 Applicant paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($1,636), 1.k ($450), and 1.l 
($30). He has payment plans for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($2,409), 1.b ($2,086), 
and 1.c ($1,748). He concentrated on paying debts collected by the same collection 
company. Once those debts are paid, he will pay the debts collected by another 
collection company. Applicant disputed owing the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o ($51), and 
it has been deleted from his credit report. He has not received formal financial 
counseling. He credibly testified that it will take time, but he is committed to paying all 
his debts. He has a pending lawsuit from his car accident. He will use any funds he 
receives in a settlement or a judgment to pay his debts.7 
 
 Two witnesses testified and Applicant submitted documents and letters attesting 
to his excellent job performance, loyalty, trustworthiness, and honesty.8 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 32-34, 59-60; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 30; GE 1, 3.  
 
5 See e.g., http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/orders/order20120214.pdf.  
 
6 Tr. at 20-30, 39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE F. 
 
7 Tr. at 20-27, 36-41, 58-61; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE A-E  H K. 
 
8 Tr. at 45-50; AE G. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s wife is a citizen of South Korea and a U.S. permanent resident. His 
wife’s siblings are citizens and residents of South Korea. South Korea is a close ally of 
the United States, but it also engages in foreign economic collection and industrial 
espionage against the United States.  
 
 Applicant’s foreign relatives create a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) are applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to South Korea, but they are 
outweighed by his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
States. Like many military members serving overseas, Applicant married a citizen of the 
host country. His wife went through the vetting process that was required by the military 
before the marriage. Two of her siblings also married U.S. citizens. Applicant has not 
visited South Korea in more than ten years. He has sporadic contact with his wife’s 
siblings by telephone. None of his wife’s siblings are associated with the South Korean 
government. Applicant credibly stated that he would report any attempt to use his wife’s 
family in South Korea against him. 
 
 I find that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of the United States and the interests of the South Korean 
government. There is no conflict of interest, because Applicant can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are 
applicable.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
7 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant lost his job in 2011. He accepted a job more than halfway across the 
country and had to pay moving expenses. He has been paying his delinquent debts for 
several years, including debts that were not alleged in the SOR because they were paid 
before it was issued. His repayment efforts were significantly hampered by a serious car 
accident in October 2015. He was out of work on disability until January 2016. He is 
back to work, and he has resumed his efforts to pay his debts. He credibly testified that 
it will take time, but he is committed to paying all his debts.9 He also will use any funds 
he receives in a settlement or a judgment from his accident to pay his debts. He 
successfully disputed one debt. All of the mitigating conditions are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009) and ISCR Case No. 09-08462 at 4 (App. Bd. 
May. 31, 2011): “Depending on the facts of a given case, the fact that an applicant’s debts will not be paid 
off for a long time, in and of itself, may be of limited security concern.” 
 
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his many years of 
honorable military service. I considered his ties to South Korea, but they are far 
outweighed by his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
States. As to his financial issues, Applicant has a plan to resolve his financial problems, 
and he has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
