 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-07061 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 5, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 31, 2015. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 2-5 (Item 1 includes pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on 
November 23, 2015. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit any additional 
evidence nor did he object to any of the Government’s evidence. Items 2-5 are admitted 
into evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 29, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the SOR allegations. The 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He is divorced and has one minor child for whom he is 
obligated to pay child support. He has worked for a federal contractor since April 2013. 
He served approximately 10 years in the Air Force before receiving an honorable 
discharge in June 2012. He experienced periods of unemployment from March 2013 to 
April 2013, and from June 2012 to August 2012. He worked in the private sector from 
August 2012 to March 2013. He is a high school graduate. He held a security clearance 
while in the Air Force.1  
  
 The SOR lists eight delinquent debts totaling approximately $25,679 (SOR debts 
¶ 1.f and ¶ 1.h are duplicate debts, even though the amounts are different due to a 
transposition error, and I find in favor of Applicant on ¶ 1.h). The debts include three 
collection accounts, two charged-off accounts, one past-due account, and a delinquent 
child support debt. The debts are supported by credit reports from April 2014 and 
November 2014, Applicant’s statement to a defense investigator in May 2014, and by 
Applicant’s admissions.2 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his periods of unemployment of one 
to two months in 2013 and two to three months in 2012 and his divorce in August 2013.3 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – (charged-off automobile repossession account $13,780): 
 
 Applicant admitted he owed this charged-off account for a vehicle. His last action 
on this account was in April 2013. He could not make the payments because he was 
unemployed in April 2013. The vehicle was sold and Applicant was responsible for the 
deficiency. He claims he talked to the company about working out a payment plan and 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Items 1, 3-5. 
 
3 Item 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
is waiting for an agreed payoff amount. There is no evidence of payment or settlement. 
This debt is unresolved.4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – (delinquent child support debt $4,861): 
 
 Applicant claims his wages are garnished from his weekly paycheck to pay his 
child support obligations. Although he provided no documentation to support these 
assertions, the two credit reports in evidence show that his balance owed decreased 
from $6,722 in April 2014 to $4,894 in October 2014. Both reports indicate that the 
monthly payment amount is $565. There is some evidence Applicant is involuntarily 
resolving this debt.5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c – 1.g (a charged-off account, a past-due account, and three collection 
accounts $4,894; $117; $585; $279; $856): 
 
 Applicant admitted that he owed these debts. He has not paid the debts or set up 
any payment plans. He claimed that he would make payment arrangements for SOR ¶ 
1.c by August 2015, but failed to provide supporting proof. He also committed to paying 
the remaining debts by September 2015, but failed to present proof of any such action. 
These debts are unresolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – (collection account $297): 
 
 Duplicate debt with SOR ¶ 1.f. Resolved in favor of Applicant.7 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about his current financial status or a 
budget. There is no evidence that he sought financial counseling.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
4 Items 1, 3-5. 
 
5 Items 1, 3, 5. 
 
6 Items 1, 3, 5. 
 
7 Items 1, 3. 5. 
 
8 Items 1, 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant presented some evidence that the debts were due to circumstances 
beyond his control (unemployment for a few months in 2012 and 2013, and 
experiencing a divorce), but he failed to provide documentation showing that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. He did not 
 
6 
 
 
provide documentation showing that the debts had been paid or that he established 
payment plans. There is no evidence of financial counseling. Although there is some 
evidence Applicant is paying his child support through an involuntary court-ordered 
wage garnishment, this does not equate to a good-faith effort to pay. Since Applicant 
failed to produce evidence of the terms of the garnishment, there is insufficient evidence 
to determine whether the garnishment will otherwise resolve the debt. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 
20(d) do not apply. He did not produce documentary evidence to support a dispute of 
any debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his military service, his 
periods of unemployment, and his divorce. Applicant has not established a track record 
of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.h:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
