KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline G
DIGEST: The Judge made detailed findings about Applicant’s financial problems as well as his
difficulties with alcohol and discussed the evidence in her analysis.  Applicant has not rebutted
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 14-04719.a1
DATE: 04/06/2016
DATE: April 6, 2016
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04719
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
John Adamson, Personal Representative
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 13, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline G
(Alcohol Consumption) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive). Applicant requested a hearing.  On January 21, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Elizabeth M. Matchinski denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28
and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Defense contractor for several years.  Her served in the U.S.
military from 1982 to 2002, during which time he held a clearance.  
Applicant failed to file Federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2013 and state
income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 2013.  He attributed these failures to his not having
received the forms necessary to complete his returns.  In addition, Applicant has delinquent debts
for credit cards, etc.  He has been making some payments toward his debts, including debts that were
not alleged in the SOR.  Applicant has been making payments of $600 a month on behalf of his
daughter, who lives with his ex-spouse.  
Applicant has had problems with alcohol.  While in the military he received non-judicial
punishment for drinking before duty and for DUI.  After leaving active duty he had two DUIs.  His
drinking increased to the point at which he consumed five to seven drinks each night.  In 2013,
Applicant underwent three days of detoxification, after which he received treatment for alcohol
dependence.  This treatment included twelve-step groups, anger management, relapse prevention,
etc.  Applicant was abstinent while taking part in the program.  He returned to work after this
treatment but relapsed after about nine months.  He finally stopped drinking after his employer asked
him to submit to a breathalyzer test, which he refused to do.  He resumed attendance at Alcoholics
Anonymous (AA).  He attends meetings daily and is actively involved in his daughter’s life.  He was
estranged from his son for many years but has resumed contact with him.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the Guideline F concerns, citing to
what she termed “a pattern of persistent noncompliance with his [F]ederal and state income tax filing
and payment obligations.”  Decision at 10.  She stated that he did not evidence responsible action
in regard to his financial obligations, although she did enter a favorable finding concerning one
consumer credit debt of under $400.  Concerning Guideline G, the Judge noted Applicant’s
disciplinary history in the military, as well as his subsequent DUI offenses.  She stated that, after he
2
completed his treatment program he had a favorable prognosis.  However, she cited to his relapse
into six months of alcohol consumption and to an absence of a current prognosis by a licensed
professional as militating against a conclusion that Applicant had demonstrated rehabilitation.  In
the whole-person analysis, the Judge stated that Applicant’s relapse illustrates the extent of his
alcohol dependency.  She also stated that Applicant took no action prior to the hearing to file
appropriate withholding documents and concluded that his circumstances evidenced complacency
regarding his financial obligations.  
Discussion
Applicant cites to evidence that he made payments to the IRS and has filed tax withholding
forms for the state.  He argues that he is addressing his delinquent debs.  Applicant notes evidence
that he has obtained a sponsors and is working on the twelve steps associated with AA.  He also
argues that by the time of the hearing he had been sober for ten months.  Applicant’s arguments
amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  However, that is not enough
to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016).  The Judge made detailed
findings about Applicant’s financial problems as well as his difficulties with alcohol and discussed
the evidence in her analysis.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered
all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06093 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2015).
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
3
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
