1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
          )       ISCR Case No. 14-05150
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Remand Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On April 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 28, 2015. A notice of
hearing was issued on November 5, 2015, scheduling the hearing for December 3,
2015.  Government Exhibits (GX) 1-2 were admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant
Exhibits (AX ) A-I at the hearing. I kept the record open until January 6, 2016 for
additional documentation, which was timely received. AX J-O were entered into the
record without objection. The transcript was received on December 11, 2015. I issued
One member of the Appeal Board issued a Dissenting Opinion.      1
2
my decision on February 23, 2016,  denying Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
Applicant appealed the decision and raised the following issues on appeal:
whether the Judge failed to consider all of the evidence; whether the Judge’s application
of the mitigating conditions was erroneous; and whether the Judge’s whole-person
analysis was erroneous.
On April 20, 2016, the Appeal Board remanded my decision to address AX O
because “specifically the documents, including a HUD 1, in Exhibit O pertaining to the
scheduled short sale of the property was not discussed.” The Board noted that not all
the documents were signed, but the cumulative significance of the documents contained
in the exhibit is sufficient such that I should have discussed the exhibit.1
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the SOR allegations under Guideline
F. He provided explanations for each alleged debt.
 
Applicant is 33 years old. He graduated from high school and received his
undergraduate degree in 2006. Applicant is married and has no children. He has been
with his current employer since 2001, where he serves as an accounting clerk. He
completed a security clearance application in 2014. (GX 1) Applicant has held a security
clearance since 2005.
The SOR alleges approximately $260,000 in delinquent debt for one mortgage
loan, two state tax liens, and a charged-off account. (GX 2) The charged-off account in
SOR 1.d for $13,771 has been settled in the amount of $8,955. (AX K)
Applicant purchased a rental property in 2007. He paid about $238,000. At the
time he earned approximately $90,000 annually. He could afford his own mortgage and
the rental property with the rental income, and he made mortgage loan payments in a
timely manner. When the tenant stopped paying and Applicant’s income was reduced by
half, he could no longer afford to make the monthly payments. (Tr. 25) Applicant
attempted to file suit against the tenant for the rent and he tried to obtain a loan
modification. He was not successful. He claims the home went to foreclosure in 2011. In
2014, he obtained the services of a law firm to help to sell the property. (AX B) At some
point, the property was vandalized and Applicant filed a claim with his insurer.
As to SOR allegations 1.a and 1.b, Applicant’s indebtedness to the state for a
2011 tax liens in the amount of $849 and $2,372 relates to the tax associated with the
rental property that he purchased in 2007. (AX C) As of the close of the record, they
were not resolved.
3
As to SOR allegation 1.c, Applicant has a past-due amount of $243,378.00 on a
mortgage loan to the bank for the rental property. The balance of the loan is about
$283,000. As of the close of the record, Applicant has not sold the property and the
balance was unresolved at this point. He stopped making payments on the mortgage
loan in 2008. He has attempted several short sales over the years. 
Applicant emphasized that the debts are not the result of an inability to live within
his means or poor self-control. His wife works and earns approximately $100,000 a year.
When Applicant’s work hours were reduced to about 24 hours a week, he looked for a
second job. (AX J) Applicant learned a lesson about real estate investment. He does not
intend to invest in real estate in the future (Tr. 32)
Applicant’s realtor testified that he has worked with him since 2008. (AX A) The
realtor explained the property that serves the basis of allegation 1.c is listed with his
company. The property was under signed contract for sale. (AX N) The transaction
would be a short sale if the bank approves. The tax liens that are listed in SOR 1.a and
1.b would be resolved by the short sale of the property according to Applicant. (Tr. 15)
He further explained the difficulties that Applicant has experienced with the rental
property. Initially, the tenants living in the home did not move out after they stopped
paying rent. After about a year the tenants left the home. No rent was paid during that
time. The realtor also explained that he advised Applicant about selling the property. He
communicated with the lender on a consistent basis to resolve the matter. The realtor
acknowledged that other short sales have been rejected by the bank.  (AX D) Part of the
reason may be that the property was vandalized. A claim was made to Applicant’s
insurer (AX L) and a check sent to the loan company. (AX G)  He believed there was a
strong chance that it will be accepted this time as a cash buyer is involved. (Tr. 20)
As a post-hearing submission, Applicant submitted AX O, which reflected a Final
HUD Approval memorandum for a gross sale price of $120,000. It stated that the closing
must take place by December 28, 2015. The Bank’s typical forms, reflected an approved
property sale, short sale affidavit, and unsigned settlement sheet. (AX O) This document
does not change or provide sufficient evidence that the sale was in fact completed. I
found nothing in the record to show a completed short sale of the property. Applicant’s
signature appeared on some forms. However, there was no signed settlement sheet to
show a completed sale. (AX O)
Applicant earns about $45,000 a year.  He is current with his other bills. There are
no credit reports in the record. He acknowledged that he has obtained financial
counseling. (AX J)
Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from a colleague who has known
him for 20 years. He describes Applicant as a trustworthy person who has demonstrated
a high degree of professionalism. He can be entrusted to protect the privacy of client
information. (AX I) 
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. It also states that An individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted that he incurred delinquent debt when one property that he
bought in 2007 went to default. The outstanding debt is about $243,000. He also has
two tax liens that are not resolved as of the close of the record. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations)
apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against
him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant still has unresolved
financial issues concerning the one home loan mortgage, and two state tax liens. The
property was under contract for a short sale, but other short sales have been rejected by
the bank. The post-hearing submission does not show a completed sale, but shows an
approval by the bank.  Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC
MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted
6
responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant purchased a rental
property and was earning ample income to maintain a mortgage as long as tenants
remained in the home. The tenants did not pay the rent for about one year. Applicant
tried to have them removed. When they left, he worked with a realtor to rent or sell the
property. He also tried to get a loan modification. At the same time his income was
reduced by half. He made the last payment in 2008. The property was vandalized and
several short sales were rejected by the bank. Applicant has pending a signed contract
for another short sale. His realtor believes this will be accepted as it is a cash buyer.
However, it has been eight years and the issue has not been resolved, and the balance
is outstanding. There is nothing in the record to show a completed short sale of the
property despite the HUD approval. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has some application. Applicant as noted above
made efforts to resolve the issue by renting the home or doing a short sale. He
communicated with the lender. He did not pay on the mortgage for a period of eight
years. His realtor and a law firm were advising him. He paid one charged-off account. He
believes the  tax liens will be resolved through a short sale.  FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem, but there are not  clear
indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 33 years old. He has been with his current employer since 2001. He is
married and has no children. He is a mature and educated man. He has held a security
clearance without incident since 2005. He bought an investment property in 2007 which
7
resulted in financial problems. He provided information that he has tried to resolve the
issue over the years. His realtor testified and confirmed his efforts. He has a possible
short sale. He settled another account that was listed on the SOR. He believes that the
two tax liens will be resolved when the house is sold through a short sale. He had
financial counseling. He has made some good-faith efforts over the years. He realizes
that investing is a difficult venture and has no plans to invest in real estate in the future.
Applicant has not incurred new delinquent debt and has not had any other difficulties.
However, as of the close of the record over $240,000 in delinquent debt, to include tax
liens, remain unresolved. Notwithstanding his efforts, Applicant’s delinquent debts have
been outstanding for a long period of time and continue to raise concerns.
   Applicant has not presented sufficient information to carry his burden of proof in
this case. He has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
