 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01083 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hymans, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 3, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 21, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 15, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 8, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 1, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. In addition, the Government submitted a copy of its discovery letter 
sent to Applicant that was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and 
offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A though C, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 10, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h. He denied the 
remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He earned an associate’s degree. He was married from 
1990 to 2002 and has two children from the marriage, ages 25 and 19. He was 
employed for 16 years with a company until he was discharged in December 2013. He 
was unemployed until April 2014. He has worked for his current employer, a federal 
contractor since then.1  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a child custody battle he had with 
his ex-wife. She had custody of the children after their divorce. Applicant stated that his 
ex-wife was abusive to the children, and his youngest child ran away to his house in 
approximately August 2008. He stated that his ex-wife was subsequently diagnosed as 
a sociopath. At that time, legal proceedings related to the custody issues began. 
Applicant estimated that he spent approximately $10,000 in legal fees until the matter 
was resolved in August 2010. He was earning approximately $38,000 to $42,000 
annually from 2008 to 2010. The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit 
bureau reports from October 2014 and July 2015.2 
 
 Applicant also attributed his financial problems to medical issues and a hospital 
stay in 2009 and twice in 2012. Although he had insurance, some bills were not 
covered. His monthly out-of-pocket medical expenses impacted his finances. He 
disputed some of the medical debts alleged in the SOR because some have been 
resolved and others were submitted to the insurance company with the wrong medical 
code for payment, and he has been attempting to have the medical providers resubmit 
the claims.3  
 
 Applicant disputed the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($211), 1.d ($159), 
1.e ($21), 1.i ($211), 1.j ($835), and 1.k ($727) on his credit report. He worked with his 
employer’s assistance program to determine that many of the medical debts were for 
amounts over-billed by the provider and disputed with the insurer. These debts are not 
listed on his most recent credit reports. Applicant believes the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
                                                          
1 Tr. 16-20, 39-40. 
 
2 Tr. 23-28, 40-44; GE 2 and 3. 
 
3 Tr. 21-24, 27, 37-39. 
 
3 
 
 
1.i are the same debt. I concur.4 He also disputed the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
($177) and 1.c ($379) on his credit report indicating these are the debts that the 
provider incorrectly coded and submitted to the insurance company. These two debts 
remain on Applicant’s most recent credit report, and they are noted as being in dispute.5  
 
 Applicant was unable to pay the credit card bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g ($2,355) 
due to his child custody legal expenses. The card was used to help pay for his 
daughter’s living and college expenses. He defaulted on it in approximately 2011. He 
withdrew money from his IRA and paid the debt. He understood he would have a tax 
penalty.6 
 
Applicant admitted he defaulted on the credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f 
($8,091). He provided documentation to substantiate that this is the same debt as SOR 
¶ 1.h ($7,603).7 Applicant credibly testified that the account became delinquent when he 
had legal and medical problems and was unable to pay it. He contacted the creditor to 
close the account and attempted to negotiate a payment plan for the debt. The creditor 
refused and would only accept a lump sum, which Applicant could not pay. The debt 
was sold to a collection company and Applicant had difficulty getting the two creditors to 
acknowledge which actually owned the debt. The issue was resolved days before 
Applicant’s hearing and the most recent credit report indicates the collection company 
owns the debt. Applicant indicated he has sufficient funds to pay the debt and intends to 
resolve it. He was hesitant to do so earlier because both creditors were claiming 
ownership of the debt, and he did not want to pay one and then have the other claim he 
still owed it.8 
 
Applicant continues to have medical problems, but has refused to let the doctors 
diagnose him as disabled because he wants to work. His treatments are expensive, but 
he is able to meet the costs not covered by insurance. His 19-year-old child lives with 
him, works, contributes to the monthly expenses, and intends on attending school next 
semester. Applicant has sufficient monthly income to cover his expenses and if 
necessary has money in his IRA to pay debts.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
4 Tr. 30-33, 35-36, 54-55; AE B and C. SOR ¶1.e is listed in AE B, but not AE C. 
 
5 Tr. 30-33, 49-54; AE B and C. 
 
6 Tr. 30-32, 44-48; AE B and C. 
 
7 AE A. 
 
8 Tr. 20, 25-30, 33-34, 44-46, 55, 64-68. 
 
9 Tr. 55-61. 
 
4 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant had numerous delinquent debts that were unpaid or unresolved 
beginning in 2011. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has addressed some of his delinquent debts, but the largest credit card 
debt remains delinquent and unpaid. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because he still has 
recent debts that he is resolving.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to legal fees associated to a protracted 
child custody issue and medical problems. I have considered that many of the debts in 
the SOR are for medical expenses. These conditions were beyond his control. For the 
full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant disputed many of the medical debts, and they are no longer 
on his current credit report. He is still disputing two medical debts because he believes 
the providers used the wrong medical code that was provided to his insurer. Applicant 
paid one large credit card debt. The remaining credit card debt he acknowledged he 
owed and had attempted to negotiate a payment plan that was declined by the creditor. 
He is now in a better financial situation to pay the debt and intends to do so. Under the 
circumstances, Applicant acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant disputed many of his medical debts with the credit bureaus and some 
have been removed. He continues to dispute the remaining two medical debts. AG ¶ 
20(e) applies to these debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 46 years old. He experienced financial difficulties when he incurred 
legal fees arising from a child custody issue. He then experienced health problems that 
also impacted his finances. Applicant has resolved most of his delinquent debts, but still 
owes one credit card and is disputing two small medical debts. He credibly testified that 
he has sufficient resources to pay the credit card debt, but was waiting for the correct 
creditor to be identified. He is continuing to attempt to resolve the remaining medical 
debts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
