 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00022 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 22, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 15, 2015, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 15, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 8, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 2, 2016. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. In addition, the Government submitted a copy of the discovery letter 
that it sent to Applicant, which was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified 
and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through J, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The record was held open until March 16, 2016, to allow Applicant to 
submit additional documents. She submitted documents that were marked AE K 
through O, and were admitted into evidence without objection. The record then closed.1 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 11, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.h through 
1.l. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. She is a high school graduate. She was married from 
1976 to 1983 and has two grown children from the marriage. She was married from 
1988 to 1990 to her second husband. She remarried in 1997 to her current husband.2  
 
 Applicant was unemployed from June 2009 to December 2010, and from 
December 2012 to November 2013. Her husband was unemployed due to a serious 
medical condition from June 2009 to November 2013. They are both working now.3  
 
 In June 2014, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). In 
response to question 26 that requested she disclose any financial delinquencies, she 
responded “no” to all of the questions. Applicant was interviewed by an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator in July 2014. She indicated to the 
investigator that she had some previous financial difficulties, but did not feel there were 
any accounts that needed to be reported on the questionnaire. She was then confronted 
with delinquent accounts from her history. When asked at her hearing why she told the 
investigator she did not feel she needed to report delinquent accounts she stated she 
did not know why she said that. She further indicated during her interview that she was 
unaware of most of the delinquent accounts, including those alleged in the SOR. She 
stated that she and her husband got behind in paying bills when he had medical 
problems beginning in 2009. After he began to receive disability payments they paid 
some of their creditors. She indicated that now that her husband is working, they hoped 
to pay off the remaining accounts. She told the investigator that she was aware of some 
                                                          
1 HE II and III are Department Counsel’s email memoranda. 
 
2 Tr. 24-26. 
 
3 Tr. 26-27. 
 
3 
 
 
of the reported delinquent accounts, but had never seen a copy of her credit report. She 
intended to contact the credit bureau and creditors to resolve the debts.4  
 
Applicant testified that she completed the SCA at a library and only had an hour 
to finish it. She answered “no” to all of the inquiries about financial difficulties and 
delinquent debts, and tried to go back and change the answer, but the program would 
not let her do it, and she was concerned that the program would erase all of her 
previous answers. She did not know why she did not answer “yes” to the financial 
inquires. She testified she regretted her mistake. She also testified that she was aware 
when she completed the SCA that she had delinquent debts. Many of these debts were 
incurred after her husband suffered a stroke in June 2009. She has been attempting to 
resolve her debts since then. She stated that she has paid accounts that are not listed 
on the SOR.5  
 
 Applicant indicated during her OPM interview that she had never heard of the 
creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a ($70). She testified that she disputed the account because she 
had paid it. She stated she would provide proof of payment. Her post-hearing 
documents do not reflect payment of this debt. Applicant also testified she paid the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.b ($112). Her post-hearing document shows there is a zero balance owed 
on the account.6  
 
 Applicant testified that she believed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,163) was related 
to a withdrawal from her account for a child support payment owed by her husband, but 
is unsure. At the time of hearing, she had not contacted the creditor to resolve the issue 
or satisfy the debt. After the hearing, she provided a settlement agreement to resolve 
the debt. She agreed to pay $697 by March 30, 2016, or the terms of the agreement 
would be voided.7 Regarding the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($815) owed for a gas station credit 
card, Applicant stated she did not know anything about this account and has not made 
inquiries to dispute or resolve it. During her OPM interview she indicated she believed 
this account was a credit card used for personal expenses, and it had been paid in full. 
She did not provide documentary evidence of her actions to resolve this debt.8 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($40,314) was for a vehicle that Applicant and her spouse 
purchased in 2007. She testified she made payments on the vehicle until June 2009. 
The monthly payment was $983. Applicant testified that the car was voluntarily 
                                                          
4 Tr. 27, 77-80; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. 32-41, AE A, B, C, and D. 
 
6 Tr. 42-46; AE M. During Applicant’s OPM interview she indicated that she never heard of the creditors, 
could not provide account numbers, the amounts owed, or what the debts were for. Many of the debts 
alleged were transferred or sold to collection agencies, which may explain why Applicant could not 
identify the accounts during her interview. 
 
7 Tr. 46-50; AE N. Applicant was made aware of this debt during her OPM interview. 
 
8 Tr. 50-51; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
 
repossessed in June or July 2009 and auctioned off. When questioned by the OPM 
investigator, she stated she thought the amount she owed on the loan was satisfied by 
the auction. At her hearing, she testified that she believed there was a deficiency 
balance, but she was not certain of the amount. She testified that she became aware 
that there was still an issue with the debt because when she met with a credit counselor 
in 2009 she saw that it was on her credit report and listed as charged off. She did not 
believe she owed the creditor because of the charged off status. In her post-hearing 
response, Applicant stated: “The Toyota is another story. They stole my paid off car, lied 
and cheated us! Tried to return it and get car back but 45 days had passed because we 
were out on the road. By the way, there was a class action suit on [dealer] and [creditor] 
for the way the[y] were conducting business.”9 Credit reports from July 2014 and June 
2015 reflect the loan was transferred/sold to a collection agency and charged off in 
December 2012 for $40,314. Applicant did not provide documentary evidence of her 
actions to resolve this debt.10  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($681) was for a cell phone account. Applicant testified 
that she had no idea how old the account was and that she had paid it about a year 
ago. She stated she would provide the receipt of payment in her post-hearing 
documents. Applicant provided a letter from the collection agency holding the debt 
dated March 10, 2016, agreeing to settle the debt for $272 with her initial payment of 
$100 due on March 30, 2016.11  
 
 At her hearing, Applicant testified she had no knowledge of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g 
($617). She stated she contacted the creditor who was unfamiliar with the debt. She did 
not dispute the debt with the credit bureau. In her post-hearing statement, she indicated 
she attempted to contact the original creditor, but the company was permanently close. 
No further evidence was provided.12 
 
 Applicant believed that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($272) became delinquent about a 
year ago. She was going to provide supporting documents to show it was resolved, but 
she did not.13 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($265), 1.j ($199), 1.k ($100), and 1.l ($170) are medical 
debts. Applicant testified that the accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.l are duplicates. They 
have the same account number, and I concur. I find in Applicant’s favor on SOR ¶ 1.l. 
Applicant testified that she paid these medical debts and would provide receipts. She 
did not. She indicated in her post-hearing response that she attempted to contact the 
creditors for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j but “got run around” so she disputes them. 
                                                          
9 AE L. 
 
10 Tr. 51- 57; GE 2, 3, and 4. 
 
11 Tr. 57-58; AE O. 
 
12 Tr. 58-60; AE L. 
 
13 Tr. 60-61. 
 
5 
 
 
She did not provide documentary evidence on her actions to dispute debts. She did not 
provide information on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k.14 
 
 Applicant testified that her current finances are stable, and she pays her bills on 
time. She does not have a written budget. She estimated she had about $3,100 in 
savings and $200 in her checking account. In June 2009, she sought credit counseling 
because she was concerned about losing her house. Before then, she never looked at 
her credit report. She was able to get a modification on her mortgage loan in 2010. She 
has met with a credit counselor about six times since then. She goes when she feels 
like she needs help. She last reviewed her credit report in 2015. She stated her 
husband went back to work in November 2013, and in August 2014 she started to pay 
some delinquent debts when she was able. She did not want to get into debt, but it 
occurred when her husband got ill in 2009. She provided tax forms to show how much 
she earned in 2015. She did not include her husband’s earnings, but she stated he 
earns about the same amount as she does. Applicant’s husband was approved for 
social security disability benefits in 2011 and they were discontinued in April 2014.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
                                                          
14 Tr. 61-64; AE K. 
 
15 Tr. 66-76, 80-83; AE F, G, H, and I. 
 
6 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.16 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
                                                          
16 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that she began incurring in about 2009, 
which remain unresolved. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has many unresolved delinquent debts. Although she stated she had 
paid some, she failed to provide supporting documentary evidence. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant’s husband had a serious medical condition and was unemployed for an 
extended period. Applicant was also unemployed for a period. These conditions were 
beyond her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must demonstrate 
that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant failed to provide 
sufficient evidence of actions she took to resolve her delinquent debts since she and her 
husband resumed working. She stated that many debts in the SOR were paid, but failed 
to provide documentary evidence despite the record being held open. She indicated 
another debt was paid a year ago, but the evidence she provided showed that she 
reached a settlement agreement with the creditor after her hearing, and the debt 
remains unpaid. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant stated she received financial counseling several times over the past 
few years and that she has also reviewed her credit report several times since 2009. 
She continues to have debts that are not resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies to the 
extent that she sought financial counseling, but there is insufficient evidence to 
conclude her financial problems are under control.  
 
 Applicant resolved the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.l. 
Although she has not yet paid the settlement amounts agreed to for the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c and 1.f, I believe she will act responsibly and do so. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to these 
debts. The others delinquent debts remain unpaid and unresolved.  
 
 Applicant disputes several delinquent debts including the largest one in SOR ¶ 
1.e for a repossessed vehicle. She failed to provide the basis of her dispute as her 
testimony and post-hearing documents differed from the statement she made to the 
OPM investigator. She did not provide proof that she resolved this debt or evidence of 
her actions to dispute the debt, or any of the remaining debts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose on her SCA that she had financial difficulties when 
she answered “no” to all of the financial inquiry questions. She testified that she 
completed her SCA at a library and had a limited amount of time to use the computer. 
She answered “no” to questions about her finances and attempted to go back and 
change the response, but the program would not permit her to do so. She was then 
concerned that her earlier responses would be deleted if she tried to correct them. 
When Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator, subsequent to completing her 
SCA, she stated that when she completed the SCA she did not believe that she had any 
 
9 
 
 
delinquent accounts that required disclosing. At her hearing, she testified she was 
aware she had delinquent debts that she should have disclosed. Her contradictory 
statements are a concern. In addition, she told the investigator that she had never 
reviewed a credit report, which contradicts her testimony that she had worked with a 
financial counselor to modify her mortgage loan and reviewed her credit report in 2009 
and subsequently several  times.17 I find that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose on 
her SCA that she had delinquent debts. She had an opportunity to disclose this 
information to the OPM investigator during her interview, but did not.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 57 years old. She has numerous delinquent debts that are not 
resolved. She began experiencing financial problems in 2009 when her husband had a 
serious medical condition and they experienced extended periods of unemployment. 
She testified she was aware that she was required to disclose delinquent debts when 
she completed her SCA, but failed to do so. Her explanation for her failure was because 
the computer program did not permit her to go back. However, she had an opportunity 
to disclose her financial problems when she was interviewed by an OPM investigator. 
Instead, she told him that she did not think she had accounts that needed to be 
disclosed. Her contradictory and inconsistent statements raise questions about her 
credibility. I find she intentionally failed to disclose she had delinquent debts. Applicant 
                                                          
17 These comments are not considered for disqualifying purposes, but will be considered when analyzing 
Applicant’s credibility, extenuation and mitigation and the whole person. 
 
10 
 
 
did not provide sufficient evidence to show she has an established track record of being 
fiscally responsible. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations and personal conduct guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.l:     For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
