 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No.: 15-01371 
  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 15, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant had one delinquent credit card debt totaling $15,539. The debt was 
paid in full after the account was charged off. Resulting security concerns were 
mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On March 6, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On September 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on October 5, 2015. (Item 1.) He 
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record 
without a hearing in his Answer. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on November 23, 2015. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), containing six Items, was received by Applicant on November 30, 2015. He 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. He provided 
additional information in response to the FORM within the 30-day period, marked as 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. Department Counsel had no objections to AE A, and it was 
admitted into the record. DOHA assigned the case to me on February 19, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 73 years old. He has been employed with a Government contractor 
since 2010. He listed on his e-QIP that he served on active duty with the Army from 
1973 to 1993. He married his wife in 1982, and has one stepchild and one child. He 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 1999. (Item 2.) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant owed approximately $15,539 in charged-off debt on a 
credit card. In his Answer, Applicant denied this debt. (Item 1.) After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 In August 2010 Applicant entered into a debt relief program to resolve the credit 
card debt that he “incurred through living expenses, business travel and car rentals for 
business travels.” The debt had become delinquent because he “endured the soaring 
interest rates on credit cards that plagued many Americans at that time.” In October 
2011 the creditor alleged in subparagraph 1.a agreed to accept $1,668 as settlement in 
full on this debt, as documented in the Answer. Applicant paid that amount through the 
debt relief program and received a 1099-C cancelling the remaining balance. Applicant 
included that 1099-C in his 2013 Federal income tax return, as documented in his 
Answer. However, the three credit reporting entities continued to incorrectly report the 
debt as a charged-off account. (Items 4 through 6.) Applicant produced evidence he 
disputed the incorrect entries with all three credit reporting agencies and each has 
updated his credit report to reflect this debt as paid. While the language differs from 
agency to agency, this debt has been resolved, despite having been previously charged 
off. (AE A.)  
 
 Applicant has no additional delinquent accounts reflected on his most recent 
credit report. All other accounts are in good standing. (Item 4.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
3 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 In 2010 Applicant became delinquent on the credit card alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.a. He hired a debt resolution program to assist him in the negotiation 
and repayment of this debt. That debt was resolved through a payment in 2013. The 
evidence raises security concerns under both conditions because Applicant’s credit card 
debt went unresolved for at least two years, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. I find the following provide 
mitigation: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant experienced financial problems in 2010. He responsibly hired a debt 
relief program to help him resolve his delinquencies. He utilized its services to resolve 
the SOR listed debt and other accounts. His immediate action on his delinquent debt 
reflects good judgment, and financial delinquencies are unlikely to recur. His financial 
delinquencies are under control and his current credit report reflects all accounts are in 
good standing, but for the erroneous entry regarding the debt identified in SOR 
subparagraph 1.a. However, Applicant formally disputed the entry related to SOR 
subparagraph 1.a with each credit reporting agency, and he presented evidence that all 
three agencies have updated their records to reflect this debt is paid and finances are 
under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) provide mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant honorably served in 
the Army. He resolved his delinquent debt in 2013, but the credit reporting agencies 
continued to incorrectly report it as a charged-off account. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
