KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant asserts that she responded to the Government’s FORM notwithstanding the
Judge’s finding to the contrary.  Applicant provided no information as to the nature or identity of
the material she claims she submitted, or the manner in which she submitted it.  Given the lack
of specificity and the presumption in favor of good faith and regularity of Federal employees
when performing their duties, Applicant has not demonstrated that her due process rights were
violated.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-00017.a1
DATE: 04/22/2016
DATE: April 22, 2016
In Re:
----------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-00017
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security  clearance.  On
August 5, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case
be decided on the written record.  On January 28, 2016, after the close of the record, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals  (DOHA) Administrative Judge Mark Harvey denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether the Judge decided the case on
the full record, and (2) whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For
the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s adverse decision. 
The Judge made the following findings: Applicant has 13 delinquent SOR debts totaling
$33,051.  There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling.  In her SOR response,
Applicant claimed she was making payments on some of the debts.  She also claimed that she had
medical bills from a trip to the emergency room and she had no insurance.  However, the record
lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes of her
financial problems and other mitigating information.  Applicant did not respond to the File of
Relevant Material (FORM) submitted by the Government in this case.  
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant’s failure to provide more detailed
information and corroborating documentation shows a lack of judgment and responsibility that
weighs against approval of her security clearance.  There is insufficient evidence about why she was
unable to make greater progress resolving most of her SOR debts.  There is insufficient assurance
that her financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. 
Under all the circumstances, she failed to establish that financial consideration security concerns are
mitigated.      
Applicant asserts that she did, in fact, respond to the Government’s FORM.  She states that
“it was mailed back in the following day.” Appeal Brief at 1.  No other information about any
submissions Applicant claims to have made is provided.   The Board will consider this assertion on
appeal, even though  it constitutes new evidence, as it raises an issue of procedural due process.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06467 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2016).  However, Applicant here has provided
no information as to the nature or identity of the material she states she submitted, the volume of
such material, when she submitted it, or the manner in which she submitted it.1  There is a rebuttable
presumption that Federal employees act with good faith and regularity when performing their duties. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-05846 at 5 (App.Bd. Aug. 1, 2012).  This presumption includes actions
of postal authorities and DOHA personnel upon receipt of written submissions from applicants. 
Moreover, as with appeal arguments regarding matters of substance, applicants are required to raise
issues involving procedural due process with enough specificity to allow the Board to evaluate fully
the claim of error.  Applicant has failed to provide the requisite specificity in this instance. 
Applicant has not demonstrated that her procedural due process rights were violated.
The Board construes the balance of Applicant’s appeal arguments as an assertion that the
Judge did not properly evaluate matters in mitigation.  Applicant’s appeal brief includes assertions
and attachments that were not part of the record below.  The Board may not consider new evidence
1To the extent that the Board might construe the attachments to the appeal brief as part of Applicant’s original
submission, such a course is undermined by the fact that several of the documents post-date the deadline for submission
and some post-date the Judge’s decision.    
on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.   The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone
compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
25157 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2008).  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a
whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd.
Oct. 12, 2007).  Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for an alternate interpretation of the
record evidence.   The Board finds no reason to believe that the Judge did not properly weigh the
evidence or that he failed to consider all the evidence of record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06622
at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2012).  We have considered the totality of Applicant’s arguments on appeal
and find no error in the Judge’s ultimate conclusions regarding mitigation.  
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  “The general standard is that a clearance
may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s ultimate
unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan      
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett       
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields      
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
