 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-02241   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 14, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on seven debts in the total amount of 
$20,987. He has resolved two debts and is making payment on the remaining five 
accounts. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 21, 2015, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 26, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned me on January 7, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
January 20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 10, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) 
A through F, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 19, 2016. The record was left open for 
Applicant to submit additional exhibits. Applicant presented additional exhibits marked 
AE G through AE O. Department Counsel had no objections to AE G through AE O and 
they were admitted. The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He has been employed with his current employer, a 
Government contractor, since 2014. He was unemployed from October 2013 to July 
2014. He worked as a federal contractor from 1991 to 2013, prior to being laid off. He 
held a security clearance for over 25 years, without incident. He is divorced and has 
four daughters, ages 24, 22, 16, and 15. His minor daughters reside with him. 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant owes approximately $20,987 on seven delinquent 
financial obligations. In his Answer, Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 
1.d, 1.f, and 1.g. He denied the SOR allegation in subparagraph 1.e. His debts are 
documented in the record credit reports dated September 5, 2014; February 23, 2015; 
August 26, 2015; December 8, 2015; and February 9, 2016. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; 
GE 7.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a to be indebted on a vehicle loan in the 
amount of $13,960. Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b to be indebted to the same 
creditor on a second delinquent vehicle loan in the amount of $955. Applicant reached a 
written agreement with this creditor to resolve these debts through monthly payments of 
$200. Applicant documented he has made those monthly payments since October 
2015. These debts are being resolved. (AE A; AE K; AE N; Tr. 22-25.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c to be indebted on a collection account in the 
amount of $2,333. On October 17, 2015, made a $101.27 payment to this creditor. On 
October 19, 2015, this creditor agreed to a monthly payment plan. Applicant has made 
five payments under this agreement. Applicant is resolving this debt. (AE B; AE L; Tr. 
26-27, 40-43.)  
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d to be indebted to a creditor on a delinquent 
account in the amount $2,329. This creditor is the same as the creditor identified in 
SOR ¶ 1.c, but this was for a separate account. Applicant contacted this creditor on 
February 25, 2016, and arranged to resolve this debt for an initial payment of $200 on 
March 4, 2016, and five subsequent payments of $193.25. Applicant credibly avers he 
will make payments on this account until it is resolved. Applicant is resolving this debt. 
(AE O; Tr. 26-27, 40-43.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e to be indebted on a collection account in the 
amount of $951. Applicant presented a letter from this creditor, dated October 14, 2015, 
that shows this debt was paid in full. This debt is resolved. (AE D; Tr. 43.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f to be indebted on a collection account in the 
amount of $302. Applicant has made three payments on this debt between December 
2015 and February 2016, totaling $140.24. He intends to continue making payments on 
this debt until it is resolved. (AE M; AE N; Tr. 43.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g to be indebted on a collection account in the 
amount of $157. Applicant testified that this debt was not incurred by him and was not in 
his name or social security number, but that he resolved it anyway to remove it from his 
credit report. He resolved it in full on December 17, 2015. (AE E; AE N; Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquencies to his unemployment and divorce. His 
unemployment is outlined above. He separated from his wife in 2012 and the divorce 
was finalized in 2014. He testified that he has enough money left over at the end of the 
month to make small payments on these debts until they are fully resolved, without 
getting further into debt. He is committed to resolving his financial obligations. (Tr. 36-
39.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accumulated seven debts in the total amount of $20,987. These debts 
establish both a history of delinquencies and an inability or unwillingness to satisfy his 
obligations. The evidence raises security concerns under the above conditions, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. I find the following two provide 
mitigation: 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has addressed all of his seven delinquent debts. Two are fully resolved 
and he is making payments on five others. As he resolved those two debts, he has 
shown a recent track record of making consistent payments. He can be trusted to 
continue to make his monthly payments on his remaining delinquencies. His financial 
delinquencies are under control and he is making a good-faith effort to repay his 
creditors. Applicant’s indebtedness does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. The security concerns with respect to his financial 
delinquencies are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served as a 
Government contractor for more than 25 years. He has held a security clearance, 
without violation, that entire time. He acted responsibly by resolving two debts and 
making payments under agreements he reached with the creditors on the others. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
(added space here) 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
