 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01768 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 16, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on  
January 13, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on January 29, 2016.  Applicant 
submitted a timely response to the FORM. (Item 8) Department Counsel did not object 
to Applicant’s submissions in her response to the FORM. (Item 9) On February 24, 
2016, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on March 1, 
2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Rulings on Evidence  
 
 Item 4 of the FORM is a portion of the Report of Investigation (ROI) from the 
background investigation of Applicant. It is a summary of Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interview completed by the investigator conducting her background investigation on 
October 9, 2012. It is unsworn and unauthenticated. DOD Directive 5220.6, Enclosure 
3, ¶ E3.1.20 states, “An ROI may be received with an authenticating witness provided it 
is otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence.” (see ISCR Case No. 11-
13999 (App. Bd., February 3, 2014)).  In her response to the FORM, Applicant indicated 
that she had no objection to the admission of Item 4.  For this reason, Item 4 is 
admitted.    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.g, 1.k – 1.m, and 1.r. She denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.h – 1.j, 1.n – 1.q, and 1.s 
– 1.w. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain her security 
clearance. She has worked for her current employer since February 2012. Her highest 
educational achievement is a Master’s degree. She has three children, who are now 22, 
22, and 18. She married in April 2010, was separated in July 2014, and was divorced in 
June 2015. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 4 at 4)   
 
On August 2, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts, Applicant listed several delinquent accounts. (Item 3, section 26) In 
the additional comments section, Applicant mentioned she has financial issues because 
she struggles as a mother trying to raise her three children. The father of her children 
did not pay child support which created an additional burden on her limited income. She 
mentioned that she filed for bankruptcy in 2005 and she continued to struggle to pay her 
debts. (Item 3, Additional Comments, at 42)  
 
 A subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant filed for Chapter 
7 bankruptcy in March 2005. Her debts were discharged by the bankruptcy court in 
August 2005. (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 4 at 1; Item 5 at 5); Applicant filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in October 2014. The bankruptcy was dismissed in May 2015. (SOR ¶ 1.b: 
Item 7 at 1); and Applicant filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 in June 2015. (SOR ¶ 
1.c: Item 7 at 1) 
 
Delinquent accounts include: a $10,741 federal tax debt owed to the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) for tax years 2013 and 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 2 at 5); a $557 
county tax debt for 2015 personal property taxes (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 2 at 5); a $7,440 
judgment filed against Applicant in 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 5 at 5); an $859 judgment filed 
against Applicant in 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 5 at 5); a $410 gym account placed for 
 
3 
 
 
collection (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 5 at 7); and two cable television accounts placed for 
collection in the amounts of $135 each (SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.t: Item 5 at 5; Item 6 at 2) 
 
 Additional delinquent accounts include: four medical accounts placed for 
collection in the amounts of $29, $104, $113, and $113 (SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.r, 1.u, and 1.v: 
Item 5 at 9, 12; Item 6 at 2); a $423 charged-off account (SOR ¶ 1.k: Item 5 at 9); a 
$1,109 department store account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.l: Item 5 at 10); a $422 
telephone account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.m: Item 5 at 10); four traffic ticket fines 
placed for collection in the amounts of $250, $300, $205, and $250 (SOR ¶¶ 1.n – 1.q: 
Item 5 at 11); a $242 insurance debt placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.s: Item 5 at 16); and 
a $35 credit union debt placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.w: Item 6 at 2). 
 
 During a personal subject interview on October 9, 2012, conducted by an 
investigator regarding her security clearance background investigation, Applicant 
admitted to incurring several delinquent accounts after her bankruptcy discharge in 
August 2005. The delinquent accounts included an automobile loan that she co-signed 
for a friend in 2008 to purchase a 2005 Jaguar. Her friend defaulted on the loan, and 
Applicant was responsible for the payments. The car was returned to the dealer. In June 
2010, a court ordered her to pay $75 a month towards the loan. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant also discussed the delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l, $1,109; 
debts owed to her apartment association, which were paid prior to the SOR being 
issued; SOR ¶ 1.f, $7,440; SOR ¶ 1.m, $422; SOR ¶ 1.g, $859; SOR ¶ 1.h, $410; SOR 
¶ 1.k, $423; and ¶¶ 1.n – 1.q, $250, $300, $205, and $250.  She did not recognize the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h and 1.k. She believed that they were discharged in her 
2005 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. She does not recognize the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n – 
1.q.  (Item 4) 
 
  Applicant said that her financial issues were caused by caring for her three 
children without receiving child support. She is capable of meeting her financial 
obligations and is attempting to resolve her debts in hopes that she can purchase a 
home in the future. She was unemployed from December 2011 to February 2012. (Item 
4) 
 
 In her response to the SOR, dated November 16, 2015, Applicant indicated that 
her Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in June 2015 was discharged by the bankruptcy court on 
October 5, 2015. She provided a copy of the bankruptcy court’s “Discharge of Debtor.” 
(Item 2, Answer to the SOR, Enclosure D) She initially filed for bankruptcy under 
Chapter 13, but her hours were decreased as well as her pay. She claims that she was 
no longer qualified for Chapter 13 and had to refile under Chapter 7. Her hours were 
reduced to 1,600 hours annually and her salary was adjusted to $89,990. (Item 2, 
Answer to the SOR, Enclosure E) She did not provide complete copies of the Chapter 7 
and Chapter 13 bankruptcy files.  
 
 Applicant provided proof that the father of her children is past due approximately 
$42,000 in his child support obligations. (Item 2, Answer to the SOR, Enclosure F). As a 
 
4 
 
 
single mother, she worked two jobs and pursued her education. She earned an M.B.A. 
Her children are doing well. One child enlisted in the Air Force. Another child is a 
manager of a fast food restaurant and her youngest child is a freshman in college. (Item 
2) 
 
 Applicant claims that the federal tax debt for tax year 2013 was the result of her 
husband’s failure to pay taxes for that year, even though he agreed to pay the taxes. In 
addition, Applicant and her husband separated in July 2014. She lost the advantage of 
filing married. In 2014, she filed as married filing separately resulting in a tax debt of 
$9,180. She intends to make payment arrangements to resolve this debt. She also 
intends to make payment arrangements regarding the $557 personal property tax debt 
for tax year 2015 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. She claims the remaining debts are discharged 
under the Chapter 7 bankruptcy with the exception of the $35 credit union debt placed 
for collection in SOR ¶ 1.f. She claims she has an active account with the credit union 
and it is in good standing. (Item 2; Answer to the SOR, Enclosure G) 
 
 Applicant disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.n-1.q; 1.r, 1.t, -1.v. 
She did not recognize these accounts. She did not formally dispute these debts, opting 
instead to file for bankruptcy. I find for Applicant with respect to the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.t and 1.v.  The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t is a duplicate of the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.i.  The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.v is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.u. I find for Applicant with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.w because Applicant 
provided proof that she is a member in good standing with the credit union and the 
credit report dated January 8, 2016, lists the debt as paid. (Item 2, enclosure G; Item 7 
at 2)     
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, dated February 5, 2016, she provided 
documentation that she entered into an installment agreement to repay the federal tax 
debt on December 28, 2015. She agreed to pay $150 per month and has made two 
payments on time. She did not provide proof of the payments. (Item 8 at 5-6)  She 
provided proof that she completed a course on credit counseling in June 2015 and a 
course on personal financial management in July 2015, as a requirement for filing for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (Item 8 at 12-16).  
 
 Applicant did not provide a complete copy of her 2015 Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
filing. She also did not provide current information on her net monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and her monthly financial obligations.  The status of her current financial 
situation after the bankruptcy is unknown. 
 
 Applicant’s student loans were not alleged in the SOR, but were discussed as 
matters affecting extenuation and mitigation. Applicant has approximately $200,000 in 
student loans. The loans were in deferment and payments were to start in February 
2016. (Item 7) On January 22, 2016, Applicant submitted an “Income Driven Repayment 
Plan” request pertaining to her student loans. Applicant claims the repayment began on 
February 28, 2016, with a monthly payment of $25. (Item 8 at 8-11) She did not provide 
 
5 
 
 
a copy of the approved repayment agreement. It is also not clear whether the plan 
applies to all of her student loans or just one account.      
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
6 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial problems which lead to a bankruptcy filing in 2005. After the 
discharge of her debts in 2005, she continued to have financial problems. This initially 
resulted in her filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in October 2014. The bankruptcy was 
dismissed in May 2015 after her hours and pay were cut. In June 2015, she filed for 
bankruptcy under Chapter 7. Her debts were discharged in October 2015.  After the 
discharge, Applicant remained responsible for a federal tax debt in the approximate 
amount of $10,741 for tax years 2013 and 2014. In addition to the federal tax debt, the 
SOR alleged 19 delinquent accounts incurred after Applicant’s 2005 bankruptcy 
discharge with a total balance of approximately $13,000. Both AG &19(a) and AG 
&19(c) apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
 
7 
 
 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control);  
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue). 
 
AG & 20(a) does not apply. Applicant has a long history of financial 
irresponsibility. Since 2005, she has filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy on two occasions 
and Chapter 13 on one occasion, which indicates a failure to take responsibility for her 
financial obligations. Applicant was put on notice about many of these debts during her 
October 2012 background investigation interview. She did nothing to start resolving 
these debts until two years later when she filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in October 
2014. While the majority of Applicant’s debts were discharged in her recent Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, she still owes the IRS over $10,000 for tax years 2013 and 2014. 
Considering Applicant’s lengthy history of financial irresponsibility, I am unable to 
conclude that her pattern of neglecting her financial obligations is unlikely to recur. 
While Applicant’s debts were discharged in October 2015, it is too soon to conclude that 
Applicant has established a track record of financial responsibility.  
 
AG & 20(b) partially applies. Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control 
contributed to her financial situation, to include a brief period of unemployment in late 
 
8 
 
 
2011 to early 2012; the lack of child support being paid by her children’s father; a 
separation from her husband in 2014 and divorce in June 2015; and a reduction in her 
hours and pay in May 2015. However, most of the delinquent debts were incurred 
several years earlier before her Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing. Applicant’s decision to file 
under Chapter 7 for a second time was a result of the reduction of her hours and pay.  
This reduced her annual income to $89,990, which still is a respectable income. I 
cannot conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances because her 
neglect of her financial obligations occurred well before her 2012 background 
investigation interview. Even after the interview, having been put on notice that her 
delinquent finances were a concern, Applicant did nothing to resolve her delinquent 
accounts even though it appears her income was sufficient to take some action.  
 
AG & 20(c) partially applies because Applicant attended financial counseling in 
conjunction with her Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing and the majority of her delinquent 
accounts were discharged in the 2015 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. She recently entered a 
repayment plan regarding the $10,000 federal income tax debt. Even though she claims 
she made two payments towards the agreement, it is too soon to conclude that she will 
continue to make timely and regular payments towards the tax debt. In addition, the 
deferment period of Applicant’s approximately $200,000 in student loans ended in 
February 2016.  Applicant provided no information regarding her current budget and 
income. I cannot conclude that she is capable of making the payments under the federal 
tax debt repayment plan as well as meet her other financial obligations. For this reason, 
AG & 20(c) is given less weight.   
 
AG & 20(d) partially applies to the federal income tax debt and the debt alleged 
in SOR & 1.w.  However, I cannot conclude that Applicant made a good-faith effort to 
resolve her remaining delinquent accounts.  Made aware of the delinquent accounts in 
October 2012, Applicant did nothing to resolve these accounts until she filed for Chapter 
13 bankruptcy in October 2014, eventually converting to Chapter 7 in 2015. While filing 
for bankruptcy is a legal means to dismiss one debt, it cannot be considered a good-
faith effort to repay or resolve one’s debts to overdue creditors.   
 
AG & 20(e) does not apply. Although Applicant disputed 11 debts alleged in the 
SOR, she did not take steps to formally dispute these debts, opting instead to file for 
bankruptcy. She was not proactive in following up to resolve her disputes. For this 
reason, AG & 20(e) does not apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
9 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the fact that Applicant raised her three children without child 
support.  I considered that Applicant went to school while raising her three children, 
ultimately obtaining a Master’s degree. I considered Applicant’s years of service with 
her employer. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, she failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts that would mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns. While the majority of Applicant’s accounts were 
discharged by the bankruptcy court in October 2015, this was her second bankruptcy 
discharge in 10 years.  Prior to filing for bankruptcy, Applicant did not take action 
towards resolving these accounts, such as entering into a repayment agreement with 
each creditor or formally disputing accounts with the credit bureaus, even though she 
was made aware of these delinquent debts during her background investigation 
interview in October 2012.  
 
 Applicant did not provide complete copies of her bankruptcy paperwork. She also 
did not provide information about her current income and monthly expenses. I cannot 
determine whether Applicant has sufficient income to meet her financial obligations. For 
this reason, I cannot conclude that Applicant is able to develop a track record of 
financial rehabilitation. Applicant did not mitigate the concerns arising from financial 
considerations. 
 
 The determination of an individual’s eligibility for a security clearance is not a 
once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying 
and mitigating to the evidence presented. Under Applicant’s current circumstances, the 
granting of a security clearance is not warranted. In the future, if Applicant takes 
proactive steps towards resolving her delinquent tax debt and establishes a track record 
of current payments towards all of her financial obligations, she may demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of her security worthiness.  
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In the future, she may be able to 
demonstrate a track record of financial responsibility. Based on Applicant’s history of 
 
10 
 
 
financial irresponsibility, it is too soon to make that conclusion at this point. The security 
concerns raised under financial considerations are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.s, 1.u:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.t, 1.v, 1.w:   For Applicant  
  
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
