 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-02051   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 28, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on four debts in the total amount of 
$59,871. One debt was listed twice on the SOR. His delinquent debts were caused by 
financial difficulties that resulted from his divorce. Over the past two years, he has 
resolved the two duplicate delinquent accounts. He is making payments on the 
remaining two accounts. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 25, 2015, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 29, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned me on January 19, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 21, 2016, scheduling the hearing for March 1, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on March 7, 2016. The record was left open for Applicant to submit 
additional exhibits. Applicant presented additional exhibits marked AE E through AE G. 
Department Counsel had no objections to AE E through AE G, and they were admitted. 
The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He is a naturalized citizen of the United States. He has 
been employed with a Government contractor for 16 years. He has held a security 
clearance for 10 or 11 years. He married his wife in 1996 and they divorced in 2005. 
(GE 1; Tr. 27-28.) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant owes approximately $59,871 on four delinquent 
financial obligations. In his Answer, Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.a, as it is a duplicate of 
SOR ¶ 1.c. He admitted all of the other SOR allegations (¶¶ 1.b, and 1.d.), with 
clarifications. His debts are documented in the record credit reports dated May 24, 
2014; December 1, 2014; December 8, 2015; and February 28, 2016. (GE 2; GE 3; GE 
4; GE 5.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c to be indebted on a delinquent 
credit card in the amount of $23,266. He only owes one $23,266 debt to this creditor, as 
documented in the credit reports. Applicant presented a settlement agreement with this 
creditor, dated March 1, 2016, that agreed to settle this debt for $6,981, payable in one 
payment of $4,600, and three monthly payments of $793.66. Applicant presented a 
copy of his cancelled check showing he made the $4,600 payment on March 28, 2016. 
He testified that he intends to continue making payments on this debt. This debt is being 
resolved. (AE E; Tr. 32, 36-37, 43-46.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b to be indebted to a bank for a delinquent 
credit card account in the amount of $4,949. Applicant testified that he had two 
accounts with this creditor. He negotiated a settlement with the creditor, whereby he 
would pay $7,500, and his remaining debt would be cancelled. (AE C.) He presented a 
cashier’s check showing he paid the $7,500 to the attorney for this creditor on January 
10, 2014. (AE C at 2.) In 2014, the company issued him a 1099-C cancelling the 
remaining debt on both of his accounts held by this creditor. (AE F.) He included the 
1099-C in his U.S. individual income tax return for 2014. (AE F at 2.) This debt is 
resolved. (Tr. 33.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d to be indebted on a delinquent credit card in 
the amount $7,390. Applicant presented a letter dated November 3, 2015, from a 
collection agent for this creditor that shows this account was “considered ‘paid-in-full’ 
11/3/2015.” (AE D.) This debt is resolved. (Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquencies to his divorce, outlined above. He was 
required to pay his ex-wife half of his assets upon their divorce, which caused him 
significant financial strain. While he was recovering from his divorce, the economy 
declined. His home value plummeted and his overtime hours at work were eliminated. 
(Tr. 21-24.) He has worked since then to resolve his creditors, one by one. He is 
currently resolving his final delinquency. (Tr. 24.) There are no delinquent debts on his 
current credit report. (GE 5.) He testified that he has enough money left over at the end 
of the month to make payments on his remaining debt until it is fully resolved, without 
getting further into debt. He is committed to resolving his financial obligations. (Tr. 40-
41.) 
 
 Two of Applicant’s co-workers wrote letters on Applicant’s behalf that 
characterize Applicant as “demonstrate[ing] a strong work ethic,” and as “extremely 
reliable.” Applicant is considered to be a tremendous asset to those that work with him. 
(AE A; AE G.) Additionally, Applicant’s work performance appraisals reflect that 
Applicant does an excellent job in his assigned duties. (AE A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant accumulated three debts in the total amount of $35,605, as one of the 
SOR debts was listed twice. These debts establish both a history of delinquencies and 
an inability or unwillingness to satisfy his obligations. The evidence raises security 
concerns under the above conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. I find the following three provide 
mitigation: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts were caused by his 2005 divorce and enhanced by the 
downturn in the economy in 2007. However, he has acted responsibly by addressing all 
of his delinquencies over time. Two debts are fully resolved and he is making payments 
on the third debt. He has shown a recent track record of making consistent payments. 
He can be trusted to continue to make his monthly payments on his remaining 
delinquency. His finances are under control and he has made a good-faith effort to 
repay his creditors. Applicant’s indebtedness does not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The security concerns with respect to his 
financial delinquencies are mitigated. The above conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
6 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s debts were caused 
by his unexpected divorce and the elimination of his overtime hours due to a downturn 
in the economy. He has worked hard to resolve his financial delinquencies. He acted 
responsibly by resolving two delinquent debts and making payments on one other. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
