 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01069 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
G, alcohol consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 On September 30, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 15, 2016. The 
Department of Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on February 9, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 4, 2016. 
 
2 
 
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through H, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on March 14, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. I have incorporated his admissions 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1991 and a master’s 
degree in 1997. He has been married four times. He most recently married in 2013. He 
has two children, ages seven and four, from his third marriage. He was on active duty in 
the military for approximately eleven years and then served in the reserves. He retired 
from the military in 2009 in the paygrade O-4. In addition to civilian employment in the 
United States, Applicant has worked at various jobs overseas for several years. He has 
also experienced periods of unemployment. He has worked with his present employer, 
a federal contractor, for about 14 months.1  
 
Applicant has a history of consuming alcohol, at times to excess and to the point 
of intoxication, from 1991 until at least 2013. He admitted that he continued to consume 
alcohol until at least February 2015. Applicant admitted that two of his marriages ended 
because of his alcohol issues.2  
 
Applicant was arrested in February 1991 and charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI) of alcohol. He was convicted of the offense in May 1991.  
 
 In 1999, Applicant went through intensive alcohol outpatient treatment from May 
through July. He testified that after this treatment he immediately resumed drinking 
alcohol. Between September and October 2001 he went through another treatment 
program and was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He believed the diagnosis was from 
a social worker. He relapsed about six months after this treatment.3  
 
 In about October 2006, Applicant left employment with a state agency under 
unfavorable conditions due, in part, to his alcohol issues. He again participated in 
alcohol treatment from October 2006 to November 2006. He relapsed and began 
consuming alcohol. He believed he was sober about a year before the relapse.4  
                                                          
1 Tr. 19-30. 
 
2 Tr. 32, 53-54. 
 
3 Tr. 54-56. 
 
4 Tr. 49-50, 57-58. 
 
3 
 
 
 In June 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with third degree assault and 
DUI. In April 2013, he received a deferred prosecution on the assault charge and was 
placed on probation. The DUI charge was dismissed due to lack of evidence. 
Applicant’s probation was terminated early and the assault charge was dismissed in 
August 2013.5  
 
 In September 2013, Applicant left his employment under unfavorable 
circumstances, due, in part, to issues related to his alcohol abuse. Applicant voluntarily 
sought inpatient alcohol treatment between October and November 2013. He was 
diagnosed with alcohol dependence. He relapsed a week after he left treatment and 
resumed inpatient treatment from December 21, 2013, to January 3, 2014. This is the 
last treatment program in which he participated. Upon completion of the program, he 
was advised to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), but he did not.6  
 
 Applicant admitted that he worked in a foreign country from October 2014 until 
February 2015 and left the job due to alcohol issues and attendance problems. He 
subsequently started a new job overseas and began reading the Bible and getting 
sober. He attends church weekly. He indicated he attempts to attend weekly prayer 
meetings, but is usually too tired to go. There are AA meetings available in his area, but 
he does not attend. He surrounds himself with supportive people.7  
 
 Applicant testified that he made changes in his life a year ago. He noted specific 
factors that demonstrate that he has changed. First, he still has a job, which if he was 
still drinking he would not have. Second, he is alive, and he is not sure he would be 
alive if he were still drinking. Third, he has moved to a different country where alcohol is 
not as prevalent. He will remain there until he is strong enough to maintain his sobriety. 
Fourth, he is married, and he would not be if he continued to abuse alcohol. Applicant 
studies the Bible and reads devotionals to help him maintain his sobriety. He believes 
his past alcohol rehabilitation failures were because he was focused on the wrong thing, 
such as the psychological reasons for his drinking. Now that he is focused on God be 
believes he has changed and can abstain.8  
 
Applicant testified that there were periods of time where he could abstain from 
alcohol consumption for six to twelve months, but then would start drinking again. He 
experienced some blackouts, but not many. Each time he completed a treatment 
program he was told to abstain from consuming alcohol. Applicant admitted he is an 
alcoholic. He stated that he is living overseas so that “when I come back to a real world 
situation I am able to maintain” sobriety.9 When asked if his wife consumes alcohol, he 
                                                          
5 Tr. 43, 50-52, 59-60. 
 
6 Tr. 41-46, 61. 
 
7 Tr. 32-34, 46-48, 64-66. 
 
8 Tr. 37-38, 48-49. 
 
9 Tr. 63. 
 
4 
 
 
indicated she will occasionally have some for a special occasion, but is respectful of his 
condition. She does not reside with him overseas. He stated she can drink in front of 
him and it does not bother him.10  
 
Applicant stated that he intentionally lives in a foreign country where alcohol is 
not as freely available to help him maintain his sobriety. He has had job offers in other 
foreign countries where alcohol is more available, but intentionally chose a country that 
has more restrictions on alcohol. He lives where alcohol is not in front of him 
everywhere he goes.11  
 
Applicant provided documents showing his military and government service 
awards, civilian evaluations, and a superior honor award.12 In addition, he provided 
character letters that describe him as a person of good moral character, who is 
dedicated and a person of integrity. He is a person with exemplary characteristics and 
professional skills who loves his country. His wife provided a letter. She noted that 
Applicant has been through alcohol rehabilitation and had relapses, but quickly gets 
back on track. He has recently changed his focus and is rededicated to his faith. This 
spiritual connection has fostered a positive change in him beyond sobriety.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
10 Tr. 32-34, 53, 59, 63. 
 
11 Tr. 32-34, 46-47, 64-67. 
 
12 AE A, B, C, and D. 
 
13 Tr. 38-41; AE E, F. F, G and H. 
 
5 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption:  
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 I have considered the following disqualifying condition for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 22:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
 
6 
 
 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual was diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) or alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence;  
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant had numerous alcohol-related incidents, including arrests for DUI and 
assault, from 1991 through 2012. He left jobs, due in part, to alcohol abuse. He 
participated in both inpatient and outpatient alcohol treatment programs at least four 
times and repeatedly relapsed. During some of the treatments he was diagnosed with 
alcohol dependence. Although the evidence is not specific as to the qualifications of the 
persons making the diagnosis, they were made at medical and alcohol treatment 
facilities. I find the above six disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The 
following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) So much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
 
7 
 
 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.  
 
 Applicant has a long history of alcohol abuse and dependency. He has 
repeatedly relapsed after both inpatient and outpatient treatment. His testimony is that 
he has not consumed alcohol since February 2015. He acknowledged he is an 
alcoholic. He stated that he has maintained sobriety for periods, but each time he 
eventually relapsed. He does not follow a structured program, but chooses to devote 
himself to focusing on his spiritual commitment to remain sober by reading the Bible. He 
has attended a weekly prayer group, but admitted he often misses it because he is too 
tired. He intentionally lives in a country that restricts alcohol, so he will not be tempted to 
consume it. Those more recent efforts demonstrate positive actions to address his 
alcoholic behaviors. However, given Applicant’s long history of alcohol abuse and 
repeated treatment failure, insufficient time has passed to conclude his alcohol abuse 
will not recur. I find AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) do not apply. Applicant is not participating in 
a current treatment program. AG ¶ 23(c) does not apply. Applicant did not provide 
evidence that he is in an aftercare program. He provided evidence that he has had a 
successful military and civilian employment and awards he has received. However, 
there is no evidence of a favorable prognosis by a qualified medical professional or 
licensed clinical social worker. AG ¶ 23(d) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
8 
 
 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old educated man. He has a long history of alcohol abuse 
and has been diagnosed with alcohol dependence. He has had periods of sobriety, but 
has been unable to maintain them even after completion of extensive inpatient and 
outpatient treatment. He does not participate in any form of ongoing treatment to assist 
him in maintaining sobriety, but rather chooses to live overseas in a country that 
restricts the availability of alcohol. He is now focused on maintaining his sobriety 
through his spiritual commitment to God. His actions are commendable, but his past 
cannot be ignored. Without a proven long-term period of sobriety, I am unable to 
conclude that Applicant’s alcohol issue is not a security concern. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
