KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant challenges the Judge’s decision not to consider the summary of her
clearance interview.  She argues that the interview contains information that she believes is
beneficial to her.    Under the particular facts of this case, we conclude that the best resolution is
to remand the case to the Judge to consider Item 4, after which she will issue a new Decision.
Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 15-05252.a1
DATE: 04/13/2016
DATE: April 13, 2016
In Re:
-------. 
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-05252
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
25, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On February 3, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Erin C. Hogan denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s ruling on the admission
of evidence effectively denied Applicant an opportunity to present matters in mitigation and whether
the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following, we remand the case to the Judge.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has a number of delinquent debts, for such things as student loans, cable television
services, utilities, etc.  She stated that she had consolidated three of the student loans and that they
were no longer delinquent.  The Judge found that she had not made proof of payment nor had she
shown that the loans covered by the consolidation plan were those addressed in the SOR.  Applicant
is taking credit counseling classes.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant had not provided enough information to mitigate the
concerns raised by her delinquent debts.  She stated that it was too soon to determine that
Applicant’s problems were behind her.  She also concluded that Applicant has only recently begun
to address her problems, which is not enough to show that she has demonstrated a sufficient degree
of responsible action.  She stated that Applicant had not corroborated her claims to have paid certain
debts.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge stated that Applicant had not provided evidence of
timely payments, nor had she submitted a budget.  
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s decision not to consider the summary of her clearance
interview.  She argues that the interview contains information that she believes is beneficial to her. 
Applicant’s brief asserts matters from outside the record, which we are generally prohibited from
considering.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  As noted below, however, we are treating this issue as one of due
process, a threshold issue for which we will consider new evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
00812 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 8, 2015). 
Department Counsel attached Applicant’s interview summary to the File of Relevant
Material (FORM).  This document was part of the DoD Report of Investigation (ROI) in Applicant’s
2
case.  It bore no authentication, as required for admission by Directive ¶ E3.1.20.1  In a footnote,
Department Counsel advised Applicant as follows:
IMPORTANT NOTICE TO APPLICANT: The attached summary of your Personal
Subject Interview (Item 4) is being provided to the Administrative Judge for
consideration as part of the record evidence in this case.  In your response to the
[FORM], you can comment on whether it accurately reflects the information you
provided and you can make any corrections, additions, deletions, and updates
necessary to make the summary clear and accurate.  Alternatively, you can object on
the ground that the report is unauthenticated by a Government witness.  If no
objections are raised in your response to this FORM, or if you do not respond to this
FORM, the Administrative Judge may determine that you have waived any
objections to the admissibility of the summary and may consider it as evidence in
your case.
In her response, Applicant did not make any reference to Item 4 at all, either to object,  offer
clarification, or explicitly to acquiesce in its admission.  The Judge noted that Applicant had not
objected.  However, on her own motion she declined to consider this document, insofar as it was
unsworn and not authenticated.  She stated that, given Applicant’s pro se status, she was more likely
than not unaware of the legal meaning of wavier.  She found that the record did not show that
Applicant’s failure to address Item 4 constituted a knowing and intelligent waiver of objection to
the document’s lack of authentication.  
In her brief, Applicant challenges this ruling.  She states that she was under oath when she
answered the interviewer’s questions, as reflected on the first page of Item 4.  She states that she
does not know what else needs to be done to have it authenticated2 but that information in the report
is beneficial to her.  “I did an overall budget with the agent during the interview and I assumed it
would be included in the packet[.]” Appeal Brief at 1.  She states that this is why she did not include
another budget.  We note that the Judge cited to an absence of a budget as a matter that weighed
against Applicant’s case for mitigation.  Applicant also notes that during the interview she corrected
an error regarding her employment history.  The Judge’s findings do not reflect that correction.  
While it is somewhat unusual to challenge a Judge’s decision not to admit evidence
submitted by a party opponent, in this case we conclude that the Applicant has established a basis
for relief.  Reading her brief in light of the record as a whole, it appears that she believed that the
summary, which provided context for her debts as well as budgetary information, would be
considered unless she explicitly objected.  This, in turn, may well have influenced her decision as
1This paragraph states that a DoD ROI “may be received with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise
admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence.”  
2Applicant may not have understood the meaning of authentication, which she appears to have equated with
her having been placed under oath prior to answering the interviewer’s questions.  Accordingly, she may not have
understood that an issue of authentication was actually raised in regard to her interview summary.    
3
to the quantum of evidence that she submitted in response to the FORM.  The Judge’s ruling, in
effect, resulted in the Judge declining to consider a document containing some information that
Applicant believed would support her effort to obtain a favorable decision.  Under the particular
facts of this case, we conclude that the best resolution is to remand the case to the Judge to consider
Item 4, after which she will issue a new Decision. Other issues that Applicant has raised are not ripe
for adjudication.
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan            
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
