 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 15-00809 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 28 delinquent debts, including 22 
medical debts. His largest delinquent SOR debt was his first mortgage, and he brought 
it to current status using funds from his 401(k) account. He also paid one judgment, and 
he brought his medical debts to current status. Two debts do not have payment plans 
and remain unresolved. He is investigating one account and communicating with his 
creditors on the other account. He assures he intends to pay his debts. While additional 
sustained financial effort is necessary, he has established a track record of debt 
payment and resolution. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
Access to classified information is granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On May 29, 2014, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On September 22, 2015, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
 
2 
                                         
 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. 
 
On September 30, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing. On December 3, 2015, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On 
January 28, 2016, the case was assigned to me. On February 8, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing 
for February 24, 2016. (HE 1) Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, 
time, and location of his hearing. (Tr. 14-15) The hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits, and Applicant 
offered two exhibits. (Transcript (Tr.) 19-23; Government Exhibit (GE) 1-4; Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A-B) Applicant objected to the content of the Government Exhibits because 
they did not contain recent information about Applicant’s finances. (Tr. 19-20) I 
overruled Applicant’s objection, and the four government exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 20-21) I advised Applicant that he had a right to present additional 
information on his finances. (Tr. 21) Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s 
exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence. (Tr. 23; AE A-B) On March 3, 2016, 
DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he discussed the SOR allegations; however, he did 
not specifically admit or deny the SOR allegations. He also provided extenuating and 
mitigating information. Applicant’s general admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 6) He has been 
employed by the defense contractor for the previous 14 years in a position relating to 
aircraft. (Tr. 8) In 1992, Applicant graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) From 1992 to 
1995, Applicant served in the Army, and his military occupational specialty (MOS) was 
motor transport operator (88M). (Tr. 8) He left active duty as a private first class, and he 
received an honorable discharge. (Tr. 8) In 2002, he received a college certificate in 
information technology. (Tr. 7) In 2002, he married, and his children are ages 6, 20, and 
21. (Tr. 30-31, 57) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 In 2004, Applicant’s spouse obtained a bachelor’s degree in business 
administration. (Tr. 37) In 2009, Applicant’s spouse became unemployed, and his 
family’s annual income was reduced from over $100,000 to about $58,000. (Tr. 32-34, 
46) His spouse unsuccessfully applied for hundreds of jobs. (Tr. 37) She had a difficult 
pregnancy, and she was unable to travel. (Tr. 38) She is working on her master’s 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
degree in instructional technology. (Tr. 34-38) She has an $11,000 student loan debt 
that is currently in deferment. (Tr. 49) 
 
In 2007, Applicant had a minor stroke, which resulted in medical bills. (Tr. 39) 
Applicant maintained contact with his creditors and kept them informed of his financial 
status. (Tr. 40) Applicant’s annual income is now $64,000, and his spouse earns about 
$9,600 annually as a substitute teacher. (Tr. 44-45) Their two vehicles are paid off, and 
they do not have any credit card debts. (Tr. 45, 47) They have a remainder of about 
$200 monthly to address unforeseen contingencies. (Tr. 45)    
 
 Applicant’s 28 delinquent SOR debts are documented in his SF 86, credit 
reports, SOR response, and hearing record. His SOR alleges 22 delinquent medical 
debts, delinquent first and second mortgages, one judgment, and one charged-off debt 
related to a vehicle.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.e, 1.g-1.s, and 1.w-1.bb allege 22 delinquent medical debts totaling 
$5,182. (Tr. 27-28) The 22 debts were for various amounts, and originated from the 
same medical creditor. (Tr. 27-28) Applicant made payments of $148, $521, and $285 
to address his medical debts for a total payment of $954. (Tr. 27; AE A) The creditor 
merged all of the medical debts into one debt, and he currently owes $3,258. (Tr. 55-56) 
He made a separate $53 payment to resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.bb. (Tr. 30) He was 
unsure whether all of the medical debts were processed through his medical insurance 
company, and he was working with his creditor and insurance company to insure proper 
processing of his medical debts. (Tr. 27-28) 
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.f are owed to the same bank. SOR ¶ 1.a for 
$214,974 is for a first mortgage, which was alleged on the SOR to be delinquent in the 
amount of $5,587. (SOR response; AE B at 2) Applicant unsuccessfully sought to have  
the creditor merge the first and second mortgages into one debt. On November 9, 2015, 
Applicant paid the bank-creditor $8,938, which brought his first mortgage to current 
status. (Tr. 28-29; AE A at 4; AE B at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b for $68,164 is for Applicant’s second mortgage, which has been 
delinquent for about two years. (Tr. 59; GE 2) In 2006, Applicant and his spouse took 
out a second mortgage to finish their basement and make repairs. (Tr. 33) On January 
21, 2016, Applicant asked the creditor of the second mortgage to provide a settlement 
agreement, and Applicant intends to start a payment plan to bring the debt to current 
status. (Tr. 43-44, 58) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f is a revolving credit account in the amount of $360. (GE 3) Applicant’s 
2015 credit report shows the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f is settled, and this debt does not appear 
in the two subsequent credit reports of record. (GE 2, 3; AE B) 
 
The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.t for $2,308 is related to a purchase at a store. The 
creditor settled the debt for $1,850. (Tr. 29) On February 12, 2016, the creditor filed an 
Order of Satisfaction with the court. (AE A at 8)   
 
 
4 
                                         
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.u for $1,513 resulted from Applicant’s vehicle being in an 
accident. (Tr. 51-52) Applicant believed he had gap insurance to cover the difference 
between the amount of the lien and the vehicle’s fair market value, and the creditor 
contended the insurance payment was insufficient. (Tr. 51-52) His February 23, 2016 
credit report indicates the account was transferred and the balance is zero; however, his 
new credit report does not indicate the current holder of the debt. (Tr. 52; AE B) 
Applicant has not been able to ascertain the current holder of the debt. (Tr. 52) 
Applicant disputed his responsibility for the debt. (Tr. 52) Applicant promised to pay this 
debt if it resurfaces on his credit report, or he is able to locate the creditor holding the 
debt. (Tr. 53) 
 
Applicant borrowed about $10,000 from his 401(k) account to pay, resolve, or 
bring his debts to current status. (Tr. 29) He had taxes withheld from his 401(k) early 
withdrawal. (Tr. 58) The balance of his 401(k) account is down to $13,782. (Tr. 58) He 
used his federal income tax refund to pay the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.t. (Tr. 48)   
 
In sum, in the previous 12 months Applicant paid $11,795 to his SOR creditors. 
His credit reports show several non-SOR accounts were paid as agreed. His first 
mortgage was brought to current status, and a judgment was settled and paid. His 22 
medical SOR debts were merged into one debt; he paid $1,007 to his medical creditors; 
and his medical debts are in a current payment plan.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
 
5 
                                         
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SF 86, SOR response, and hearing record. 
Applicant’s SOR alleges 28 delinquent debts, including 22 medical debts, delinquent 
 
6 
                                         
 
first and second mortgages, a judgment, and a delinquent vehicle loan. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
                                            
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
                                         
 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply. Applicant’s financial problems resulted from 
Applicant’s minor stroke and his spouse’s unemployment and underemployment.    
 
In the previous 12 months, Applicant paid $11,795 to his SOR creditors. His 
credit reports show several non-SOR accounts were paid as agreed. His first mortgage 
was brought to current status, and a judgment was settled and paid. His 22 medical 
SOR debts were merged into one debt; he paid $1,007 to his medical creditors; and his 
medical debts are in a current payment plan. He is communicating with his creditors, 
and has assured he intends to pay his debts. I am confident that Applicant will 
conscientiously endeavor to resolve his remaining delinquent debts. 
 
Based on Applicant’s credible and sincere promise to timely pay his debts, future 
new delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” His payments of some of his debts 
showed good faith. He has sufficient income to keep his debts in current status and to 
continue making progress paying his remaining delinquent debts. His efforts are 
sufficient to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Even if Applicant 
provided insufficient information to mitigate security concerns under AG ¶ 20, he 
mitigated security concerns under the whole-person concept, infra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
8 
                                         
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed by the defense contractor for the previous 14 years. From 1992 to 1995, 
Applicant served in the Army; he left active duty as a private first class; and he received 
an honorable discharge. In 2002, he received a college certificate in information 
technology. There is no evidence of security violations, abuse of alcohol or drugs, or 
criminal activity.     
 
Applicant’s financial problems resulted from circumstances beyond his control 
including his minor stroke, his spouse’s unemployment, and her underemployment. In 
the previous 12 months, Applicant paid $11,795 to his SOR creditors. His credit reports 
show several non-SOR accounts were paid as agreed. His first mortgage was brought 
to current status, and a judgment was settled and paid. His 22 medical SOR debts were 
merged into one debt; he paid $1,007 to his medical creditors; and his medical debts 
are in a current payment plan.  
 
Applicant is communicating with his creditors, and has assured he intends to pay 
his debts. He understands that he needs to pay his debts, and the conduct required to 
retain his security clearance. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the 
whole-person analysis in financial cases stating:  
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment. Applicant needs to continue to pay his creditors, to establish a payment 
plan for his second mortgage, and to locate and set up a payment plan for his vehicle 
 
9 
                                         
 
loan. Applicant should continue his efforts to establish and maintain his financial 
responsibility.3  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.bb:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
3The Government has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s finances. 
The Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, 
investigation, and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from 
subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security 
significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security 
significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation of a promise made in a 
security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and may 
support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not have “authority to 
grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 
2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or 
probationary security clearance to allow [the applicant] the opportunity to have a security clearance while 
[the applicant] works on [his or] her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this decision to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
