1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-00650
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On August 8, 2015, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations)  and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September
2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 2, 2015.The case
was originally scheduled for January 29, 2016, but was postponed for good cause. A
notice of hearing was issued on February 10, 2016, rescheduling the hearing for March
3, 2016.  Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4  were admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-F, which were admitted
without objection. The transcript was received on March 10, 2016.  Based on a review
2
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under
Guideline F, with the exception of allegation 1.e. He provided explanations. Applicant
denied the falsification allegation under Guideline E. 
Applicant is 55 years old. He obtained his high school diploma in 1978. He
attended college and has ten years of certificate training. He is divorced. Applicant
completed a security clearance application in 2011 and has been employed as a
federal contractor for many years. (GX 1)  He is sponsored by a former employer, but is
now working as a salesman. (Tr. 24)  He has held a security clearance since 1987.
The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts, including  judgments, collection accounts
and medical accounts. (GX 2-4) The approximate total for the delinquent debts is
$32,000. Applicant cites his financial difficulties to a contentious divorce, cosigning
loans for his wife and brother, and lost work due to the federal sequestration as reasons
for his financial problems. (Tr. 7) He obtained a number of loans and tried to pay his
bills. When he was laid off in 2014, he could not pay the bills. He was laid off again in
May 2015 and had several conditions which resulted in medical bills. (Tr. 9) He is now
employed and intends to pay his debts. He acknowledged that his wife took out a loan
that he was not aware of until he saw the SOR. 
Applicant stated that he has been ill and homeless. He had nowhere to live after
he left his wife in 2012. When he was unemployed he would take temporary jobs so
that he could make some money. He called his creditors recently and is hoping to settle
some accounts. Applicant stated that he lost his documentation and receipts for bills
that he has paid. He could not afford to pay his storage bill and the company would not
release his personal files to him. (Tr. 18)
As to the debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant remembered that most were credit
cards, but he did not remember when they became delinquent.(Tr. 52) He believes that
the last payments that he made were in 2007. (Tr. 53) He does not have any plan in
place yet to start repaying the debts. He also noted that he did not have money to pay
these debts because the state was garnishing his pay for back taxes. As to the debt in
1.e, he believes he paid the debt, but the documentation is in storage. (Tr. 61) Applicant
claims that he paid the two parking tickets that are noted in allegations 1.l and 1.m, but
he does not have any documentation. (Tr. 67) The remainder of the bills on the SOR
have not been settled or resolved.
Applicant noted on his 2011 security clearance application that he was behind on
his mortgage due to cosigning loans with his wife and brother. He stated at the hearing
that the home went to foreclosure. However, as to his answer to Section 26 concerning
judgements and collection accounts, he answered “No”.  He was candid about his debts
and denied that he deliberately falsified his application. He stated in his answer that it
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
3
was an error. He put the government on notice about his financial difficulties. The
government did not challenge his reasoning at the hearing by asking any questions. I
find his explanations credible, and I do not find that he falsified his 2011 security
clearance application.
Applicant’s last full time position provided an annual salary of about $100,000.
He is now working on commission and does not earn more than $2,500 a month. Since
2013, he had to use savings and retirement money to pay bills. He states that he has
never been irresponsible. He pays $600 a month for his auto payment. (Tr. 80) He
continues to live in his car.
Applicant submitted medical bills at the hearing (AX C-F) to fully disclose his
financial situation. He has not been able to pay them in full. He fully intends to pay all
bills. (Tr. 77) He also submitted a statement that shows he has been paying some back
taxes. (AX A-B)
POLICIES
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”   The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The following condition is relevant here.
(A) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
5
In this case AG ¶ 16 (a) does not apply. Applicant answered his 2011 security
clearance application to the best of his ability. He denied the falsification and was not
questioned at the hearing about his reasoning. He listed information concerning a
mortgage issue and put the government on notice of financial problems. He was candid
at the hearing about his debts. Some of the accounts he did not know about at the time.
I do not find that he intentionally falsified her 2011 security clearance application.  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.”
Applicant admitted that he was indebted and had delinquencies after his divorce
and various periods of unemployment. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate
security concerns.  
Applicant’s financial delinquencies were exacerbated by unemployment in 2014
and 2015. His last full time position earning a steady income was in 2013. He took
temporary jobs. He became ill after his divorce and lives in his car. He tried to pay his
car payment so that he would have a place to live. He used savings and retirement
monies. His separation and divorce also led to indebtedness. However, he has not
provided any documentation to show what actions he has taken. He states that he has
paid some small debts, but did not produce any evidence. He intends to pay his bills,
but a promise to pay in the future is not sufficient for mitigation. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment) receives partial application.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
partially applies. Applicant’s divorce, medical condition, and loss of income were
beyond his control. He has worked hard but he has not produced documentation that
he is resolving his debts or has a plan in place. 
6
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has some application. Applicant as noted above
paid some small amounts and used his savings to make ends meet. He lives in his car.
However, he has not provided any documentation that he has resolved his debts or
even has the means to do so. There is no information that he has received any financial
counseling. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is
under control) does not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 55 years old. He has held a security clearance for many years. He has
worked as a contractor earning a good salary. He had a separation and divorce that
impacted his financial status. In addition, he had two separate periods of
unemployment. He had to take temporary low-paying jobs. He cosigned a loan with his
wife and brother and had the responsibility for them. He became ill and has had to live
in his car. There is nothing in the record concerning any criminal behavior. He has
worked hard for many years.  He has had unfortunate circumstances in his life. He
admits that he probably did not handle things the best way.
Despite the fact that he intends to pay all his debts, he has not provided any
evidence that he has paid any SOR debts or is in a position to pay them. I found him
candid and sincere in his testimony. However, given the fact that none of the debts in
the SOR have been resolved or in a repayment plan, I have doubts that there are clear
indications that his financial problems have been resolved. He has not mitigated the
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.
7
He has mitigated the personal conduct concern. I do not find that Applicant
intentionally falsified his security clearance application. Applicant omitted information
about his finances in his responses to Section 26. However, he detailed information
about his home mortgage issues. He stated that it was a mistake, and his mistake does
not reflect a wilful omission. 
Applicant has not provided sufficient information to establish mitigation under the
financial considerations guideline. He has mitigated the security concerns under the
personal conduct guideline.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                       AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-.nl: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
