 
  1
           
             
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-00746 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Meg Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant incurred debt when she was unemployed. She is resolving 
her delinquent debts through Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on September 14, 
2012. On August 1, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on September 16, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
 
  2
December 30, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on December 17, 2015. On 
March 15, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant 
that the hearing was scheduled for April 6, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
On Department Counsel’s motion and without objection, I amended SOR ¶ 1.h to 
correct a typographical error in the amount of the debt. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through G, which were admitted without objection. I kept the 
record open until April 20, 2016, to enable her to submit additional documentary 
evidence. She timely submitted AX H, which I have admitted without objection.  DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on April 14, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts totaling approximately $43,730. The 
delinquent debts primarily include a mortgage loan, student loans, and multiple medical 
bills. In her Answer, Applicant admitted six of the allegations, but qualified five of the 
admissions with the repayment status of each debt. She denied ten of the allegations, 
and qualified six of the denials with brief explanations. Her admissions in her Answer 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old information technology hardware specialist employed 
by a defense contractor since October 2012. She received an associate’s degree in 
2014. (Tr. 33.) She served honorably in the U.S. Army Reserves from January 1980 
until June 1986. (GX 1.) She divorced in 1986 and 2001. She is a single parent who has 
two sons who reside with her, one of whom is a minor. (GX 1.) Applicant is solely 
responsible for her minor child’s health insurance coverage. (AX E.)  
 
Applicant’s ex-husband required to make monthly child-support payments. 
However, he has been sporadic in his child-support payments. (Tr. 31-32.) He is 
currently approximately $41,900 in arrears. (AX E.) Over the years, the unpredictability 
of these payments has contributed to Applicant’s financial difficulties. (Tr. 31.) 
 
Applicant was unemployed from April 2011 until approximately October 2012, 
and fell behind on her financial obligations. (Tr. 29.) In an effort to maintain paying her 
bills, she exhausted her 401(k). (Tr. 55.) When she finally found employment, her salary 
was approximately $20,000 less annually than she had previously earned. (Tr. 30.) She 
resumed making contributions to her 401(k) in early 2016. (Tr. 55.) 
 Following the receipt of the SOR, Applicant realized she needed help in resolving 
her delinquent debts. (Tr. 30.) She completed the required credit counseling, then filed 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in November 2015. (AX D; GX 5.) Her 60-month 
payment plan was accepted by the court, and she has made four payments of $420. 
(AX C; Tr. 50.) Applicant testified that all of her delinquent debts, including her student 
loans, are included in the Chapter 13 plan. (Tr. 36; Tr. 41.) She is current on her 
mortgage payments, and the past-due balance, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, is included in the 
Chapter 13 plan. (Tr. 38.)  
 
 
  3
Applicant testified that the outstanding medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.h, 
1.i, and 1.n-p, were incurred for medical services for her children. (Tr. 49.) The most 
recent of these debts is from 2011. (GX 4.) These debts total $1,317 and are included in 
the plan. (Tr. 49.) 
She admits owing $467 to a clothing store (SOR ¶ 1.g), which became 
delinquent in 2014.  She was making payments on that account, but it is now included in 
the plan. She has not incurred any other delinquent debt since 2011. (GX 5.) She is 
current on her taxes and all her ongoing financial obligations. She lives within her 
means. (Tr. 54-55.) She is considered to be a hardworking, dependable, and 
trustworthy employee by her supervisor and coworkers. (AX H.) 
Applicant also experienced a period of financial strain in approximately 2008, in 
part because several of her student loans came due. (GX 4; Tr. 54.) Applicant testified 
that she was subject to a garnishment of $65 biweekly on a judgment for a delinquent 
student loan. The garnishment began in approximately 2009. She notified the creditor 
when she was laid off in 2011. The garnishment resumed with her current employer, 
and continued until December 2015, when it was terminated due to her bankruptcy 
filing. It is the only debt not included in the Chapter13 plan. The balance due is 
approximately $300, and she intends to pay this debt off. (Tr. 47-48.) 
 
The delinquent debts are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) 
dated January 2015 and October 2012. (GX 3; GX 4.) She discussed the bankruptcy 
during her testimony.   
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
 
  4
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
  5
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the record evidence establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The 
following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is established. Applicant has not incurred any significant 
delinquencies since approximately 2011.  Her financial difficulties were not the result of 
irresponsible behavior and her conduct “does not cast doubt on [her] current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  
  
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant experienced circumstances largely beyond 
her control when she was unemployed from April 2011 until October 2012. She also 
suffered a significant decrease in income beginning in 2012. Additionally, her ex-
husband’s failure to comply with the court-ordered child support payments, as 
evidenced by his substantial arrearage, was beyond her control. Her outstanding 
medical debts for her sons’ medical care also arose from circumstances beyond her 
control. She has acted responsibly by resuming her monthly mortgage payments, not 
incurring recent delinquent debt, and filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy to manage her debt.    
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is established. She has resolved or is resolving her delinquent debts 
and has not incurred any additional delinquencies since about 2011.  Her Chapter 13 
 
  6
repayment plan has been approved and she is making monthly payments. Thus, there 
are “clear indications” that her financial problems are under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant’s bankruptcy includes all but $300 of her 
delinquent debt. She is adhering to her repayment plan and her conduct constitutes a 
good-faith effort to resolve her debts. “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
 
 Applicant previously repaid the majority of the balance of one of her student 
loans through a garnishment. The fact that Applicant was paying this debt through 
garnishment rather than a voluntary effort diminishes its mitigating force. ISCR Case 
No. 08-06058 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug.26, 2010). However, payment by garnishment does 
not bar mitigation of financial concerns. ISCR Case No. 04-07360 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep 
26, 2006).    
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish resolution of every 
debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to resolve financial 
problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The adjudicative guidelines 
do not require that an individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, 
nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 
07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has addressed and is repaying her 
debts in a responsible manner. Although her financial record is not perfect, she has 
implemented a reasonable plan to resolve her financial issues within her means. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
  7
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 Applicant clearly recognized the importance of resolving her financial issues by 
proactively entering into a Chapter 13 plan. She has been living within her means for 
several years, despite her reduced income and unreliable child support. She served 
honorably in the military and is a hardworking and dependable employee. Such actions 
are indicative of an individual who is reliable and trustworthy and who exercises good 
judgment.  I am confident that Applicant will continue her good-faith effort to resolve her 
remaining delinquent debt. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.p:    For Applicant. 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
