 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01217 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 8, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on  
December 4, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on December 15, 2015.  Applicant 
had 30 days to submit a response to the FORM. He did not submit a response to the 
FORM. On February 1, 2015, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and 
assigned to me on March 1, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits the SOR allegations. (Item 1)    
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain his security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since May 2014. He is married and 
has four children. (Item 2)   
 
On June 27, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts, Applicant listed several delinquent accounts, including a past-due 
automobile loan, and a past-due mortgage. He mentioned that he has a payment 
arrangement on the automobile loan and that he was in the process of applying for a 
loan modification on his mortgage. From 2013 to 2014, Applicant endured two periods 
of unemployment, which caused these accounts to become delinquent. (Item 3, section 
26)  
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed the following delinquent 
accounts which are alleged in the SOR: a mortgage account past due in the amount of 
$53,298, with an account balance of $350,077 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 4 at 1; Item 5 at 4); and 
a $55 cable television account placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 4 at 2; Item 5 at 
5). 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant states that the sequestration imposed by 
Congress adversely affected a lot of contractors. In 2012, his salary was initially 
reduced. A few months later, his position was cut because of the lack of funds. He was 
unemployed from July 2013 to November 2013, and April 2014 to June 2014.  His 
periods of unemployment adversely affected his ability to pay his mortgage. Applicant 
was the sole breadwinner. When Applicant found a job, his salary decreased by 
$100,000. (Item 1) 
 
Applicant is being considered for a position that will increase his income. His 
wife, a psychologist, is also actively seeking employment in order to help out with 
expenses. Applicant and his wife have been working with the bank when the first 
delinquency occurred on their mortgage. They did not purchase a home that they could 
not afford. They submitted a request for a loan modification in July 2014. It is under 
consideration. The $55 cable television debt was just overlooked.  Applicant provided 
proof that he paid this debt.  (Item 1) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
4 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial problems since 2012.  He had difficulty meeting his mortgage 
payments, resulting in a past-due balance of $53,298. I consider the $55 cable bill to be 
insignificant and do not give it much weight when assessing Applicant’s financial 
responsibility.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
5 
 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control);  
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue). 
 
AG & 20(a) and AG & 20(b) apply because circumstances beyond Applicant’s 
control adversely affected Applicant’s ability to pay his mortgage payments. The 
sequestration initiated by Congress resulted in Applicant’s pay being reduced in 2012 
and the loss of his job in 2013. He endured two periods of unemployment, four months 
in 2013 and two months in 2014. It should be noted that aside from the delinquent 
mortgage account, Applicant appears to be current on all of his other debts. He paid the 
cable television debt alleged in SOR & 2(b). He is in the process of having his mortgage 
loan modified. This process can take years. Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control 
adversely affected his financial situation. He has taken reasonable steps to resolve the 
problem. Applicant’s situation does not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
  
AG & 20(c) applies because Applicant’s financial situation will be resolved once 
the mortgage loan modification is approved. AG & 20(d) applies because Applicant 
demonstrated that he made a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts. He 
paid off the cable television account and is working with the bank to obtain a mortgage 
loan modification.  He has several student loans that are in deferment. He has no 
additional delinquent accounts. AG & 20(e) does not apply to the facts of this case. 
 
Sequestration, a reduction in income, and several periods of unemployment 
adversely affected Applicant’s financial situation. As a result, his mortgage payments 
became delinquent. Applicant is attempting to obtain a loan modification. The other 
delinquent account alleged in the SOR was not paid because of oversight as opposed 
to an inability to pay. It is paid in full.  Applicant is taking sufficient measures to rectify 
the delinquent mortgage situation.  He has no other delinquent accounts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered that Applicant is a married father of four. I considered his history of 
working for Department of Defense contractors. I considered the adverse impact 
sequestration had on Applicant as well as his two periods of unemployment and his 
reduction in pay. Considering the hardships Applicant has endured over the past few 
years, it is a testament to Applicant that he maintained payments towards his other 
debts. The key issue in this case is the delinquent mortgage.  Applicant requested a 
loan modification which is currently pending. He and his wife are looking for better 
employment opportunities.  Should the loan modification not be approved, it is likely 
Applicant will take steps to resolve his mortgage. He has mitigated the security 
concerns raised under financial considerations.  
         
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    For Applicant 
  
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
