 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03300 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 30, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 5, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 9, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 3, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. In addition, the Government submitted a copy of the discovery letter 
sent to Applicant. It was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and 
offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record was held open until March 10, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit 
additional documents. She submitted documents that were marked AE C and D and 
they were admitted into evidence without objection. The record then closed.1 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 11, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.i and 1.l. She 
disputed or denied the remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She earned her bachelor’s degree in 2006 and a 
master’s degree in 2015. She intends to pursue a doctorate degree. She is “trying to 
raise $2,500 to begin the program” and intends on funding it with a loan and a work 
study program.2 She has been married since 1989 and has two children, a son age 21 
and a daughter age 18. Her son lives at home and attends college. She pays his tuition 
of $1,700 twice a year. Her daughter is in high school and intends on going to college. 
Applicant has worked for her current employer, a federal contractor, since 2006. Before 
then she worked for a subcontractor from 2004 to 2006. She worked from 1997 to 2002 
and was unemployed from 2002 to 2004. Her husband receives 30% disability pay from 
the Department of Veteran’s Affairs. He has worked sporadically since 2003, but is not 
currently employed. He does not contribute financially to the family. Applicant testified 
that her husband is a “bit of a gambler” and he asks her for money.3 She will give him 
money but knows he uses it to gamble. She stated she does not know how to handle 
the situation.4  
 
 Applicant testified that she had a Federal tax lien from 2002 that she owed about 
$14,000. This was due to her not having sufficient funds withheld from her income. She 
testified that the tax problem occurred in 2001 when she permitted her mother to claim 
Applicant’s children on her taxes because the children were living with their 
grandmother for one year. Consequently, Applicant’s tax burden increased. Later, 
Applicant claimed the children for exemptions and her husband also claimed the 
children. Applicant did not have sufficient money withheld from her income to cover her 
tax liability. This began in about 2001 and the amount of tax owed kept increasing. Her 
tax liability also increased because she was receiving pay raises. She explained she 
                                                          
1 HE II is Department Counsel’s email memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 21. 
 
3 Tr. 29. 
 
4 Tr. 19-30. 
 
3 
 
 
had a payment plan with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) so the payment for the lien 
was automatically withdrawn from her paycheck. The 2002 tax lien was released in 
2010.5  
 
The SOR alleges Applicant has two delinquent Federal tax liens (¶¶ 1.b - $5,275 
and 1.c - $7,882) that were filed in 2008 and 2012. Applicant explained that she 
received a letter from the IRS regarding owing taxes. Applicant testified that she was 
required in 2010 to make a new payment plan with the IRS for other taxes owed. She 
stated that the IRS was involuntarily withholding her refunds and applying them to her 
tax liens. She did not set up a new payment plan with the IRS as directed. The only 
money she paid to the IRS for her Federal tax liens was any annual tax refunds she was 
entitled that were applied to the debt. She did not make any independent payments. 
She believed she now owes about $8,000 to the IRS. She did not provide any 
supporting evidence that either tax lien is satisfied or that she has a payment plan.6  
 
 Regarding the state lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($606) filed in 2006, Applicant 
indicated it was satisfied through a tax refund that she was due and applied to the lien. 
She did not make an independent payment. She stated that through the years she has 
owed other amounts of state income taxes, but she waits until she is owed a refund and 
then has it applied to outstanding taxes. She provided a document that shows she has a 
zero balance owed to the state.7 
 
 Applicant was asked what she does if she owes taxes after she completes her 
state and federal income tax returns. She stated: “Most of the time I won’t have any 
money to pay the entire amount.”8 Instead she relies on future refunds to be applied to 
past due taxes. She was further asked if she waits to see what she notices she receives 
from the state or federal government regarding her taxes. She stated: “[w]ell basically, 
yes. That’s what’s happening although in my mind and in my heart I have intentions of 
paying it when I’m caught up. However, I never seem to get caught up. So, them taking 
the refund seems to be my best [way] out of them helping—me helping myself. So—I 
realize that’s [] not perfect and it’s not the way it should be done, but, that just the way.”9 
 
 During a September 2011 interview with a government investigator as part of her 
background check, Applicant disclosed that she lived in one state and worked in a 
different state. She did not file state income taxes for the state where she worked, but 
did for the state where she lived. This occurred over a three year period from 1999 to 
2002. She believed she owes approximately $10,000 for taxes to the state where she 
worked. She indicated during the interview that she intended to contact the state and 
                                                          
5 Tr. 52-63. It appears Applicant and her husband filed their tax returns separately. 
 
6 Tr. 59-65; GE 9. It is unknown what tax years the liens were for. 
 
7 Tr. 65-66; GE 9; Attachment to Answer to SOR; AE B. 
 
8 Tr. 66. 
 
9 Tr.67. 
 
4 
 
 
make payment arrangements. At her hearing, she testified she believed she still owes 
the state. She did not provide further evidence as to any actions she may have taken to 
contact the state or resolve the matter.10 
 
 The judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d ($1,380) was for medical accounts 
delinquent since 2013. Applicant explained she did not have the funds to pay the 
account at the time. She testified that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($340), 1.j ($338) and 1.k 
($313) are included in this judgment. The judgment was paid in May 2015.11 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e is for a past-due mortgage payment of $1,708. Applicant 
purchased the house in 2013. Her mother gave her $5,000 for the down payment. Her 
husband had a job in 2013. He also purchased a truck in 2013. When asked why she 
purchased a house when she had medical bills, she stated she wanted to get out of her 
mother-in-law’s house where she was living. She did not think at the time her medical 
debts were reflected in her credit report. She explained that she got behind on her 
mortgage payment in March 2015 because her son lost his college tuition funding when 
he fell below the academic requirements, and she paid his tuition. Around the same 
time, she had the judgment entered against her that she had to pay. She did not have 
enough money to pay all of her bills. She testified that she entered a home saver 
program. She explained the program will pay her mortgage for up to two years. The 
length of the program depends on if Applicant’s husband gets a job or her finances 
become stable. Applicant testified she is currently not making her mortgage payments 
($1,364), and at the end of the program the company will extend her loan. She also 
testified that she really did not understand how the program worked. She provided 
“Substitute Form 1098 annual statement for mortgage account for 2015” dated October 
2015.12 It appears Applicant’s mortgage payments are current as of the date of the 
document.  
 
Applicant fell behind three months in paying her car note and the vehicle was 
repossessed. (SOR ¶ 1.f - $385) Because she was traveling with her company, she 
received additional money and used that money to catch up on her payments. She was 
able to bring the car note current and have the car returned.13 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($176) was for a title loan. She provided a document 
showing she made the payment. She still has a balance on the debt, but it is not 
delinquent.14.  
                                                          
10 Tr. 67-71; GE 3. Potential delinquent taxes to the state where Applicant lived were not alleged and will 
not be considered for disqualifying purposes, but will be considered when analyzing credibility, mitigation, 
and the “whole person.”  
 
11 Tr. 33-40; Answer to SOR. 
 
12 Tr. 40-52; AE A. 
 
13 Tr. 41, 78-79; AE D. 
 
14 Tr. 72-74 80; Attachment to Answer to SOR. 
 
5 
 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($339) is a collection account for a delinquent cable bill 
from July 2015. Applicant paid the amount in December 2015.15 Applicant is unsure 
what the debt is for in SOR ¶ 1.l ($1,747). She stated she tried to call the creditor. No 
other action was taken. It appears this may be a debt from a loan Applicant received 
from a tax preparer based on a refund she anticipated. Because the refund was 
involuntarily applied to her tax liens, she did not receive the refund. She had already 
spent the loan money and could not afford to repay it.16 Regarding the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.m ($103), Applicant indicated she contacted the creditor and was told the debt is paid. 
No documentary evidence was provided.17  
 
The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit reports from August 2011, 
November 2012, and March 2015.18  
 
Applicant testified that “I always had a problem with choosing what I need to pay 
and what [was] most important. And sometimes some things got left behind when other 
things popped up that was –you know, like choosing between a light bill and a medical 
bill, my light bill would win.”19 Applicant testified that she has a budget, but it is not 
written. She stated that at the end of the month she has between $50 and $200 
remaining after paying her bills. She has not received financial counseling. She has 
some money in her retirement account, but has taken two loans from it, and has about 
$2,000 to pay back. She also has a debt to a furniture company with a balance of about 
$1,900. She last made a payment in July 2015. She opened the account in December 
2014. She makes minimum payments on two credit cards with balances of $500 and 
$800. She purchased a new wedding ring set and watch ($300) in around 2013 or 2014. 
She owes the jeweler $1,300. She thought she could afford it at the time and 
“squeezed” out payments as long as they were small. She explained; “I just wanted a 
ring and I guess I just didn’t think about the consequences as time went on.”20 She 
made $60 payments until July 2015. She owns a 2007 Toyota (paid), a 2009 Mercedes 
Benz (owes $13,000), and a 2013 Silverado that Applicant co-signed for her husband to 
purchase new for $23,000 (monthly payment $563).21 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
15 Tr. 80-82; AE C. 
 
16 Tr. 77-78; GE 4. 
 
17 Tr. 77-78. 
 
18 GE 5, 6, and 7.  
 
19 Tr. 39. 
 
20 Tr. 94-95. 
 
21 Tr. 74-77, 83-95. Delinquent debts not alleged in the SOR will not be considered for disqualifying 
purposes, but will be considered when analyzing Applicant’s credibility, in mitigation and the whole-
person. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Three character witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf. She was described as 
a good and honest person, who has had trouble with her finances and is working hard 
to make a living. They said that Applicant has worked hard to achieve her goals and has 
learned her lessons. She is reliable, dependable and responsible.22  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
22 Tr. 100-109. 
 
7 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.23 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant had numerous delinquent debts and tax liens dating from at least 2008 
that were not paid or resolved. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
                                                          
23 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
8 
 
 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts and tax liens that remain unresolved. She 
repeatedly has failed to address her income tax responsibilities, despite being made 
aware of them for many years. Applicant’s conduct is recent and ongoing. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that it is unlikely to recur. Her failure to voluntarily 
address some of her delinquent debts casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s husband is unemployed and she paid her son’s tuition when he no 
longer was eligible for assistance. These circumstances may be conditions that were 
beyond her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. It does not appear Applicant has a solid 
understanding of her financial situation. She testified that her tax liens are being paid 
through the IRS’s involuntary withholding tax refunds. She failed to set up a new 
payment plan with the IRS to resolve the liens, as directed. She failed to pay medical 
bills, which resulted in a judgment. When she was required to pay the judgment it 
affected her ability to pay other bills. She gives her husband money that she knows he 
uses to gamble. She has paid some past-due bills, but there is insufficient evidence to 
conclude Applicant acted responsibly in resolving her financial problems under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
 Applicant resolved the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i 
1.j and 1.k. She has not provided evidence to demonstrate that she has responsibly 
attempted to address her tax liens (SOR ¶¶1.b and 1.c). She did not provide sufficient 
evidence to resolve the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.l or 1.m. Applicant’s delinquent medical 
debts were resolved through a judgment. I have considered that the judgment is now 
paid, but this does not constitute a good-faith effort to pay the creditor. Applicant did not 
 
9 
 
 
provide a reasonable plan for resolving her remaining delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) 
partially applies.  
 
 Applicant has not participated in financial or credit counseling. She is not paying 
her mortgage because she is in a program where the payment is being made for her. 
She testified she does not know how the program works. It is unclear how she will pay 
all of her bills when she becomes responsible for paying her mortgage. She has not 
addressed her tax liens. She does not have a plan or budget showing how she is going 
to pay all of her expenses and delinquent debts. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude her financial problems are under control or are being resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. Applicant did not provide evidence to dispute any of her delinquent 
debts. AG ¶ 20(e) has not been raised.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 47 years old. She is highly educated and has been employed 
steadily since 2004. She has a long history of irresponsible conduct and attitude toward 
her obligation to pay her taxes when due and her tax liens. She managed to address 
some debts that were past-due, but this was done while she has not been responsible 
for her mortgage payment. She has other debts for jewelry and furniture that are 
delinquent. The evidence clearly demonstrates that Applicant is living beyond her 
means. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to show she has an established 
and reliable track record of being fiscally responsible. Overall, the record evidence 
 
10 
 
 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the financial considerations.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.k:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.m:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
