 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )       ISCR Case: 15-01175   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 19, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on five debts in the total amount of 
$58,731. He has resolved four debts and is making payments on the remaining account. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 18, 2015, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 13, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned me on January 7, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
January 20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 10, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) 
A through G, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 19, 2016. The record was left open for 
Applicant to submit additional exhibits. Applicant presented additional exhibits marked 
AE H through AE N. Department Counsel had no objections to AE H through AE N and 
they were admitted. The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He has been employed with a Government contractor 
since 2014. He was unemployed from September 2013 through May 2014. He was on 
active duty with the Air Force from August 2005 through September 2013. He married in 
2005, separated in 2011, and divorced in 2013. (GE 1; Tr. 29-30.) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant owes approximately $58,731 on five delinquent 
financial obligations. In his Answer, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, with 
clarifications. His debts are documented in the record credit reports dated April 12, 
2014; August 19, 2015; and December 8, 2015. (GE 2; GE 3; GE 4.) After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a to be indebted to a cable company in the 
amount of $192. Applicant paid this debt in October 27, 2015. This debt is resolved. (AE 
D; AE I; Tr. 21-22.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b to be indebted to a credit union for a 
charged-off debt totaling $6,969. Applicant established a payment agreement with this 
creditor to resolve this debt through monthly payments of $200, beginning in June 2013. 
He successfully made all required payments and as of February 2015, the balance of 
the debt had been reduced to $3,100.96. (AE B; Tr. 23,35-38.) On February 29, 2016, 
Applicant paid the remaining $3,100.96. (AE J.) This debt is fully resolved. 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c to be indebted on foreclosed home mortgage 
in the amount of $41,964. Applicant testified that when he and his ex-wife separated in 
2011, she remained living in this house. She promised to make the mortgage payments. 
He was not aware that she had defaulted on the mortgage until it was in foreclosure 
proceedings. He did not have the money to resolve the deficiency and the home was 
foreclosed upon. He produced a letter from this creditor indicating that there are no 
outstanding interests that were excluded from the foreclosure. This debt is resolved. 
(AE F; AE H; AE K; Tr. 23-26, 38-40.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d to be indebted on a delinquent vehicle loan 
in the amount $9,540. This debt was for a repossessed vehicle. Applicant documented 
 
 
3 
 
 
that he has a payment agreement with this creditor to make monthly payments of 
$469.76. He has successfully made three consecutive payments under this agreement 
and intends to continue making monthly payments under this agreement until this debt 
is resolved. (AE C; AE L; Tr. 26-28, 41.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e to be indebted to an insurance company in 
the amount of $66. Applicant presented documentation that shows he resolved this debt 
in full on October 26, 2015. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquencies to his unemployment and divorce, outlined 
above. He testified that he has enough money left over at the end of the month to make 
payments on his remaining debt until it is fully resolved, without getting further into debt. 
He is committed to resolving his financial obligations. He has matured and now places 
great importance on financial solvency. He has custody of his 12-year old child and 
wants to be a good role model. (Tr. 45-48.) 
 
 Applicant’s two supervisors, who wrote letters on Applicant’s behalf, characterize 
him as a very hardworking, reliable, trustworthy individual, who is focused on his duties. 
Applicant is considered to be a tremendous asset to those that work with him. (AE N.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accumulated five debts in the total amount of $58,731. These debts 
establish both a history of delinquencies and an inability or unwillingness to satisfy his 
obligations. The evidence raises security concerns under the above conditions, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. I find the following two provide 
mitigation: 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has addressed all of his five delinquent debts. Four are fully resolved 
and he is making payments on the fifth debt. He has shown a recent track record of 
making consistent payments. He can be trusted to continue to make his monthly 
payments on his remaining delinquency. His finances are under control and he has 
made a good-faith effort to repay his creditors. Applicant’s indebtedness does not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The security concerns 
with respect to his financial delinquencies are mitigated. The above conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant left the Air Force in 
2013. He was unemployed for approximately nine months after his separation. At that 
same time, he and his wife divorced. He is now responsible for his young son and has 
matured. He has worked hard to resolve his financial delinquencies. He acted 
responsibly by paying three delinquent debts and making payments on one other. He 
 
 
6 
 
 
was willing to resolve any delinquency resulting from the foreclosure, but the creditor 
indicated that the debt was fully resolved. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
