1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-00156
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Adrienne M. Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Patrick K. Korody, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for the 2011, 2012,
and 2013 tax years. Applicant always timely filed his tax returns before 2011; he filed
his past-due returns five months before the Statement of Reasons (SOR) was issued;
he has timely filed his returns since 2013. It is unlikely that he will again fail to meet his
income tax obligations. When assessed in the context of his entire personal and
professional background, his conduct in this regard is not indicative of his overall
judgment, reliability or trustworthiness. His request for a security clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On August 7, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to renew eligibility for a security clearance required for
his employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 A copy of the October 26, 2015, letter by which Department Counsel forwarded to Applicant advance copies3
of Gx. 1 and 2 is included for administrative purposes only as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. (Tr. 11)
2
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to continue
to hold a security clearance.  1
On August 28, 2015, DOD issued an SOR alleging facts which raise security
concerns addressed under the adjudicative guidelines  for financial considerations2
(Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). Applicant timely responded to the
SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on January 8,
2016, and I convened a hearing on February 10, 2016. The parties appeared as
scheduled. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 and 2.3
Applicant testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - D. All exhibits were
admitted without objection. One witness also testified for Applicant. A transcript of the
hearing (Tr.) was received on February 19, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant did not timely file his
federal income tax returns for the 2011 - 2013 tax years (SOR 1.a - 1.c). Under
Guideline E, the Government cross-alleged the Guideline F information as adverse
personal conduct (SOR 2.a). In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted these
allegations, and provided a statement explaining his conduct. He also provided
documents showing he had filed his past-due returns and paid the taxes owed for each
tax year at issue. (Answer; Tr. 6 - 7) In addition to the facts established by these
exhibits and by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 49 years old. He and his wife have been married since June 1988,
and they have three children between the ages of 25 and 16. He and his family have
lived in the same house on the east coast of the United States since February 1992.
Applicant served in the United States Navy from December 1984 until June 2006, when
he retired as a chief petty officer in the Naval aviation community. In 2006, he went to
work as a commercial truck driver, but quickly decided the work did not suit him and that
he missed being around the military community. He was hired in March 2007 by a
defense contractor for work as a technician and site manager. He has continued in this
line of work ever since, and he was hired by his current employer in August 2014. (Gx.
1; Tr. 27 - 28)
The company that employed Applicant from June 2012 until August 2014
assigned him to projects that required him to be away from home for long periods of
time. From 2009 until early 2011, Applicant was in charge of a project that required him
3
to be away from home most of the time while working 12-hour days seven days a week.
When he returned, his employer asked him to take over another project away from
home that would be almost as demanding even though it was not as far away. That
project was intended to take no more than 60 to 90 days. It lasted a year.  Basically,
Applicant worked away from home about 90 percent of the time between 2009 and
2012. (Gx. 1 and 2; Tr. 29 - 34)
Applicant has had back problems since the late 1980s. While he was working on
the first project away from home between 2009 and 2011, his back problems worsened.
By the time he finished his second project away from home in 2012, he was nearly
disabled. The everyday impact on both Applicant and his family as care givers was
significant. A diagnosis in August 2012 showed he had herniated discs and
degenerative joint disease in his lower back. Applicant was told he would not be able to
work anymore and was advised to apply for disability benefits. Aside from receiving pain
medications, Applicant was not provided any other course of treatment. Applicant then
received a second opinion, which provided a less drastic (but still significant) diagnosis.
In September 2012, Applicant began a course of pain management and rehabilitative
treatment that has shown positive results and has allowed him to continue working,
albeit, not as rigorously as before. (Answer; Ax. C; Tr. 35 - 38)
When Applicant submitted his EQIP, he disclosed he had not filed his tax returns
as alleged in the SOR. He also stated that he was in the process of filing those returns
and establishing repayment arrangements of taxes, penalties, and interest owed for
those tax years. In October 2014, he discussed this matter with a Government
investigator as part of his background investigation and reiterated his intent to resolve
his past-due returns. Applicant completed that process in March 2015, when his past-
due returns were filed. He also established that he has finished repaying all of his tax
and penalty obligations for those years. (Answer; Gx. 1 and 2; Ax. B) 
Applicant accepts full responsibility and offers no excuses for his failure to timely
file his income tax returns. By way of explanation, he cited his work situation between
2009 and 2011, and his subsequent back problems as factors that disrupted his
otherwise normal circumstances. He testified that he was distracted from normal
obligations, including, but not limited to, his annual tax filings. Nonetheless, Applicant
readily acknowledged that his failure to comply with his income tax obligations simply
was due to his own procrastination. (Answer; Tr. 39 - 40, 51 - 52)
Applicant’s witness and the other whole-person information he submitted show
that he has a reputation for hard work and professionalism. Applicant is characterized
as reliable and trustworthy. His witness and other references who know that he failed to
file his taxes described Applicant as remorseful and embarrassed by his own conduct.
They also are confident that he has done everything he can to file his past-due returns
and avoid similar lapses in the future. Applicant’s Navy service was characterized by
numerous personal awards, decorations, and professional qualifications over the course
of his career. (Ax. A; Ax. D; Tr. 14 - 20)
 See Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
4
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.7
5
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support the SOR allegations under this
guideline. The facts established reasonably raise a security concern about Applicant’s
finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, this record requires application of the disqualifying condition at
AG ¶ 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required
or the fraudulent filing of the same). The record also requires application of the
mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control). Applicant disclosed his failure to file in his EQIP. He discussed this issue
with a Government investigator a month later and stated his intent to file his past-due
returns as soon as possible. Within five months, all of his returns were filed and any
taxes he owed were paid or were being paid through a repayment plan. Applicant’s
past-due tax returns were resolved before the SOR was issued, and he has shown that,
aside from the three years at issue here, he has always met his tax-filing obligations. On
balance, available information is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by
the Government’s information about Applicant’s finances.
Personal Conduct
Available information also reasonably raised a security concern abut Applicabt’s
judgment and reliability. That concern is expressed at AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, the following AG ¶ 16 disqualifying condition applies: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a
6
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information.
Applicant’s failure to file his tax returns is mitigated under the guideline for
financial considerations. Nonetheless, the Government must be satisfied more generally
that the poor judgment underlying his conduct no longer presents a security concern. In
this case, the following AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions apply:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.
Applicant’s failure to file was not indicative of his overall good judgment,
trustworthiness, and reliability. His personal and professional circumstances have
changed for the better, in that, his medical issues are largely resolved, and his current
employment is not as disruptive to his personal life. He has taken full responsibility for
his actions, and there is little likelihood of recurrence. Available information supports a
conclusion that the security concern about Applicant’s personal conduct has been
mitigated.
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is an honorably-discharged veteran and has been gainfully
employed in the defense industry since 2006. He is a responsible husband and father,
and he has a solid reputation in the workplace for reliability and trustworthiness. The
adverse information at issue here was, within the context of his entire background,
isolated and unlikely to recur. A fair and commonsense assessment of the record
evidence as a whole shows Applicant’s misconduct was an atypical lapse in judgment
and no longer raises a security concern. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: For Applicant
7
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                                       
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
