 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01793 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
July 28, 2014.  On October 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations.1  The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
                                                     
1 Item 1. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 5, 2015,2 and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on October 10, 2015.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns.  Applicant received the FORM on December 17, 2015.  He did not 
submit a response to the FORM, nor did he assert any objections to the Government’s 
evidence. 
 
The case was assigned to me on March 17, 2016.  The Government’s exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 1 to 6) are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling approximately $10,035, and a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, filed in August 2011, and discharged in November 2011.  
Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR,3 and provided an explanation for each 
allegation.  The evidence submitted with the FORM substantiates the SOR allegations.4 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor as a 
pipe fitter since July, 2014.  He was terminated for cause from his previous position, 
held from 2006 to April 2014.  He has never held a security clearance.  He received his 
GED in 2003.  He was married in 2013, but separated in June 2014, with the intent to 
file for divorce.5 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, however asserted that the debts listed in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.f are either paid or the accounts are current.  He asserted that SOR ¶ 1.g, 
a charged-off account with a bank for $7,018, is current and the subject of ongoing 
settlement negotiations.6  Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy was discharged in 
November 2011, with approximately $26,000 in liabilities.7  He claimed that his 
bankruptcy resulted from being financially overextended on credit card and auto loan 
debts without sufficient income to maintain required payments.8 
                                                     
2 Item 1. 
 
3 Item 1. 
 
4 Items 2–6. 
 
5 Item 2. 
 
6 Item 1. 
 
7 Item 6. 
 
8 Item 3. 
 
 
3 
 
Additionally, he stated that some SOR debts resulted from his job termination in 
April 2014, although he was re-employed in July 2014.9  Applicant attributed the bank 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, to medical care costs for his spouse, and claimed that he is 
using a debt consolidation company to make monthly payments toward this debt, but 
did not provide evidence of this arrangement.10 
 
Overall, no documentary evidence was submitted with Applicant’s Answer or in 
response to this FORM to support his assertions regarding resolution of the SOR debts, 
or the status of consolidation or settlement negotiations.  Additionally, although he 
reported using a credit consolidation company, he did not submit documentary evidence 
of such efforts, or of credit counseling or budget education.  I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility and demeanor, or to discuss the status of the SOR debts since he elected to 
have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.”  The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.11  In Department of Navy v. Egan12, the Supreme Court stated that the burden 
of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.13 
                                                     
9 Items 2-3. 
 
10 Item 3. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan.27, 1995). 
 
12 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to 
a security clearance). 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”   It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.14 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to sensitive and classified information.  Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive or classified information.  Such decisions entail 
a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of sensitive or classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and, 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
                                                                                                                                                                           
 
13 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
14 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant has unsettled delinquent debts, following a Chapter 7 discharge, 
which he is unable or unwilling to resolve.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:15  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has been working full time with his current employer since July 2014, 
however, he has not provided documentary evidence of resolution of any of the SOR 
debts.  He has not shown evidence of the use of a debt consolidation payment plan and 
regular payments in accordance with such a plan.  Finally, there is no evidence that 
Applicant has sought credit counseling or budget education since his 2011 bankruptcy.   
 
  There is insufficient evidence to determine that Applicant’s financial obligations 
have been or will be resolved within a reasonable period.  His financial issues are 
recent and ongoing.  I am unable to find that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. 
 
  Based on the evidence contained in the record, I find that the SOR debts have 
not been sufficiently addressed to warrant application of any of the mitigating conditions.  
The totality of the unresolved delinquent debts incurred after receiving a bankruptcy 
discharge, leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s overall financial condition and ability 
or willingness to face his financial responsibilities.  They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 
 
                                                     
15 AG ¶¶ 20e and 20.f are inapplicable. 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  I have incorporated my findings of fact and 
comments under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
