 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 15-00606 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 9, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On June 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated May 9, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF 
was unable to make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 30, 2015. On August 5, 2015, Applicant 
responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on 
October 7, 2915. The case was assigned to me on October 15, 2015. A Notice of 
Hearing was issued on October 28, 2015, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
November 17, 2015. 
 
 During the hearing, five Government Exhibits (GE 1 through GE 5) were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
November 25, 2015. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it.2 She 
failed to timely submit any documents. The record closed on December 8, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.o.). She commented regarding 
the personal conduct allegations, but failed to specifically use the terms “admit” or 
“deny.” Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been a 
custodial janitor with her current employer since March 2014. She previously held 
similar positions, as well as that of housekeeper, with other employers.3 She dropped 
out of high school after completing the 11th grade, coinciding with the birth of her first 
child.4 She has never served with the U.S. military.5 Applicant does not currently hold a 
security clearance.6 She reported that she was granted a secret security clearance in 
2008, but that was during a lengthy period of voluntary unemployment (January 2008 
until August 2013) after she gave birth to her second child, and that report appears to 
                                                          
2
 Among the items that I suggested to Applicant that she furnish me were the schedule of her bankruptcy 
petition that contains the list of creditors and accounts that were discharged under Chapter 7 of the U.S. Bankruptcy 
Code; character references; work performance appraisals; a personal financial statement reflecting her current 
finances; documented disputes; and correspondence from creditors. See Tr. at 57-67. 
 
3
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10-13: GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated June 30, 2014), at 3-4. 
 
4
 Tr. at 26; GE 2, supra note 3, at 3. 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 15. 
 
6
 Tr. at 6. 
 
3 
                                      
 
be in error.7 Applicant has never been married, although she currently resides with a 
cohabitant.8 She has a son (born in 1987) and a daughter (born in 2009).9 
 
Financial Considerations10 
 
 It is unclear when Applicant first experienced substantial financial difficulties, but 
it appears that several delinquent accounts existed as far back as mid-2004, or even 
earlier, for in May 2004, Applicant filed a bankruptcy petition under Chapter 13 of the 
U.S. Bankruptcy Code. A wage-earner plan was established under which Applicant was 
to make bi-weekly payments of $65 to the bankruptcy trustee for a period of 60 months. 
That plan was continued until January 2006 when Applicant elected to convert the case 
to one under Chapter 7 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Applicant gave no reason for the 
desired conversion except that she wanted to “get it over with.”11 She apparently passed 
the “means test,” and the conversion was permitted. On May 3, 2006, Applicant’s 
unsecured, nonpriority debts were discharged.
12
  
 
 In late 2008, Applicant went on a short-term disability associated with the birth to 
her second child, drawing about $700 or $800 per month. After her child was born, she 
remained unemployed and received unemployment compensation and food stamps. 
She resided with her sister and also received periodic financial assistance from both her 
sister and her father.13 During her lengthy period of unemployment, Applicant was under 
the impression that she did not have to file a federal income tax return for the tax year 
2011 because she did not have any “earned” income, only the “unearned” benefits. In 
2013, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) contacted her and informed her that she owed 
$200. She purportedly entered into a payment plan in July 2014 and agreed to pay $30 
                                                          
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 12, 26-27. 
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 17. 
 
9
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 18-19. 
 
10
 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: GE 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated June 7, 2014); GE 5 
(Equifax Credit Report, dated November 21, 2014); GE 2, supra note 3; GE 3 (Case Summary, dated May 8, 2006); 
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated August 5, 2015.  
 
11
 GE 3, supra note 10, at 1-2; Tr. at 29-30.  
 
12
 GE 3, supra note 10, at 3. In a bankruptcy filing, most debtors list potential creditors, even when the debt 
may have been resold or transferred to a different collection agent or creditor, to ensure notice, and reduce the risk of 
subsequent dismissal of the bankruptcy. If Applicant failed to list some debts on her bankruptcy schedule, this failure 
to list some debts does not affect their discharge. Absent fraud, in a no-asset bankruptcy, all unsecured, nonpriority 
debts are discharged when the bankruptcy court grants a discharge, even when they are not listed on a bankruptcy 
schedule. See Judd v. Wolfe, 78 F.3d 110, 114 (3d Cir. 1996); Francis v. Nat’l Revenue Service, Inc., 426 B.R. 398 
(Bankr. S.D. FL 2010), but see First Circuit Bucks Majority on Discharge of Unlisted Debt in No-Asset Case, 
American Bankruptcy Institute, 28-9 ABIJ 58 (Nov. 2009). There is no requirement to re-open the bankruptcy to 
discharge the debt. Collier on Bankruptcy, Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., 2010, Chapter 4-523, ¶ 523(a)(3)(A). 
Not all debts are discharged through bankruptcy. Priority debts, such as tax debts, student loan debts, and child 
support obligations, are generally not discharged through bankruptcy. Secured debts such as home mortgages and 
car liens are not discharged unless the security (home or car) is foreclosed or repossessed. 
 
13
 Tr. at 27-29. 
 
4 
                                      
 
per month until the balance of $440 with interest is paid off.14 Although Applicant stated 
that the IRS had furnished her with a notice that the account has been resolved, and 
she indicated an intention to submit it to me, she failed to do so. Accordingly, it is not 
clear if the federal income tax debt has been resolved. 
 
Although Applicant’s unsecured, nonpriority debts were discharged in May 2006, 
she apparently was unable to handle her new routine expenses. As a result, over the 
ensuing multi-year period, a number of new accounts were placed for collection, 
charged off, or went to judgment. Applicant had delinquent payday loans, automobile 
loans, storage accounts, medical accounts, cellular telephone accounts, and credit card 
accounts.  
 
In addition to the bankruptcy and the federal income tax issue, the SOR identified 
13 purportedly continuing delinquent accounts, totaling approximately $15,082, which 
had been placed for collection, charged off, or went to judgment. Although Applicant 
offered comments regarding each of the accounts, and claimed to have made contact 
with some of the creditors, she failed to submit any documentation to support her 
contentions pertaining to her actions or activities to resolve them. There is no 
documentary evidence that any of the accounts were placed in repayment plans or that 
payments were made for any of them. Although Applicant purportedly disputed several 
of the accounts discussed with an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in June 2014, to date, nearly two years later, she failed to submit 
any documentation to support her contentions or disputes. She also claimed that some 
of the accounts may have been duplications of other accounts, but once again, she 
failed to submit any documentation to support those contentions. There is no 
documentary evidence to indicate that Applicant made any payments on any of the 
SOR-related delinquent accounts, including one account with the minimal balance of 
$58.  
 
Those unaddressed, unresolved, delinquent accounts are as follows: a payday 
loan with an unpaid balance of $265 that became a judgment in 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.c.); a 
cellular telephone account with a past-due balance of $1,763 (SOR ¶ 1.d.); a medical 
account with a past-due balance of $295 (SOR ¶ 1.e.); a medical account with a past-
due balance of $295 (SOR ¶ 1.f.); a bank credit card with a past-due balance of $427 
that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.g.); a medical account with an unpaid balance of $58 
(SOR ¶ 1.h.); a self-storage company account with a past-due balance of $166 (SOR ¶ 
1.i.); a credit card account with a past-due balance of $799 that was charged off in 2008 
(SOR ¶ 1.j.); a bank overdraft with a past-due balance of $726 (SOR ¶ 1.k.); an 
unspecified bank account with an unpaid balance of $300 that was charged off and 
transferred or sold to a debt purchaser who increased the past-due balance to $491 
(SOR ¶ 1.l.); a regular unsecured loan with a high credit of $1,500 that was charged off 
and transferred or sold to a debt purchaser who purportedly increased the unpaid 
amount to $1,932 (SOR ¶ 1.m.); an automobile loan with a high credit of $11,522 (as 
opposed to the $7,564.55 that was alleged in the SOR) that was charged off, the car 
was repossessed, and the account was transferred or sold to a debt purchaser (SOR ¶ 
                                                          
14
 GE 2, supra note 3, at 5; GE 1, supra note 1, at 28. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
1.n.);15 and a bank credit card with and unpaid balance of $300 that was sold to a debt 
purchaser (SOR ¶ 1.o.).  
 
In November 2015, Applicant stated that her hourly wage was approximately $10 
per hour. Based on a 40-hour work week, she generally works between 72 and 80 
hours every two weeks. Her net take home pay if she works the 72-hour schedule 
provides her with $648 every two weeks. Her cohabitant generally earns $600 every two 
weeks. Applicant estimated that once the monthly expenses are paid, she sometimes 
has a monthly remainder of approximately $1,000 available for savings or discretionary 
spending. Nevertheless, because her cohabitant is a dialysis patient, his hours may be 
minimized, and their take-home pay may be reduced. Applicant has no money in her 
bank account and is not accumulating money because they actually live “paycheck to 
paycheck.”16  
 
While there is no testimony or documentary evidence that Applicant ever sought 
the services of a financial advisor, or that Applicant ever received financial counseling, 
because she went through the bankruptcy process, I have given her credit for 
completing the necessary financial training associated with the filing of a bankruptcy 
petition. There is a paucity of evidence to indicate that Applicant’s financial problems 
are now under control. 
 
Personal Conduct17 
 
 On May 9, 2014, when Applicant completed her e-QIP, she responded to 
questions pertaining to her financial record. Several of those questions in Section 26 – 
Financial Record – asked if, in the past seven years, she had any bills or debts turned 
over to a collection agency; if she had any account or credit card suspended, charged 
off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; if she had been over 120 days delinquent 
on any debt not previously entered; or if she was currently over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt. Applicant answered “no” to those questions. She certified that the responses 
were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of her knowledge and belief,18 but the 
responses to those questions were, in fact, incorrect, for at that time Applicant had 
several accounts that fell within the stated parameters.  
 
                                                          
15
 There was some speculation and discussion regarding this account and the timeframes involved for 
Applicant was of the opinion that the repossession of the vehicle occurred in 2004, and she was unsure if the account 
was a debt that was included in her bankruptcy discharge. Tr. at 44-46. The issue could have been resolved had she 
furnished a copy of the discharged debts during the post-hearing open period for submissions. See note 2, supra. 
 
16
 Tr. at 51-56. 
 
17
 During the hearing, just before the parties made their final arguments, Department Counsel moved to 
amend the SOR. The first motion was to correct the date alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b. by substituting the date May 
9, 2014, for the one listed (May 6, 2014). The second motion was to withdraw SOR ¶ 2.a. There being no objection to 
either motion, both motions were granted. See Tr. at 68-69. 
 
18
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 29, 32. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
 During her OPM interview, Applicant stated that her omissions were merely an 
oversight because she was not aware of the debts when she completed the e-QIP.19 In 
her Answer to the SOR, while not specifically admitting or denying the allegation, she 
submitted what appears to be a new explanation for her answer to the e-QIP questions. 
She said that she did not remember checking “no” to the questions and claimed it was 
“not intentionally done and was an honest mistake.”20 During the hearing, she continued 
to claim that the omission “must have been an honest mistake.”21 She denied trying to 
lie or hide anything.22 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”23 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”24   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
                                                          
19
 GE 2, supra note 3, at 5-10. 
 
20
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 10, at 4. 
 
21
 Tr. at 47. 
 
22
 Tr. at 47. 
 
23
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
24
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”25 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.26  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”27 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”28 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
                                                          
25
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
26
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
27
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
28
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. In addition, a “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns as required . . .” may raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19(g). Applicant has 
had a long-standing problem with her finances which existed as far back as mid-2004, 
or even earlier. Her unsecured, nonpriority debts were discharged under Chapter 7 or 
the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in May 2006. A number of accounts subsequently became 
delinquent and were placed for collection, charged off, or went to judgment. She failed 
to timely file her federal income tax return for the tax year 2011. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 
19(g) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”29 Under AG ¶ 20(e) it is potentially mitigating if “the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
                                                          
29
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) minimally 
apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties 
since about 2004, despite having her unsecured, nonpriority debts discharged in 2006, 
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” 
Although she does not specifically attribute any one particular cause to her initial or 
current financial problems, she did mention her lengthy period of voluntary 
unemployment (January 2008 until August 2013) and the fact that her cohabitant is a 
dialysis patient. The specific impact of those factors, either individually or collectively, 
was not discussed. Although Applicant spoke about some of her efforts to address 
various delinquent debts, she offered no documentary evidence of a good-faith effort to 
resolve any of them. She has failed to address any of her delinquent accounts, including 
the one with a minimal balance of $58.  
 
I have given Applicant credit for completing the necessary financial training and 
counseling associated with the filing of a bankruptcy petition. Applicant has no money in 
her bank account and is not accumulating money because, as she stated, they actually 
live “paycheck to paycheck.” The overwhelming evidence leads to the conclusion that 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. Applicant has not acted responsibly 
by failing to address her delinquent accounts and by failing to make limited, if any, 
documented efforts of working with her creditors.30 Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances confronting her cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.31 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is a 
                                                          
30
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
31
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
10 
                                      
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 As noted above, on May 9, 2014, when Applicant completed her e-QIP, she 
responded to questions pertaining to her financial record. Several of those questions in 
Section 26 – Financial Record – asked if, in the past seven years, she had any bills or 
debts turned over to a collection agency; if she had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; if she had been over 
120 days delinquent on any debt not previously entered; or if she was currently over 
120 days delinquent on any debt. Applicant answered “no” to those questions. She 
certified that the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of her 
knowledge and belief,32 but the responses to those questions were, in fact, incorrect, for 
at that time Applicant had several accounts that fell within the stated parameters. As 
noted above, in her Answer to the SOR, Applicant failed to admit or deny the allegation. 
 
 Applicant’s responses provide sufficient evidence to examine if her submissions 
were deliberate falsifications, as alleged in the SOR, or merely the result of 
misunderstanding the true facts on her part. She initially said her omissions were merely 
an oversight because she was not aware of the debts when she completed the e-QIP. 
She subsequently offered another explanation. She said that she did not remember 
checking “no” to the questions and claimed it was “not intentionally done and was an 
honest mistake.” She denied trying to lie or hide anything. 
 
 I have considered Applicant’s background, education, professional career, and 
her seemingly superficial understanding of financial matters, in analyzing her actions. 
Although she was offered the opportunity to submit character references attesting to her 
honesty, integrity, and trustworthiness, she chose not to do so. In the absence of such 
evidence, I am unable to credit her explanations for failing to provide accurate financial 
information on her e-QIP. Accordingly, as it pertains to the alleged deliberate 
falsification, AG ¶ 16(a) has been established.33   
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns that could mitigate security concerns arising from personal conduct. However, 
                                                          
32
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 29, 32. 
 
33
 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10390 at 8 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
none of them apply. Furthermore, Applicant’s explanation is not credible and is 
insufficient to refute AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.34   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. She has been 
a custodial janitor with her current employer since March 2014, and she previously held 
similar positions, as well as that of housekeeper, with other employers. She was 
granted a secret security clearance in 2008. There is no evidence of misuse of 
information technology systems, mishandling protected information, substance abuse, 
or criminal conduct.  
 
The disqualifying evidence is more substantial. Although her finances were 
rehabilitated with the May 2006 discharge of her debts, she subsequently returned to a 
pattern of being unable to maintain her accounts, and many of them went unaddressed 
for unspecified reasons. Accounts became delinquent, and several of them were placed 
for collection, charged off, or went to judgment. Applicant failed to timely file her federal 
income tax return for the tax year 2011. When asked about the existence of financial 
delinquencies, she lied and denied that there were any, despite the presence of a 
number of them. Although Applicant claimed to have made contact with some of the 
creditors, she failed to submit any documentation to support her contentions pertaining 
to her actions or activities to resolve them. There is no documentary evidence that any 
of the accounts were placed in repayment plans or that payments were made for any of 
them. Although Applicant purportedly disputed several of the accounts, she failed to 
                                                          
34
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
submit any documentation to support her contentions or disputes. She also claimed that 
some of the accounts may have been duplications of other accounts, but once again, 
she failed to submit any documentation to support those contentions. There is no 
documentary evidence to indicate that Applicant made any payments on any of the 
SOR-related delinquent accounts, including one account with the minimal balance of 
$58.  
 
Applicant offered no evidence as to her reputation for reliability, integrity, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant’s long-standing failure over the years to 
voluntarily repay her SOR creditors, even in the smallest amounts, or to arrange even 
the most reasonable payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about her 
fitness to hold a security clearance. There are clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are not under control. Applicant’s actions under the circumstances cast doubt 
on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Considering the absence 
of confirmed debt resolution and elimination efforts, Applicant’s financial issues are 
likely to remain. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:35 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘“meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially negative track record of voluntary 
debt reduction and elimination efforts, generally ignoring her delinquent SOR debts. 
Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
                                                          
35
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
considerations concerns and her personal conduct. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 
2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
