 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01232 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 7, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 6, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
12, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 1, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 9, 2016.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were 
admitted without objection. A letter from Department Counsel to Applicant was marked 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Colombia. The request was not admitted in evidence but was included in the 
record as HE II. Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the 
facts contained in HE II. Of note is that Colombia is one of the oldest democracies in 
Latin America. The United States is Colombia’s largest trading partner. Colombia has 
been plagued by transnational criminal and narcotics trafficking organizations, terrorist 
organizations, and armed criminal gangs. Colombia also continues to have human 
rights problems. Any person born in Colombia may be considered a Columbian citizen, 
and dual U.S-Columbian citizens are required to present a Colombian passport to enter 
and exit Colombia. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. She has 
worked for her current employer since 2014. She is applying for a security clearance for 
the first time. She has a bachelor’s degree. She is married with a child.1 
  
 Applicant was born in Colombia to Colombian parents. She has never known her 
father. When Applicant was a child, her mother married a native-born U.S. citizen who 
was a member of the U.S. military. Applicant and her mother moved to the United 
States with Applicant’s stepfather when Applicant was about six years old. Applicant 
attended primary school, high school, and college in the United States.2 
 
 Applicant has two half-siblings who were born in the United States. Her two half-
siblings are serving on active duty in the U.S. military. Applicant’s mother became a 
U.S. citizen in 2003. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2009. Applicant’s husband is a 
native-born U.S. citizen. He works for a defense contractor and holds a security 
clearance.3 
 
 Applicant’s grandfather, aunt, and cousins are citizens and residents of 
Colombia. Her grandfather is elderly and ill. Applicant talks to her aunt about every 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18-19, 34; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-21, 28, 38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 30-31, 38, 40-41; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 
 
other month. About five to six times a year, she sends her aunt between about $100 
and $200. Her contact with her other relatives is primarily through social media. There is 
no indication that any of her family members have ties to narcotics trafficking, criminal 
gangs, or Colombia’s intelligence services. None of her Colombian relatives have 
visited the United States.4 
 
 Applicant’s mother and stepfather took the family to Colombia for a visit when 
Applicant was 11 years old. There was difficulty departing Colombia because Applicant 
had a different last name than her stepfather. It was months before she was permitted 
to depart Colombia.5 
 
 Applicant did not consider herself a dual U.S.-Colombian citizen. She thought 
when she became a U.S. citizen that she was no longer a Colombian citizen. She 
visited Colombia in 2010. She traveled on her U.S. passport, but she also brought the 
expired Colombian passport that she had since she was a child. She was told by 
immigration officials that she should have a Colombian passport. She decided to renew 
the Colombian passport so that there would be no problems when she departed 
Colombia.6  
 
 Applicant has not returned to Colombia, and she has not used the Colombian 
passport since she obtained it in 2010. She surrendered the Colombian passport to her 
facility security officer (FSO) in January 2016. She plans to initiate the process of 
renouncing her Colombian citizenship.7 
 
 Applicant credibly stated that her allegiance lies with the United States. She 
stated that she would report any attempt to use her family in Colombia against her.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 22-27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE B. 
 
5 Tr. at 21; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 21-24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 22-25; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
8 Tr. at 23-24, 28-33; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s grandfather, aunt, and cousins are citizens and residents of 
Colombia. Colombia has been plagued by transnational criminal and narcotics 
trafficking organizations, terrorist organizations, and armed criminal gangs. Colombia 
also continues to have human rights problems.  
 
 Applicant’s contacts in Colombia create a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Colombia, but they are outweighed 
by her deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. Applicant 
never knew her father. Her mother married a member of the U.S. military and moved to 
the United States when Applicant was a child. Her half-siblings were born in the United 
States and serve in the U.S. military. Her husband is a native-born U.S. citizen who 
works for a defense contractor and holds a security clearance. They have a child. 
Applicant has a good job with a defense contractor. She credibly stated that she would 
report any attempt to use her family in Colombia against her.  
 
 
6 
 
 I find that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of the United States and the interests of the Colombian 
government, a terrorist group, a criminal organization, or a drug cartel. There is no 
conflict of interest, because Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest 
in favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are applicable.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 Applicant obtained and possessed a Colombian passport while a U.S. citizen. AG 
¶ 10(a) is applicable. The renewal of her Colombian passport while a U.S. citizen could 
raise concerns under AG ¶ 10(b), as an action to obtain recognition of her Colombian 
citizenship.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant exercised her Colombian citizenship by obtaining a Colombian 
passport while a U.S. citizen. Therefore, her dual citizenship is not based solely on her 
parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country. AG ¶ 11(a) is not applicable. She 
 
7 
 
surrendered the passport to her FSO. She plans to initiate the process of renouncing 
her Colombian citizenship. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e) are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s ties to 
Colombia, but they are far outweighed by her deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
