1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01562 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Rick Morris, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 12, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel amended the SOR on December 
2, 2015, adding one additional allegation, and was ready to proceed on December 9, 
2015. The case was assigned to me on January 6, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 13, 2016, 
scheduling the hearing for February 3, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, called one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A 
through P, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until February 
19, 2016, to enable Applicant to submit additional evidence. He did not submit any 
additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on February 10, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.o and denied all the other 
allegations.2 His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old information technology (IT) programmer employed by a 
defense contractor since December 2015. (Tr. 43-44.) He held an interim security 
clearance until the SOR was issued, but he has never held a final clearance.3  
 
After graduating from high school in 1992, Applicant began working for his 
brother in a printing business. In about 1999, he began participating in the business as 
an informal partner rather than an employee. In 2000, he started his own IT business, 
doing computer programming and home network installation. He continued to work for 
the printing company until September 2009, when he was laid off because of a business 
decline. He was rehired by the printing company from April 2011 until June 2013. He 
was self-employed from June 2013 to December 2015.  
 
 Applicant married in August 2001, separated in mid-2010, and divorced in March 
2012. He has three children from this marriage, ages 9, 12, and 13. (Tr. 45.) He has 
resided with a cohabitant, to whom he is now engaged, since June 2013. (Tr. 19.) His 
fiancée served in the Army National Guard for five years, held a security clearance, and 
was honorably discharged. (Tr. 19-20.)  
 
 Applicant began taking college courses in November 2010. He continued as a 
full-time student after he was rehired by the printing company in April 2011. (GX 2 at 2.) 
He received an associate’s degree in applied sciences information technology in April 
2013. He is still a full-time student, working toward a bachelor’s degree in computer 
science. (Tr. 46.) 
 
 Around 2003, Applicant and his brother started buying real estate as an 
investment. They bought a residence next to the printing shop, renovated it, and rented 
it. They bought a second property that was in poor shape and a neighborhood eyesore. 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
2 Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h and 1.j through 1.n. Due to incorrect lettering of the SOR 
paragraphs, there is no SOR ¶ 1.i. 
 
3 Applicant was separated when his employer received the SOR, but he will be rehired if his application 
for a security clearance is granted. (Tr. 75-76.) 
3 
 
They rehabilitated the property and sold it for a small profit. They bought two more 
properties just before the real estate market began to decline. Applicant did not agree 
with the purchase of the fourth property, but he acquiesced in the purchase.  
 
About two or three years before Applicant moved to his current location, his 
brother assumed total control of the real-estate investments. Applicant did not know that 
his brother stopped making payments on the mortgage loans on the investment 
properties until he submitted his application for a security clearance. (Tr. 33-37.) The 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c are the delinquent first and second mortgages on one 
of the investment properties and the related penalties and late fees. Applicant signed a 
quit-claim deed, giving his brother sole interest in the property, but Applicant remained 
liable on the loans. (Tr. 39-40.) He testified that he gave his brother sole interest in the 
property, hoping that his brother would feel more responsible as a sole owner and start 
making timely payments on the mortgage loans. (Tr. 53-54.) 
 
Over the years, Applicant personally guaranteed several business loans and 
lines of credit for the printing business that are not alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 38.) His 
brother did not pay the sales taxes from the printing business in 2012, and a state tax 
lien for $12,726, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, was filed against the business in May 2013. (GX 
3 at 4.) Applicant was unaware of the tax lien until he was interviewed by a security 
investigator in August 2014. (Tr. 49; GX 2.) The basis for Applicant’s liability for the tax 
obligations of the printing company is unclear, because there is no evidence that he 
held an ownership interest in the company. In November 2014, the printing company 
entered into a payment agreement with the state, providing for an initial payment of 
$3,602 and monthly payments of $654 for 24 months. The agreement was signed by 
Applicant’s brother. (AX E.)  
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.g and 1.j-1.o were joint debts incurred by 
Applicant and his wife before they divorced. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k involve the 
same creditor. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.l includes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e. His wife continued 
to use their joint accounts after the divorce, but she did not make any payments on 
them. Applicant was unaware that the accounts were delinquent, because he was living 
with his parents at an address other than the marital home to which the bills were sent. 
(Tr. 55-61.) He has settled several delinquent accounts that were not alleged in the 
SOR, including a credit-card bill, two medical bills, an electric bill, and a 
telecommunications bill. He made payments on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. (Tr. 58-
59.)  
 
 Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in July 2015, listing asserts of 
about $367,184 and liabilities of about $591,676. The creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.l-1.n were specifically listed in the bankruptcy petition. In 
November 2015, his dischargeable debts were discharged. (GX 6; AX A.) 
 
 Before filing his bankruptcy petition, Applicant attempted to resolve several debts 
incurred during the marriage, including the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.k. He was 
unsuccessful because the creditors insisted on large lump-sum payments. (Tr. 59-60.) 
4 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement reflecting 
monthly income of $5,500, expenses and debt payments of $3,463, and a net monthly 
remainder of $2,037. (AX I.) His child-support payments are current. He has student 
loans totaling about $43,000, but they are in deferment because he is still a full-time 
student. (Tr. 43.) He anticipates that his payments on the student loans will be about 
$150 per month when the deferment ends. (Tr. 47.) 
 
 A personal friend, who has known Applicant for about ten years, describes him 
as a trustworthy, hardworking, dedicated, and honorable friend. He states that 
Applicant’s love of country and belief in the American dream and way of life are 
unmatched. (AX M.) Applicant’s uncle, who has known him for 20 years, considers him 
a serious, responsible person who gives his family responsibilities first priority. (AX N.) 
Another uncle describes him as dedicated to his family, responsible, and always helpful. 
(AX O.) A neighbor, who has known Applicant for eight years, considers him a “person 
of integrity, decency, and honesty.” (AX P.) 
 
 Applicant’s fiancée testified that she has known Applicant for five years and they 
have lived together for two and a half years. (Tr. 26.) She testified that Applicant is very 
careful about spending money unnecessarily. They rarely go to restaurants because he 
does not want to spend the extra money. He prefers to use any extra money for his 
children’s sports, music, and scouting, and to visit his children, who live in another state 
with their mother. His fiancée also testified that Applicant is very reliable and he avoids 
dishonest people. His distaste for dishonesty has strained his relationship with his 
brother, because he has discovered some questionable business dealings by his 
brother. (Tr. 21-24.) She testified that she is aware that Applicant’s ex-wife obtained 
loans and credit cards in his name before the divorce and that he felt obligated to 
resolve those debts. (Tr. 26.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
5 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
6 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing 
establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”). The sales tax debt alleged in SOR ¶1.h does not establish AG ¶ 19(g) 
(“failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required . . . .”), 
because it applies only to income tax returns. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant encountered several conditions that were 
largely beyond his control: his periods of unemployment, the decline in the real estate 
7 
 
market, his brother’s failure to share financial responsibility for the mortgage loans, and 
his brother’s failure to remit sales taxes to the state. His ex-wife’s continued use of the 
joint credit cards was not a condition beyond his control, because he could have 
removed himself as a joint owner. He acted responsibly about his periods of 
unemployment by actively seeking other employment. He settled several joint debts 
incurred by his ex-wife, tried to settle other debts, and resorted to bankruptcy only when 
his attempts to settle them were unsuccessful. He lives frugally and has avoided 
incurring any new debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is established. A bankruptcy proceeding necessarily included 
financial counseling, and Applicant’s financial situation is under control as a result of his 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not fully established. A bankruptcy proceeding is not a “good-faith” 
effort within the meaning of this mitigating condition. See ISCR Case No. 10-03578 
(App. Bd. Oct. 4, 2012). However, Applicant resolved several consumer debts not 
alleged in the SOR and unsuccessfully attempted to resolve several other debts before 
resorting to bankruptcy. Furthermore, bankruptcy was a prudent means of avoiding 
additional financial vulnerability related to his brother’s irresponsibility. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. Applicant has not disputed any of the debts alleged in 
the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
8 
 
 Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He enjoys a 
reputation as a devoted father. After recovering from the marital debts and his brother’s 
questionable business practices, he is living responsibly and frugally. He has a 
reputation for honesty, generosity, trustworthiness, and dedication.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h and 1.j-1.o:4  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
4 See footnote 2, supra. 
