 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01722 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 14, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 22, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 22, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 15, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 24, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a to change the dollar amount 
alleged from $32,590 to $20,000.1 The motion was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR except ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.l, 
and 1.m. His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He has a high school education and some college, but 
no degree. He served in the military from 1993 to 2002, when he was honorably 
discharged. He was married from 2001 to 2004. He has no children and does not 
provide financial support to anyone. He worked for a government contractor from 2002 
until October 2013. He testified that his employer was downsizing, and he had already 
planned on seeking other employment. His employer learned of his plan to leave, so 
instead of being terminated, he resigned. He collected unemployment benefits from 
December 2013 until April 2014. Since then he has worked in construction and as a 
handyman. Applicant testified he held a top secret security clearance and access to 
sensitive compartmented information while in the military and during his government 
contractor employment. He is presently being sponsored for a security clearance by a 
prospective government contractor employer.2  
 
 Applicant’s salary in 2013 was approximately $96,000, and the two prior years it 
was $93,000. He attributed his financial problems and delinquent debts to 
unemployment, underemployment, and medical issues. He acknowledged that when he 
was employed he spent his money somewhat frivolously. He testified: “I was spending it 
because I earned it.”3 He lived beyond his means the last two years he was steadily 
employed. After he left his job he was earning about $18,000. He stated: “I did not save 
because I did not need to.” He said he did not anticipate being unemployed or having 
medical issues.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 64, 67-68. 
 
2 Tr. 16-22, 50.  
 
3 Tr. 48. 
 
4 Tr. 46-49. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant had medical problems in the spring of 2012, which resulted in four 
months of treatment. He had medical insurance and his employer provided medical 
leave. His treatments were completed in approximately October 2012. He estimated his 
out-of-pocket expenses at that time were about $5,000 to $6,000. He used all of his 
savings to pay those expenses. When he left employment he had about $2,000 in 
savings. While employed, in addition to his medical bills as noted, he spent his money 
on credit cards, a truck loan and “basically spending my—spending the rest of it on 
whatever came up; computers, whatnot.”5  
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit reports from November 
2012 and February 2015, along with information disclosed in Applicant’s security 
clearance application (SCA).6 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleged Applicant is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
for delinquent taxes for tax year 2007 in the approximate amount of $20,000. Applicant 
explained that he was employed overseas from 2002 until April 2007, and while 
employed overseas a portion of his income was exempt from federal income tax. He 
stated he attempted to adjust his tax year to reflect the move. He testified that he was 
notified by the IRS in 2008 that he owed approximately $25,000 for tax year 2007. He 
stated he contacted the IRS later in 2008 and advised it that he had “adjusted the tax 
date.” He testified the IRS advised him he would be contacted by its office later, but it 
never did. He filed his 2008 federal income tax return and assumed the problem was 
fixed. He believed the tax issue dealt only with tax year 2007. He testified that he 
thought the amount of the tax debt should have been between $3,000 and $6,000 for 
the nonexempt amount he earned during the months of 2007 while living overseas.7  
 
Applicant disclosed on his 2012 SCA that he owed approximately $20,000 to the 
IRS and that he was working with a tax service to “sort this out.”8 He testified that he 
was advised by the IRS in writing in 2012 that he owed $20,000. He testified he advised 
his security office of the IRS notice. Applicant contacted a “tax relief office,” to remedy 
the issue, but he did not want to pay their fee. He acknowledged he had the money to 
pay the tax service, but he did not want to spend it. He was concerned because the tax 
service indicated there were no guarantees. He testified that the IRS did not call him 
after 2008, so he did not follow up. He testified he was going to address the tax 
problem, but did not. After receiving the SOR and being put on notice about the tax 
debt, Applicant did not contact the IRS to resolve the debt. It remains unpaid.9  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 22-25. 
 
6 Tr. 67; GE 1, 2, 3. 
 
7 Tr. 38-42, 51-55. 
 
8 GE 1. 
 
9 Tr. 42-44, 51-64. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant testified that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($244), 1.h ($183), 1.j ($758), and 
1.k ($574) are for medical services. He stated he made payments on those debts until 
he resigned from his job and then stopped making payments. He testified that he owed 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h at one time, but the creditor opted to use “this debt as a tax write 
off” and advised him he was no longer liable for the debt. Applicant did not provide 
documents to substantiate that he is no longer liable for the debt. It is listed as a 
collection account on his February 2015 credit report. None of the debts are resolved.10 
  
Applicant purchased a new truck in 2012 for $23,000. He stopped making 
payments sometime prior to June 2014. In July 2014, the truck was repossessed and 
auctioned off. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($6,503) is the deficiency balance owed to the 
collection agency. Applicant informed the creditor that he intends to pay it when he is 
employed.11 The debt is not resolved.  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($3,545) is a loan and a line of credit Applicant obtained 
from his credit union. He took the loan out in 2013 to start a business. He stopped 
making payments in 2014. He has contacted the creditor. He intends on paying it when 
he is employed.12 It is not resolved. 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($1,249) is partially owed for check-writing overdrafts. 
Applicant could not recall what the remaining amount was owed for. Applicant thought 
he was going to receive some money that would cover the checks, but did not. He 
stated he contacted the creditor. He intends on paying it when he is employed.13 It is not 
resolved. 
 
Applicant admitted he owed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($547) for cable services that 
has been delinquent since 2014. He stated he paid half of the bill, but was unable to pay 
the remainder. It remains unresolved.14  
 
Applicant disputed that he owed the electric company debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($399) 
stating that he already paid it. He said the debt was delinquent for two to three years. 
He did not provide documentary proof that the debt is paid.15  
 
Applicant disputes the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($2,487) and 1.m ($2,243). He 
testified the accounts are the same debt. I concur. The debt is for unpaid rent for an 
apartment he rented in 2007. He stated he had a one-year lease. He gave two months’ 
                                                          
10 Tr. 26-28. 
 
11 Tr. 28-30. 
 
12 Tr. 30-31. 
 
13 Tr. 31-32. 
 
14 Tr. 32-34. 
 
15 Tr. 34. 
 
5 
 
 
notice to vacate the apartment. He stated the landlord lost the notice. Applicant told the 
landlord he would not pay. Applicant stated he sent the creditor a letter about three 
years ago disputing the debt. He did not have a copy. He does not believe he owes the 
debt and stated it is no longer reflected on his credit report.16  
 
Applicant stated he was never notified of the electric debt in SOR ¶ 1.l ($62). In 
his answer to the SOR, he stated he was not aware of the debt and did not believe he 
owed it. He testified he contacted the creditor and was told it did not have a record of 
the debt. He stated he requested the collection company contact him “monthly for an 
update in status and to arrange for repayment once I am employed fulltime.”17 At his 
hearing, he testified he is waiting for the collection company to contact him. He has not 
disputed it on his credit report.18 The debt is not resolved.  
 
Applicant explained that after he obtains his security clearance and is working he 
will then pay his delinquent debts. He stated that he presently does not make enough 
money to pay these debts. He admitted he was living beyond his means in years past, 
but has learned his lesson.19  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
16 Tr. 35-38. This debt is reported in GE 2, but not in GE 3. 
 
17 Answer to SOR. 
 
18 Tr. 37-38. 
 
19 Tr. 44-49. 
 
6 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant owes more than $16,000 in delinquent debts that are unpaid or 
unresolved. He also owes a tax debt from 2007 that is unpaid. He is unable or unwilling 
to resolve his delinquent debts. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s numerous debts remain delinquent and unpaid. He admittedly earned 
a substantial salary at one time, but spent it frivolously, and did not save money. He had 
the resources to resolve his tax debt at the time it was levied, but did not pay it or pay a 
tax advisor to help him resolve it. The debt is unpaid. His behavior casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to periods of unemployment, 
underemployment, and medical issues. These were conditions beyond his control. For 
the full application of AG ¶ 20(b) Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant had the resources when he was employed to save some 
money to cover medical bills not covered by insurance. He also had the resources to 
address his tax debt when he became aware there was an issue, but failed to do so. He 
does not provide support to others. He admitted he had no savings and spent his 
money frivolously. Although he indicated he intended to pay his delinquent debts, at this 
time he is unable to do so. Applicant failed to act responsibly under the circumstances. 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he participated in financial counseling. 
There are not clear indications his financial problems are being resolved or are under 
control. He has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve even the smallest debts. 
He intends to wait until he obtains a security clearance and is working, and then he will 
begin to resolve his debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. 
 
 Applicant disputed the amount owed on the tax debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, but failed to 
provide any documents to support his position, or to substantiate action he has taken to 
resolve it. He disputed the electric bill in SOR ¶ 1.d, stating he paid it, but did not 
provide proof of payment. He stated he is no longer responsible for the medical debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.h because the creditor claimed it as a tax write off. That delinquent debt is on 
his 2015 credit report and owned by a collection agency. It is unpaid. Applicant failed to 
provide evidence he is no longer responsible for the debt. He disputed the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.i and 1.m stating he provided the landlord with proper notice, and he is not 
responsible for the amount alleged. I concur that these two debts are for the same 
account and find for Applicant on the greater amount in SOR ¶ 1.i. Applicant did not 
provide any documentary evidence to support his position or action he took to dispute 
this debt or any others on his credit report. He does not believe he owes the electric bill 
in SOR ¶ 1.l. He will wait for the collection agency to contact him to resolve the debt 
once he is employed. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to any of the debts alleged because 
Applicant has not provided documentation to substantiate the basis of his disputes or 
evidence of actions to resolve the debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
9 
 
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He served in the military and was honorably 
discharged. He has a tax debt that he failed to resolve despite being aware of it for 
many years and having the resources to pay it. Understandably, he may dispute the 
amount he owes, but he has failed to contact the IRS or hire someone to help him as he 
stated he was doing in his SCA. Applicant’s unemployment and underemployment 
impacted his ability to pay his delinquent debts. However, he does not have a financial 
plan for resolving the debts other than obtaining a security clearance and starting a job 
with his prospective employer. Applicant has the burden of persuasion to mitigate the 
security concerns about his finances before he is granted a security clearance. He has 
not met that burden. Applicant’s conduct raises questions about his judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.m:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
