 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-00838 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 6, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On November 30, 2015, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
and it was received on December 16, 2015. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
object to the Government’s evidence and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. The 
Government had no objection and AE A is admitted into evidence. The Government’s 
documents identified as Items 5 through 10 are admitted into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on February 17, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He is a high school graduate. He married in 2001 and 
divorced in June 2011. He has lived with a cohabitant since September 2011. He has 
two children, ages 13 and 10. Applicant was steadily employed from 1999 to January 
2013. He was unemployed from January 2013 until September 2013 when he began 
work with his current employer, a federal contractor.1  
 
 Applicant stated that he experienced financial problems when he went through a 
difficult divorce in 2011 and was ordered to pay all of the expenses.2 He also had a 
period of unemployment that impacted his finances. He used credit cards to pay his 
expenses while going through the divorce and to pay his attorney’s fees.3 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in June 2014. In 
response to question 26 he wrote: “in [ar]rears for child support due to unemployment, 
but currently catching up.” He answered “yes” to each of the following questions that 
asked in the past seven years if he had defaulted on a loan, had debts that were turned 
over to a collection agency, had an account or credit card suspended, charged off, or 
canceled for failing to pay as agreed, and that he was currently 120 days delinquent on 
a debt.4  
 
Applicant was interviewed in August 2014 by an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator, as part of his background investigation. He explained 
he got behind on child support payments because the court ordered an increase and 
backdated it, so he had to catch up on the difference. He indicated he was still $1,600 in 
arrears.5 It is unknown if he is now current. 
 
Applicant acknowledged during the interview that he had a judgment owed to a 
credit card account that was not satisfied. He also had several other delinquent credit 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 10. 
 
2 Applicant did not provide a copy of the divorce decree or settlement agreement. 
 
3 Item 10. 
 
4 Item 5. 
 
5 Item 10. 
 
3 
 
 
cards that were charged off or with a collection agency. He stated that he was 
contacting the creditors and making arrangements to resolve the debts, or he was 
unaware of the debt and was going to contact the creditor. He indicated to the 
investigator that his finances were stable.6 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in January 2015. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant indicated that his bankruptcy plan was finalized in March 2015. He stated the 
delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b ($2,524) is included in the case. He reiterated the 
reasons for his financial difficulty. He completed the mandated credit counseling for 
filing bankruptcy.7  
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he stated that he currently owns his own 
home. He stated he has never lived beyond his means. He indicated he never missed a 
mortgage payment, credit card payment, car note, or electric bill until his divorce. He fell 
behind for a short time with his bills because he decided to pay his child support and 
alimony payments rather than his bills. He decided to be a responsible father and work 
with the creditors at a later date. He does not gamble and considers himself a 
trustworthy adult.8 
 
 Credit reports from June 2014, December 2014, and July 2015 provide evidence 
of the debt alleged in the SOR.  
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy documents indicate on Schedule F that creditors holding 
unsecure nonpriority claims total $11,845. Credit reports from June 2014 and December 
2014 indicate that he was delinquent several months on his mortgage and a foreclosure 
process had started, other accounts were charged off or in collection, and he had an 
unsatisfied judgment. The July 2015 credit report showed the mortgage was part of the 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Applicant did not provide a status update on his mortgage other 
than to say he owns his home and never missed a payment until he went through his 
divorce.9 Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy payment plan requires him to pay $575 for 
58 months beginning in April 2015. Beyond Applicant’s statement, it is unknown if he 
has consistently complied with the plan. No documentary evidence was provided by 
Applicant to show his current financial situation, such as his current salary, expenses, 
and any accounts on which he is making payments. No explanation was provided as to 
why Applicant chose to file bankruptcy.10 
  
 
 
                                                          
6 Item 10. 
 
7 Items 4 and 6. 
 
8 AE A. 
 
9 Items 7, 8; AE A. 
 
10 Items 6, 7, 8, and 9. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.11 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in January 2015 and he indicated the one 
delinquent debt that was alleged in the SOR was included. There is sufficient evidence 
to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged he had financial problems when he went through a 
divorce in 2011 and experienced a period of unemployment in 2013. In his OPM 
interview and subsequent statements he indicated he used credit cards during this time 
to pay expenses and his attorney’s fees. He did not provide information about his 
actions to address the delinquent debts before he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
January 2015. He indicated a plan was approved in March 2015, but he did not provide 
any documents to establish his compliance with it. He did not provide information about 
his current financial status. Applicant’s debts are recent and ongoing. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude future delinquent debts are unlikely to recur. AG¶ 
20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to a 2011 divorce and period of 
unemployment in 2013. These were conditions beyond his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must demonstrate that he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. He admitted he used credit cards during this difficult period of his 
life, but did not provide evidence of actions he took to pay or resolve these debts before 
filing bankruptcy. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
Applicant included the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b in his bankruptcy. He completed the 
mandated credit counseling by the bankruptcy court. Applicant’s debts have not yet 
been discharged. Documentary information was not provided to conclude he has been 
making consistent payments on his Chapter 13 payment plan. Because he did not 
provide sufficient information about his current finances, I am unable to determine if 
there are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) marginally applies.  
 
Although bankruptcy is a legal means to address dire financial problems, without 
additional information about Applicant’s past actions to address his legal obligations and 
whether he has made consistent payments on his Chapter 13 payment plan, I cannot 
make a determination as to whether Applicant’s conduct constitutes a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 45 years old. He experienced financial problems in 2011 due to a 
divorce and later a period of unemployment. In early 2015 he filed Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. He failed to provide sufficient evidence to show he is complying with the 
bankruptcy plan and his current financial situation. Even if Applicant is complying with 
the requirements of the Chapter 13 plan, he has not yet established a solid financial 
track record to conclude his financial problems will not recur. He failed to meet his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
