 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-01908 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Subsequent to having discharged debts through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2008, 
Applicant accumulated additional delinquent debts. She resolved half of the alleged 
debts and is resolving the other half through a payment plan. She failed to disclose a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy or any delinquent debts in her security clearance application. She 
mitigated the financial and personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On July 3, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 24, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On October 7, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On February 12, 2015, the Department of Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me and issued a hearing notice, setting 
the case for February 29, 2015. At the hearing Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without 
objections. The record remained open until March 21, 2016, to give Applicant time to 
submit additional exhibits. She timely submitted exhibits, which I marked as AE G 
through P and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
March 10, 2016.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.l, 
1.m, and 1.p. She denied the remaining allegations and asserted they were paid. She 
denied the allegation contained in SOR ¶ 2.a. Her admissions are accepted as factual 
findings. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old and married to her second husband for five years. She 
has four adult sons from a previous marriage. She is a high school graduate and has 
earned certificates of achievement in areas of study from a technical college. In July 
2014 she began an administrative assistant position with a defense contractor. (Tr. 15; 
GE 1.) Prior to this position she worked in the health care field for over 30 years. She 
was unemployed from July 2012 until April 2013. (Tr. 17, 23; GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a complimentary letter from a customer for whom she 
provided services. The customer appreciated her diligence and attention to detail. (AE 
D.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to several factors: a 2006 divorce from 
her first husband; a subsequent period of underemployment; and incurring medical bills 
related to a serious illness for which she did not have medical insurance. She explained 
that after her divorce she was earning $7 per hour and was unable to afford health 
insurance or pay the numerous medical bills that accumulated after a serious illness. 
(Tr. 24-25.) In September 2007 she filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy and later discharged 
many of her delinquent debts, including some medical debts, in January 2008. 
Subsequently, she incurred additional medical bills for which she did not have medical 
insurance. (Tr. 27.)  
 
 
3 
 
 
  
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from July 2014, August 2015, and January 
2016, the SOR alleged a 2007 Chapter 7 bankruptcy and 15 delinquent debts totaling 
$21,906 that accumulated between 2009 and 2014. Of those 15 debts, 13 are medical 
debts and 2 are credit card debts. (GE 2, GE 3, GE 4.) To date, Applicant has paid eight 
SOR-listed debts totaling $5,317: ¶ 1.b ($229); ¶ 1.c ($249); ¶ 1.d ($559); ¶ 1.e ($487); 
¶ 1.f ($3,539); ¶ 1.g ($159); ¶ 1.l ($75); and ¶ 1.p ($50). The remaining seven medical 
debts are owed to a hospital and are being paid through a payment plan. They total 
$16,559: ¶ 1.h ($8,282); ¶ 1.i ($2,329); ¶ 1.j ($811); ¶ 1.k ($990); ¶ 1.m ($3,408); ¶ 1.n 
($573); and ¶ 1.o ($166).1 (Tr. 31-32; 51; AE E, AE G through AE P.)  
 
 Prior to being laid off in September 2015 pending this investigation, Applicant 
was earning $20 per hour. She said that after obtaining the administrative position in 
2014, she started paying some old medical bills, in addition to maintaining a car loan, 
and making payments on two student loans. (Tr. 27.) She submitted a copy of her 
monthly budget while she was working. Her net family monthly income was $3,000 and 
expenses, including payments to her student loans, were $2,600, leaving almost $400 
remaining. (AE A.) Prior to filing bankruptcy in September 2007, she completed a credit 
counseling course online. (AE C.)  
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to disclose in Section 26 of her July 2014 
e-QIP the 2007 bankruptcy or any of the 15 debts alleged in the SOR. That section 
requested information pertinent to any bankruptcy or delinquent accounts, which 
occurred within the past seven years.  
 
 In explaining the omissions, Applicant said she was working full-time and was 
rushing to complete the e-QIP in the evenings, in order to return it to her employer who 
was eager to submit it. It was the first time she submitted an e-QIP. She stated that 
when she completed the questions relating to her financial record, she knew that she 
had delinquent debts, but she did not have enough time to gather the pertinent 
information regarding them. She did not disclose her 2007 bankruptcy either. She said 
she did not appreciate the importance of disclosing the information and did not 
intentionally attempt to mislead the Government. She expressed remorse over her 
mistake. (Tr. 61-64.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
                                                 
1
 According to the collection agency for the hospital, the payment plan balance is $14,132 as of February 
26, 2016, and not $16,559. (AE F.)  
 
 
4 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides: 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.2 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of not meeting financial obligations that began before 
September 2007 when she filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Between 2009 and 2014, 
Applicant accumulated an additional 15 delinquent debts that she had been unable to 
begin resolving until 2014, when she obtained fulltime employment. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise both disqualifications, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s delinquent debts: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
                                                 
2
 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant offered evidence that the financial problems resulting in a 2007 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy arose as a consequence of her 2006 divorce. In 2009 she began 
accumulating additional delinquent debts, in particular medical debts, because she did 
not have medical insurance during a serious illness and had insufficient income to pay 
those bills. These were circumstances beyond her control. However, she did not provide 
documentation that she attempted to address the debts while they were accumulating, 
which evidence is necessary for the full application of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 Applicant documented participation in a credit counseling course required for 
filing bankruptcy. She provided information that the unpaid alleged debts are slowly 
being resolved, and there is evidence to conclude that those debts are coming under 
control. Thus, the evidence establishes some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). She also 
provided evidence that she made a good-faith effort to pay and resolve 8 of the 15 SOR 
alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(d) applies.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The SOR alleged in ¶ 2.a that Applicant falsified her July 2014 e-QIP because 
she failed to disclose a 2007 bankruptcy or any delinquent accounts in response to 
questions listed in Section 26. The Government contended that her omissions may raise 
a security concern and be disqualifying under AG ¶ 16:  
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, 
determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant denied that she intentionally concealed requested information. When a 
falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the government has the burden of 
proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an 
applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining 
holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant asserted that she did not disclose information about her delinquent 
debts or a previous bankruptcy because she rushed to complete the e-QIP in the 
evenings after working all day, and did not have information about the financial matters 
available. She knew she had delinquent accounts, but did not appreciate the 
significance of giving accurate answers in the e-QIP. While her explanation of feeling 
hurried to finish and submit the e-QIP may be understandable, her explanation for 
failing to list any delinquent debt or the 2007 bankruptcy is not sufficiently credible. The 
series of questions relating to one’s past financial record are extensive and clear. In fact 
the first question under the financial record section asks whether one has filed a petition 
under the bankruptcy code in the last seven years. The evidence establishes an 
intentional omission, raises the above disqualifying condition, and shifts the burden to 
Applicant to rebut or mitigate the security concern. 
 
AG ¶ 17 includes two conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant emphasized that at the time she submitted an e-QIP, and she did not 
have pertinent the financial information available to her as she rushed to complete it in 
the evenings after work because her supervisor was pressuring her to submit it. She 
explained that she did not appreciate the importance of being accurate in her answers, 
as this was her first security clearance application. She told the investigator essentially 
the same thing in response to his questions about the reasons she failed to disclose 
requested financial information. While testifying, she credibly and remorsefully 
acknowledged that she made a serious mistake and that she should have gathered her 
financial information before completing the application in order to accurately disclose 
the requested information. Given the circumstances surrounding the completion of her 
first application, her sense of feeling stressed to quickly submit it, and her current 
awareness of the importance of full disclosure to the Government, the likelihood that 
Applicant would fail to disclose requested information in a future e-QIP is unlikely. Her 
conduct no longer casts doubt on her trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. 
The evidence establishes mitigation under AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant’s husband is aware of 
the security concern, reducing her vulnerability to exploitation or duress, should that 
information become known to the public. AG ¶ 17(e) provides some mitigation.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent, 58-
year-old employee of a defense contractor since 2014. She is effective in her position. 
She has a history of financial difficulties dating back to before 2007, many of which 
occurred after a divorce and encountering medical problems for which she did not have 
insurance. After obtaining an administrative position, she began to slowly establish a 
track record of resolving old debts. She fully mitigated the security concerns raised by 
past financial problems. Based on the circumstances surrounding the completion of her 
first e-QIP, her credible testimony regarding her state of mind at the time she submitted 
the e-QIP and demeanor, she also mitigated the security concerns raised by her 
personal conduct.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubts as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant met her 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for financial 
considerations and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.p:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
   
                                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
