 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00530 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 7, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on September 22, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
responded with a letter and copies of tax returns that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A and B. The case was assigned to me on December 21, 2015. The Government 
exhibits included in the FORM and AE A and B are admitted in evidence without 
objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He seeks to retain 
his security clearance. He is married with three adult children.1   
 
Applicant left steady employment in 2006 to open his own business. The 
business failed, and Applicant stated that he was living on credit cards. He returned to 
his former employer in 2007, where he still works.2   
 
 Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in February 2009. 
Under Schedule D, Creditors Holding Secured Claims, the petition listed $103,150 in 
claims. The petition listed a $6,500 debt to the IRS under Schedule E, Creditors Holding 
Unsecured Priority Claims. Under Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority 
Claims, the petition listed debts totaling $67,477.3   
 
 The approved bankruptcy plan called for 60 monthly payments of $432 for 
months 1 to 6, followed by $455 payments for months 7 to 60. The plan included 
payments of $100 per month to the IRS during months 9 to 60. The plan also included 
car loan payments of $56 for months 1 to 8, followed by $236 payments for months 9 to 
60. Applicant’s $757 mortgage-loan payments were to be made outside the plan.4   
 
 In April 2011, the court granted, without objection, the trustee’s motion to modify 
the plan. The modified plan called for a $4,406 payment in May 2010 (month 15), 
followed by $455 payments for months 16 to 25 and $921 payments for months 26 to 
60. The $921 payments were to begin in April 2011.5   
 
 The record is unclear as to why the bankruptcy plan was modified. Applicant 
indicated that “there was some controversy with the attorney.” The bankruptcy was 
dismissed in April 2012 after the trustee took action to remedy Applicant’s and his wife’s 
default. The trustee reported that Applicant paid $23,492 into the plan, of which $4,434 
went to the bankruptcy attorney and the trustee, and $19,057 was disbursed to 
Applicant’s creditors, including $2,789 to the IRS and $6,599 to Applicant’s car loan.6   
                                                          
1 Item 3.  
 
2 Items 2, 3; AE A.  
 
3 Items 2-5.  
 
4 Item 5.  
 
5 Item 5.  
 
6 Items 2, 3, 5; AE A.  
 
3 
 
The SOR alleges the dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy case, a $3,983 debt to 
the IRS, and three delinquent debts totaling about $20,600. Applicant denied owing the 
IRS, indicating the debt was paid. He admitted owing the remaining three debts. The 
debts are listed on an August 2014 credit report; however, Applicant is only reported as 
an authorized user of the $8,991 credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d.7     
 
 Applicant paid the back taxes owed to the IRS. He stated that he has been 
receiving lump-sum settlement offers from the credit card companies. He stated that he 
was saving up and he intended to use his income tax refund to pay the settlements. He 
also wrote: “I am not trying to get out of my responsibilities. I am and have always 
worked hard. I plan to continue working hard to pay these debts off.”8   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
7 Items 2, 4.  
 
8 Items 2-5; AE A, B.  
 
4 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Applicant is only an authorized user of the $8,991 credit card debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.d. That allegation is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s business failed in about 2007. He and his wife filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy case in February 2009, and paid $23,492 into the plan before the 
bankruptcy was dismissed in April 2012. It is unclear why the plan was modified and 
why Applicant and his wife defaulted on the plan. He has since paid the IRS, but little 
else is known about the current state of his finances other than that he stated that he 
intends to pay his debts. The Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay off debts in 
the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible 
approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)).  
 
There is insufficient evidence in the record for a determination that Applicant’s 
financial problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay 
all his debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are 
partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is only applicable to the 
paid IRS debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. I find that financial considerations concerns remain 
despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
