 
1 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----------------------    )  ISCR Case No. 15-00986 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges eight delinquent debts totaling 
$46,447, discharge of his nonpriority, unsecured debts under Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
Code in 1997, and dismissal of his Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in October 2012. He failed to 
provide sufficient evidence about his finances and demonstrate enough progress 
resolving his SOR debts after October 2012. Financial considerations security concerns 
are not mitigated. Access to classified information is denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On April 30, 2014, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire 
for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 3) On September 21, 2015, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865,  
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. Specifically, the SOR set 
forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. 
 
2 
 
 
On October 8, 2015, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he 
requested a decision without a hearing. On January 31, 2016, Department Counsel 
completed the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On February 5, 2016, Applicant 
received the FORM. On February 26, 2016, DOHA received Applicant’s response to the 
FORM. On February 29, 2016, Applicant responded to the FORM. The Government’s 
case consisted of nine exhibits. (Items 1-9) On April 4, 2016, the case was assigned to 
me. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted all of the SOR allegations. He also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted 
as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor since 
1997.2 In 1974, he graduated from high school. He did not attend college. He has never 
served in the military. He has never married, and he does not have any children. There 
is no evidence of security violations or disciplinary actions by his employer.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, SF 86, 
bankruptcy schedules, and SOR response. His SOR alleges: ¶ 1.a describes discharge 
of his nonpriority, unsecured debts under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code in 1997; ¶ 
1.b details dismissal of his Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in October 2012; ¶ 1.c is a charged-
off bank debt for $11,338; ¶ 1.d is a collection-bank debt for $9,706; ¶ 1.e is a charged-
off credit card debt for $1,544; ¶ 1.f is a charged-off credit card debt for $991; ¶ 1.g is a 
charged-off bank debt for $880; ¶ 1.h is a charged-off credit card debt for $5,642; ¶ 1.i is 
a charged-off bank cred-card debt for $10,675; and ¶ 1.j is a charged-off bank credit 
card debt for $5,671. 
 
In his April 30, 2014 SF 86, Applicant disclosed that he filed for bankruptcy 
protection to address debts totaling $76,500. (Item 3) Applicant received financial 
counseling as part of the bankruptcy process. He generated a budget as part of the 
bankruptcy process. (Schedules I and J) His monthly gross income was $5,852; his 
monthly net income was $3,673; his monthly expenses were $3,133; and his net 
monthly remainder was $540. (Schedules I and J)   
 
In April 2011, the trustee issued the bankruptcy plan requiring $548 monthly 
payments with 34 percent allocated to general unsecured creditors. (Item 5) As of 
August 2012, Applicant was $3,288 behind on his payments to the bankruptcy trustee. 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph and the next paragraph 
is Applicant’s April 30, 2014 Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86). 
(Item 3) 
 
3 
 
(Item 5) When the Chapter 13 Bankruptcy was dismissed in December 2012, the 
trustee’s report indicated: creditors sought $48,491; attorney fees were $2,025; 
expenses of administration were $2,302; and creditors were allocated $4,812, which 
included $2,000 for priority payments. (Item 5)  
 
The file lacks documentary evidence from creditors that after the trustee’s 
distribution in December 2012, Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, 
or otherwise resolved any of the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR. The record 
lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of any 
other mitigating information and the effect on his current financial situation. The FORM 
noted that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a 
documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or 
explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional 
information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 3)  
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant said that he made his payments for 18 
months under his Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan.3 He told his bankruptcy lawyer that he 
could not afford to continue the payments under his Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan 
because he moved, and his rent and utilities increased. He stopped his payments to the 
Chapter 13 trustee, and his bankruptcy was dismissed. His lawyer told him “not to do 
anything but wait to hear from creditors.” He said he paid off one debt; however, he did 
not provide any information about the debt he paid. He said he has not heard from any 
of his other creditors. He pays his rent and utilities on time. His debts are not due to 
gambling, drugs, or alcohol. There is nothing in his background that would cause him to 
be subject to extortion or coercion. He has held a security clearance for several years. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
                                            
3The source for the information in his paragraph is Applicant’s FORM response. 
 
4 
 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SF 86, SOR response, bankruptcy schedules, and 
FORM response. Applicant’s SOR alleges, and he admitted eight delinquent debts 
totaling $46,447, discharge of his nonpriority, unsecured debts under Chapter 7 of the 
Bankruptcy Code in 1997, and dismissal of his Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in October 2012. 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
6 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to all of his SOR debts; however, he presented 
some important mitigating information. He said he made payments for 18 months into a 
payment plan under Chapter 13 of the Bankruptcy Code. However, that bankruptcy was 
dismissed in October 2012.  
 
Applicant did not provide enough details about what he did to address his SOR 
debts after the trustee issued his report and distributed funds in December 2012. 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation relating to his SOR debts after 
December 2012: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, 
photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any 
payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or from any creditors to establish 
maintenance of contact with creditors;5 (3) credible debt disputes indicating he did not 
believe he was responsible for the debts and why he held such a belief; (4) attempts to 
negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was 
attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution of his 
debts.  
 
Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) for any specific SOR 
debts because he did not provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
dispute or the result of the dispute. There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant 
was unable to make greater progress resolving more of his SOR debts. There is 
insufficient assurance that his financial problems are being resolved, are under control, 
                                            
 
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
and will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, he failed to meet his burden 
and establish that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor since 
1997. In 1974, he graduated from high school, and he did not attend college. He has 
never served in the military. He pays his rent and utilities on time. His debts are not due 
to gambling, drugs, or alcohol. There is nothing in his background that would cause him 
to be subject to extortion or coercion. He has held a security clearance for several 
years. There is no evidence of security violations or disciplinary actions by his employer. 
He disclosed his financial problems on his SF 86. 
 
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant’s SOR 
alleges, and the record establishes: eight delinquent debts totaling $46,447; discharge 
of his nonpriority, unsecured debts under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code in 1997; 
and dismissal of his Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in October 2012. He did not provide 
corroborating or substantiating documentary evidence of payments to his SOR 
creditors, payment plans, or his communications to those creditors after December 
2012. He did not provide documentation showing his attempts to resolve any of his SOR 
debts in good faith after December 2012. The evidence of record shows lack of financial 
responsibility and judgment and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. 
More information about his inability to pay debts, financial history, or documented 
financial progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
 
8 
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented 
resolution of his past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his 
obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude that financial consideration concerns are not mitigated, and it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance 
eligibility at this time. Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
