 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01439 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
August 14, 2014. On September 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 5, 2015,1 and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on January 27, 2016. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on February 4, 2016, and replied with 
a written response (AE A) and a pay document (AE B). He did not assert any objections 
to the Government’s evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 9, 2016. 
Government exhibits (Items 1 to 3) and Applicant exhibits (AE A and AE B) are admitted 
into evidence without objections. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant failed to file and pay federal and state income taxes 
from 2009 to 2013. The SOR alleges he owes approximately $60,000 in federal tax 
delinquencies and $8,000 in state tax delinquencies. Applicant admitted all the 
allegations in the SOR, and provided a written response to the SOR2 and the FORM, 
along with a copy of his pay stub.3 The evidence submitted with the FORM 
substantiates the SOR allegations.4 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old and employed as a pipe fitter for a defense contractor 
since September 2014. He was previously self-employed as a consultant to a medical 
company from 2004 to 2014. He completed college in 1985 and is unmarried.5 
 
Applicant failed to file and pay federal and state income taxes from 2009 to 2013.  
Additionally, he admitted that he also failed to file his 2014 tax returns when due. He 
stated he intends to file the 2014 and 2015 tax returns by April 2016.6 Applicant asserts 
that his failure to file and pay taxes resulted from the added responsibility he assumed 
when he began to care for his sister and niece after his sister lost her job and attempted 
suicide. He did not indicate when this occurred or how much financial assistance he 
provided. Applicant made assertions in his 2014 SF 86 that he was meeting with an 
accountant to complete his tax returns and make payments under a payment plan.7 In 
                                                     
1 Item 1. 
 
2 Item 1. 
 
3 AE A and B. 
 
4 Items 1-3. 
 
5 Items 2 and 3. 
 
6 AE A. Failure to file 2014 federal and state tax returns on time was not alleged in the SOR. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
his November 2014 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview, he made similar 
assertions, stating he had taken no action to pay his tax delinquencies but he was in the 
process of preparing his tax returns and intended to settle his tax debts with use of 
funds in a 401k retirement plan.8 
 
Applicant stated in his Answer to the SOR that “in one week” he will request to 
have additional funds withheld from his paycheck per week for federal ($50) and state 
($25) taxes. In addition, he asserted that he intended to send $9,000 to the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) and $10,000 to the state tax authorities to apply toward his tax 
debts. Finally, he stated he intended to withdraw $32,000 from his retirement fund by 
January 2016 and apply it toward his tax debts.9 
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he modified his withholding 
as stated above beginning in 2015. He provided a pay stub from February 2016 
showing the additional $75 withheld for taxes, but there is no documentary evidence to 
show the starting date of this action. He also stated that he intends to file his 2014 and 
2015 tax returns by April 2016. He then will gather necessary documents to file his 2012 
and 2013 returns, and then will begin the process for the remaining returns. He also 
claimed that he intended to withdraw the 401k funds, but was hoping the value of the 
account would increase before he made the withdrawal. 
 
No documentary evidence has been submitted to support any actions with regard 
to filing and paying past-due taxes except for the change to Applicant’s tax withholding 
from his pay. There is no evidence that he has contacted federal or state tax authorities 
to determine his tax liabilities, and to negotiate and pay the delinquencies. Additionally, 
there is no evidence Applicant has obtained credit counseling or budgeting education. I 
was unable to evaluate his personal credibility, demeanor, or further inquire into his tax 
and financial status since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                     
8 Item 3. 
 
9 Item 1. 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.10 The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of the evidence.11 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.12 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
10 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
11 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security 
clearance). 
 
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 Applicant failed to file federal and state tax returns from 2009 to 2013, and has 
long-standing delinquent tax debts that he is unable or unwilling to resolve. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
6 
 
 Applicant has been employed full-time since at least 2004, but failed to file and 
pay federal and state taxes. Although he alleges additional financial burdens to care for 
his niece and sister in their time of need, insufficient evidence has been submitted to 
explain the period of time involved and the impact on Applicant’s ability to file and pay 
taxes. Applicant has provided no documentary evidence to show resolution of the debts 
except to show that he has increased his tax withholding from his pay. The efforts made 
to date are insufficient to show that the problem is being resolved or his financial issues 
are under control. He has been complacent about addressing these long-standing tax 
issues and apparently has not made the first step of filing past-due tax returns and to 
contact the tax authorities to determine what he owed and establish a plan to repay. 
Promises of future actions are insufficient to mitigate financial security concerns. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems are being or will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to 
file his returns and pay his tax debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They 
continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
None of the above mitigating conditions are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence, facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of fact and 
comments under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. 
 
Overall, the record leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the 
financial considerations security concerns. 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
