 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-05252 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Remand Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 14, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on 
the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
September 1, 2015. On October 2, 2015, Applicant responded to the FORM and 
provided additional documents. Her Response to the FORM and attached documents 
are admitted as Item 7. Department Counsel indicated no objection to Applicant’s 
Response to FORM on November 7, 2015. (Item 8) On November 9, 2015, the FORM 
was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on November 17, 2015. I did 
not admit Item 4, a summary of the Applicant’s background investigation interview, 
because it was not authenticated in accordance with the Directive, ¶ E3.1.20. On 
February 3, 2016, I issued a decision denying Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
2 
 
 
On April 13, 2016, the decision was remanded to me because Applicant believed 
that Item 4 “provided a context for her debts as well as budgetary information, [and] 
would be considered unless she explicitly objected.” The DOHA Appeal Board 
remanded the case to me for the limited purpose of considering Item 4 and then issuing 
a new decision. Based upon a review of the pleadings, and exhibits, to include Item 4, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admits the SOR allegations. (Item 2)    
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to obtain a security 
clearance. She has worked for her current employer since December 2014. From 
November 2010 to December 2014, Applicant worked the same position for a different 
contractor. She changed employment in December 2014 because another contractor 
was awarded the contract. She is a high school graduate and has some college credit. 
She served in the United States Army from June 1997 to July 2002, separating with an 
honorable discharge.  She is married. She and her husband have been separated since 
1999. She has two daughters, ages 17 and 14. (Item 3; Item 4 at 2-3)   
 
On May 31, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts, Applicant listed several delinquent accounts. (Item 3, section 26) A 
subsequent background investigation revealed the following delinquent accounts: three 
student loan accounts placed for collection in the amount of $5,641, $5,263, and $1,526 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d: Item 6 at 1-2); a $2,210 online university account placed for 
collection (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 5 at 8; Item 6 at 2); a $1,166 account placed for collection 
(SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 6 at 2); and a $915 debt owed to a townhome rental agency placed for 
collection. (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 6 at 2) 
 
Additional debts include: a $626 debt placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 6 at 
2); a $545 account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 6 at 2); a $498 charged-off 
credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 6 at 2); a $158 cable television account placed for 
collection (SOR ¶ 1.j: Item 6 at 2); a $145 utility account that was charged off (SOR ¶ 
1.k: Item 6 at 2), and a debt with no balance alleged that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.l: 
Item 6 at 3)  
 
Applicant was interviewed under oath on May 20, 2015. The summary of the 
interview was prepared by the investigator who interviewed Applicant. Applicant did not 
have the opportunity to review the summary of the interview or to swear or affirm its 
accuracy. Applicant forgot to mention on her security clearance questionnaire that she 
received a position of public trust clearance when she worked for her previous employer 
that was later upgraded to a Secret clearance. (Item 4 at 4) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
During the May 2015 interview Applicant discussed 11 delinquent debts. Nine of 
the 11 debts were alleged in the SOR. They are summarized as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c, $2,210 charged-off debt owed to an online University: The account 
was charged off in July 2011.  The debt was a student loan for classes that Applicant 
attended from August 2009 to July 2010. Applicant intended to contact the creditor on or 
before June 2015 to make payment arrangements. (Item 4 at 4) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d, student loans in the respective amount of $5,263 and 
$1,526:  The loans were deferred. In October or November 2014, Applicant received a 
notice that the loans were in collections. She claims she was not informed that the 
deferment period had ended. All of her student loan accounts were consolidated. The 
balance as of May 2015 is $12,593.19. Applicant agreed to a payment plan of $5 per 
month for one year. In October or November 2015, her student loan repayment plan will 
be re-evaluated. Her payments will likely increase at that time. (Item 4 at 5)  
 
Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant also consolidated some additional 
student loans that were in deferment with another lender. In February 2015, the total 
balance was $21,466. In February 2015, Applicant began making payments of $68 per 
month. She states that she has been current on her payments towards this loan. (Item 4 
at 5)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e, $1,166 charged-off credit account:  Applicant believed this debt was 
a personal loan. She does not specifically recall the account, but does not deny that it is 
her debt. She planned to contact the creditor in June 2015 to set up payment 
arrangements. (Item 4 at 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f, $915 debt owed to the landlord of the previous townhome she rented 
which was placed for collection:  When Applicant moved out of the townhome, instead 
of paying for someone to clean the townhome, she cleaned it herself. After she moved 
out, the townhome contacted her and told her that she owed $500 because she did not 
do a good job of cleaning the apartment. Applicant intends to contact them in June 2015 
to set up a payment plan. (Item 4 at 6)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h, two credit card accounts placed for collection in the 
respective amounts of $628 and $545: Applicant mentioned to the investigator that she 
was contacted by the collection agency collecting on these accounts. In May 2015, she 
completed a form sent by the collection agency acknowledging the debt and to schedule 
payment arrangements. She was waiting to be contacted by the collection agency. (Item 
4 at 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j, $158 cable and internet bill placed for collection:  Applicant told the 
investigator she is not aware of this debt. Her cable and internet account transferred 
with her when she moved to a new property. Her account is current. She was going to 
look into the debt and if the debt is legitimate, she will pay the debt in full. (Item 4 at 6)  
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k, $145 charged-off electric bill:  Applicant moved out of a townhouse in 
June 2014 and did not pay the final electric bill because she believed her initial deposit 
would pay the electric bill. She mentioned that she intended to pay this bill in full in May 
or June 2015. (Item 4 at 5) 
 
As of May 20, 2015, the date of the interview, Applicant’s monthly gross income 
was $3,520. Her net monthly income was $2,824. She received $213 in monthly child 
support. Her total monthly income was $3,037.  Her monthly expenses include: rent 
$840; utilities $200; car insurance $74; groceries $240; gas $120; Netflix $13; and 
allowance for her children $120. Her total monthly expenses are $1,607.  Her monthly 
debt payments consist of cell phone $134 and student loans $73. Her total monthly 
debts are $207. (She did not include any of her delinquent debts.) After expenses, she 
has $1,223 left over each month. Her car is paid off. (Item 4 at 7) 
 
Applicant hopes to be debt free by 2017. Her oldest daughter will be starting 
college in two years. She wants to be able to help pay for her daughter’s college 
education. Applicant focused on getting her car paid off. Now, she is focused on paying 
off her student loans. She used to focus on helping family members with their medical 
bills and giving money to her church. She would receive a bill in the mail and would put 
it aside because she was giving money to her family members. She would forget about 
the bill. She admits to being careless with her bill management which has created her 
adverse delinquent accounts.  She is taking ownership of her accounts and putting her 
finances first. (Item 4 at 7)  
 
In her response to the SOR, dated August 14, 2015. Applicant states that she 
consolidated her student loans in different groups with the exception of the debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c. She claims that her loans are no longer in delinquent status and she is 
working to correct this on her credit report. She provided statements of three student 
loan accounts which indicate the first payment is due on August 15, 2015. She did not 
provide any proof that she made the first payment. It is unclear whether the three 
student loan accounts in question are the same as the student loan accounts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d.  Applicant intended to pay the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k on 
September 19, 2015 and the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j on October 16, 2015. Aside from 
the student loans, she hopes to resolve all of her debts by 2017. (Item 2)  
 
Applicant states that she is taking credit counseling classes and is taking charge 
of her finances. She is not living above her means. She is just catching up on past debts 
and not incurring new debts. She is teaching her daughters money management so 
they will be responsible adults. (Item 2 at 4)  
 
In her response to the FORM, dated October 2, 2015, Applicant again says she 
has taken steps to pay off her debts.  The three student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, and 1.d are consolidated. She consulted a consumer credit counseling program 
and consolidated four of her collection accounts into a debt repayment program. She 
entered into an agreement on October 2, 2015. It is unclear which four debts alleged in 
the SOR are included in the repayment agreement because the listed creditors in the 
 
5 
 
 
repayment agreement are different from the debts alleged in the SOR. A reasonable 
inference is that the debts were transferred to other collection agencies. Based on the 
similar balances of the debts it appears the debts might be SOR ¶¶ 1.f – 1.i. (Item 7) 
Applicant also provided a receipt indicating she paid $292 towards a student loan on 
September 18, 2015. (Item 7 at 2) 
 
Applicant mentions again that she is teaching her children to live on a budget 
without applying for loans or borrowing money from family and friends. Her goal is to be 
debt free by 2017. She will continue to make payments as scheduled. (Item 7)  
 
The status of the delinquent debts are: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d, Student loans with respective balances of $5,641, 
$5,263, and $1,526: Applicant claims the accounts are now current and they are now 
consolidated. In her response to the SOR, she provided statements of the Repayment 
Schedule of three different student loans with balances of $1,434.79, $5,028.20, and 
$5,388.79. The first monthly installment for each account was to begin on August 15, 
2015. It is unclear if these are the same student loans.  Applicant provided a receipt that 
a $292 payment was made on September 18, 2015. It is unclear whether she has 
continued to make timely payments. (Item 2 at 5-7; Item 7 at 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c, $2,210 charged-off account owed to an on-line university: Status of 
repayment is unknown.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e, $1,166 charged-off account: Status of account is unknown.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f, $915 debt owed to townhouse community placed for collection: Debt 
appears to have been included in a debt-repayment plan on October 2, 2015. There is 
no evidence that Applicant is making regular payments towards the debt-repayment 
plan. (Item 7 at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g, $628 account placed for collection: Debt appears to have been 
included in a debt-repayment plan on October 2, 2015. There is no evidence that 
Applicant is making regular payments towards the debt-repayment plan. (Item 7 at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h, $545 account placed for collection: Debt appears to have been 
included in a debt-repayment plan on October 2, 2015. There is no evidence that 
Applicant is making regular payments towards the debt-repayment plan. (Item 7 at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i, $498 charged-off credit card account: Debt appears to have been 
included in a debt-repayment plan on October 2, 2015. There is no evidence that 
Applicant is making regular payments towards the debt-repayment plan. (Item 7 at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j: $158 cable-television account placed for collection: In her Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant expressed her intent to pay this debt on October 16, 2015. No proof 
was provided that this debt was paid. (Item 2 at 4) 
 
6 
 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k: $145 utility bill placed for collection. In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant expressed her intent to pay this debt on September 18, 2015. No proof was 
provided that this debt was paid. (Item 2 at 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l: a charged-off account with an unknown balance: It appears this 
account is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e.  I find for Applicant with regard 
to this debt.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
7 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial problems since about 2013.  The SOR alleges $14,640 in student 
loan debt and seven consumer debts with a total balance of $4,055. Both AG &19(a) 
and AG &19(c) apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
 
8 
 
 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control); and 
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts). 
 
AG & 20(a) does not apply. Applicant has incurred delinquent debt for about 
three years. She just recently entered into repayment agreements for her student loans 
and some of her debts. It is too soon to conclude that she will meet the terms of her 
repayment agreements. In the budget she provided during her background investigation 
interview on May 20, 2015, Applicant had $1,223 left over after expenses each month, 
yet she did not apply this extra money towards her delinquent debts. Applicant’s 
inattentiveness to her delinquent financial obligations raises questions about her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) does not apply because Applicant did not provide information about 
whether circumstances beyond her control contributed to her financial problems. She 
did have any periods of unemployment. While Applicant is a single mother (having been 
separated from her husband since 1999) who is provided sporadic child support, she 
has lived with this issue for a long time. Applicant is given partial credit in that she is 
now attempting to deal with her financial situation after neglecting it for several years. 
She is beginning to act responsibly towards her financial obligations.  
 
AG & 20(c) partially applies in that Applicant sought out financial counseling and 
recently entered into debt repayment plans. However, it is too soon to conclude that her 
financial situation is now under control. She has not developed of track record of making 
consistent payments towards her debts.   
 
9 
 
 
AG & 20(d) partially applies because Applicant demonstrated she made a good-
faith effort towards bringing three of her student loans current, and entered into a debt- 
repayment agreement which included four of her accounts. It is unclear which of the 
four accounts in the SOR are included in this agreement. Based on the balance owed, 
they appear to be the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f – 1.i.  Applicant recently entered into 
both repayment agreements. A question remains as to whether she will follow through 
with the payments. Applicant claims to have paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k. She 
provided no proof that these debts were paid. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.j 
and 1.k remain unresolved.  While Applicant is beginning to make a good-faith effort 
towards resolving her delinquent debts, it is too soon to conclude that she will be 
successful.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, she failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances and 
facts that would mitigate financial considerations security concerns. While Applicant 
provided evidence that she recently began to resolve her delinquent accounts, she did 
not provide evidence that she is making timely consistent payments towards her 
repayment agreements. Applicant did not mitigate the concerns arising from financial 
considerations. 
 
 The determination of an individual’s eligibility for a security clearance is not a 
once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying 
and mitigating to the evidence presented. Under Applicant’s current circumstances, the 
granting of a security clearance is not warranted. In the future, if Applicant meets the 
terms of her repayment agreements and establishes a track record of resolving her 
 
10 
 
 
delinquent debts, she may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security 
worthiness.  
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s service in 
the United States Army, her honorable discharge, and her employment record. I 
considered she is a single mother of two teenage daughters. While Applicant is taking 
action towards resolving her delinquent accounts, it is too soon to conclude that her 
financial situation will remain under control. In the future, she may be able to 
demonstrate of track record of resolving her financial obligations. It is too soon to make 
this conclusion at this point. The security concerns raised under financial considerations 
are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.l:      For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
