1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-00780 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 30, 2014. On 
August 22, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 23, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
December 2, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on January 6, 2016. On January 
13, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that 
2 
 
the hearing was scheduled for February 3, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, which were 
admitted without objection.1 I kept the record open until March 3, 2016, to enable 
Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX D through 
I, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
February 11, 2016. 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to file federal and state income 
tax returns as required by law for tax years 2012 and 2013 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and1.b). It also 
alleges two delinquent collection accounts for $687 and $114 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d). 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding SOR ¶ 1.e, alleging 
that Applicant was indebted to his mother-in-law for delinquent child-support payments 
totaling approximately $3,600. Applicant did not object to the amendment, and I granted 
Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 54-55.) 
 
 Department Counsel also moved to amend the SOR to allege that Applicant 
deliberately failed to file federal and state income tax returns for tax year 2014. I denied 
the motion. (Tr. 56.) 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b and denied 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated 
in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old laborer employed by a federal contractor since May 
2014. He graduated from high school in May 2002 and worked at various private-sector 
jobs until he began his current job. He was unemployed from October 2012 to July 
2013. He held a part-time job as a surveyor from July 2013 to May 2014. He has never 
held a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant married in April 2007 and separated in August 2010. He has resided 
with a cohabitant since May 2014. He has a ten-year-old daughter for whom he is 
obligated to pay child support. He and his wife have not divorced because they cannot 
afford the legal fees. (Tr. 31-32.) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant also proffered a bundle of receipts related to his unfiled income tax returns. The documents 
were originals and he had not made copies for the record. I marked the bundle of documents as AX C but 
did not admit them. I instructed Applicant to make copies of whatever documents he wanted me to 
consider and send them to me by March 3, 2016. (Tr. 20, 62-63.) He did not resubmit the documents. 
Consequently, there is no AX C in the record. 
3 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he disclosed that he had not filed income tax 
returns or paid the taxes due for tax years 2012 and 2013. He estimated that he owed 
$500 in taxes but had been unable to pay them due to lack of funds. He also disclosed 
a delinquent cellphone bill for about $600 that had been referred for collection. (GX 1 at 
34-36.) His June 2014 credit bureau report (CBR) reflected the cellphone debt and an 
insurance debt. (GX 2 at 4.)  
 
 Applicant testified that he, his wife, and his mother-in-law have joint custody of 
his daughter and that he agreed to pay child support of $200 per month to his mother-
in-law, with whom his daughter resides. The custody arrangement was signed by all 
three parties and filed with the local juvenile and domestic relations court. (AX H.) The 
written agreement does not specify the amount of child support. Applicant testified that 
he agreed to pay $200 per month, but that he had not made the agreed payments for 
about 18 months. (Tr. 32-33, 42-43, 48-51.)  
 
 In his post-hearing submission, Applicant submitted documentary evidence that 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c had been settled for less than the full amount. (AX E at 
2.) He also submitted documentary evidence that his account with the insurance 
company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was current. (AX G.) He submitted evidence that he had 
made one $200 child-support payment to his mother-in-law on February 29, 2016. (AX 
I.) He had not filed his overdue tax returns by the time the record closed on March 3, 
2016. (AX D.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
4 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
5 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his June 2014 CBR establish three disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”), 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”), and AG ¶ 19(g) (“failure to 
file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing 
of the same”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially 
applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not fully established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are not 
numerous, but they are recent and were not incurred under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s marital breakup and periods of 
unemployment and underemployment were circumstances beyond his control. He acted 
responsibly by settling the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. However, he still has not filed 
his overdue tax returns, and he failed to pay child support for 18 months. He made one 
belated child-support payment after the hearing, realizing that his arrearage was an 
impediment to obtaining a security clearance.  
6 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has not received financial counseling 
and his child-support arrearage is unresolved. He has obtained tax advice but has not 
yet filed his overdue returns. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. His belated $200 
child-support payment is insufficient to show a good-faith effort to carry out his 
obligation. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. Applicant has not disputed any of the debts alleged in 
the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his child-support arrearage and unfiled tax returns. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
  
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
