 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00259 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by the delinquent debts she incurred 
after a marital separation. She responsibly addressed her financial situation by reducing 
her monthly expenses, contacting her overdue creditors, and resolving her debts. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On July 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that her 
circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a determination based on the 
administrative (written) record. 
  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On October 26, 2015, Department Counsel prepared its written case, a file of 
relevant material (FORM), and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the pleadings, 
Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA), a summary of her security clearance 
background interview, and an August 2014 credit report; which were admitted into the 
record, without objection, as Exhibits 1 – 5.  
 
 On November 25, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals received 
Applicant’s response to the FORM (Response). The Response has been marked Ex. 6 
and, without objection, was admitted into the record.2 On January 20, 2016, I was 
assigned Applicant’s case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, who is in her mid-twenties, is an administrative assistant for a federal 
contractor. She served in the U.S. military on active duty from 2009 to 2012, receiving 
an under honorable conditions (general) discharge. She held a security clearance while 
in the military. After leaving the military, Applicant was unemployed for about 20 
months, except for about two months when she held a job as a cashier at a fast-food 
restaurant. She was hired by her current employer in approximately mid-2014.  
 
 Applicant married in 2010. She and her husband separated in 2014, shortly after 
the birth of their only child. At the time, Applicant’s husband was the higher wage 
earner. Despite this, he is not providing Applicant with financial support or paying his 
share of the marital debts. She is bearing the financial responsibility of raising their 
child. Their divorce is pending. Applicant notes that the part of the reason for the divorce 
is her estranged husband’s financial irresponsibility. 
 
Applicant incurred a number of debts while unemployed and underemployed. 
She disclosed her troubled financial situation on her SCA. She then discussed her 
finances, including her past-due debts, during her background interview.  
 
Applicant moved in with her mother a few months before she and her husband 
legally separated. This allowed Applicant to reduce her monthly expenses. She 
provided documentary proof of having paid the SOR debts referenced at 1.a, 1.b, and 
1.h, totaling $5,157. (Ex. 1; Ex. 6 at 8-9, 13.) She also provided documentary proof that 
she is making monthly payments towards the $1,675 in medical debts referenced in 
SOR 1.c and 1.d. (Ex. 6 at 10.) She has consistently disputed the $903 cell phone bill 
alleged in 1.f since first becoming aware of it during her background interview in 2014. 
She contacted the creditor and filed a written dispute contesting the debt. (Ex. 4 at 5; 
Ex. 6 at 11-12.) She is currently liable for the balance owed on her estranged husband’s 
car. The car was repossessed after her husband stopped paying the monthly loan 
payments. This car-related debt is alleged at SOR 1.e and 1.g. The debt has been 
charged off by the creditor. 
 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s receipt of the FORM and Department Counsel’s submission noting the Government had no 
objection to Ex. 6 are included in the record as File Exhibits I and II, respectively. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant has addressed six of the eight SOR debts. She convincingly states that 
if the car-related debt is not resolved through the divorce, she will contact the creditor 
and work out a payment arrangement. She provided documentary proof of paying her 
major monthly expense, her child’s daycare bill, in a timely and consistent manner. (Ex. 
6 at 3-7.) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s recent financial problems raise the financial considerations security 
concern. The record evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems stem from unemployment and underemployment, 
which was then exacerbated by the separation from her husband. Notwithstanding 
these matters, Applicant has taken positive and concrete steps to address her financial 
 
5 
 
 
situation. She reduced her monthly expenses by moving in with her mother. She 
resolved or is resolving six of the eight SOR debts. Although some debts remain, she is 
living within her means and addressing her debts as her finances allow. The remaining 
SOR debts do not undercut the significant efforts she has made to take control of her 
finances and satisfy her overdue creditors. Furthermore, her demonstrated track record 
of debt repayment provides sufficient assurance that she will resolve any remaining 
debts and continue to manage her finances in a manner expected of clearance 
holders.3 AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e) apply.  
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to classified information.4 Applicant met her burden.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my 
comments under Guideline F, and note some additional whole-person factors. Applicant 
has been upfront and candid about her troubled financial situation since the start of the 
security clearance process. Applicant’s honesty and responsible action in addressing 
her financial circumstances mitigate the security concerns at issue. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about her eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence)        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:         For Applicant 
 
 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case 14-00504 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2014) (adverse decision reversed, because by addressing and 
resolving about half of the SOR debts applicant had demonstrated that s/he possessed the degree of 
reliability and trustworthiness contemplated by Guideline F).  
 
4 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
