 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02231 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or the personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 22, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). 
DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 21, 2015, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 29, 2015. The FORM 
was mailed to Applicant, who received it on January 14, 2016. The evidence included in 
the FORM is identified as Items 4-7 (Items 1-3 include pleadings and transmittal 
information). Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She chose not to submit any additional evidence 
or object to the proffered Government evidence. Items 4-7 are admitted into evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on March 29, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted all the allegations. Those 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact.1 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. She is single with no children. She has worked for her 
current employer, a defense contractor, since July 2014. No record of high school 
education is listed in the record, but it does contain information indicating she attended 
training to receive a commercial driver’s license in 2010. She was steadily employed 
from 1998 to 2014 with either commercial employers or a state employer.2  
  
 The SOR lists four judgments in the amounts of $8,011; $4,192; $15,734; $924 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d); one government debt, subject to a garnishment order in the amount 
of $9,042 (SOR ¶ 1.e); four charged-off or collection accounts for credit cards or 
consumer goods in the amounts of $8,272; $6,188; $5,694; $4,313 (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.h-1.j); 
two telecommunication collection accounts in the amounts of $1,406 and $1,191 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.y-1.z); and 22 delinquent medical debts totaling $15,721 (SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.k-1.x, 
1.aa-1.gg). These debts are supported by credit reports from August 2014 and February 
2015, and Applicant’s admissions.3  
  
 The personal conduct allegations include deliberately providing false information 
while completing her security clearance application (SCA) in July 2014 by failing to 
affirmatively respond to questions asking whether she had any financial account or 
credit card charged off or cancelled for failure to pay, and whether in the past seven 
years or currently she was over 120 days delinquent on any account (SOR ¶ 2.a). 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the debts and the falsification. 
She explained the debt situation by stating she went through a difficult period when her 
mother passed away of cancer on Christmas Day (she does not give the year, but it was 
before 2014, based upon her SCA) and her father died in a house fire the following 
August. She had extensive absences from work because of these circumstances, which 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 3. 
 
2 Items 4-5. 
 
3 Items 1, 3, 6-7. 
 
 
3 
 
 
ultimately led to her dismissal because of absenteeism. She stated she struggled to pay 
her bills during this time. Many of the debts, including the filing of three judgments, 
occurred in 2010. There is no evidence that she took action to set up payment plans. All 
the debts remain outstanding. Applicant did not present any information about her 
current financial status. She also did not provide evidence of any financial counseling.4 
 
 On August 31, 2014, Applicant completed her security clearance questionnaire. 
She answered “no” to a question concerning whether she had any account or credit 
card suspended, charged-off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed. She also 
answered “no” to the questions concerning whether she had been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt within the last seven years, and whether she was currently 120 
days delinquent on any debt. The answer to all those questions should have been “yes.” 
Applicant claimed she omitted this information because she did not have her records 
when she completed the SCA. She knew there were many debts, but she could not 
recall the details. She became overwhelmed by the questions and the information 
sought and omitted the information out of frustration.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
                                                          
4 Item 2. 
 
5 Items 2, 5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
  
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debts which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. She did not provide 
evidence to show that the debts are unlikely to recur. Her inaction toward these debts 
casts doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant provided evidence she experienced financial difficulties resulting from 
the death of her parents. However, in order for this mitigating condition to fully apply, 
Applicant must demonstrate responsible behavior in light of the circumstances. She 
failed to present evidence that she made any attempts to resolve her debts. I find AG ¶ 
20(b) partially applies. Applicant failed to present evidence of financial counseling. 
There is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or 
under control because the debts remain unpaid. There is no evidence that she has 
made a good-faith effort to pay the debts. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. She 
does not dispute any of the debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant failed to list delinquent debt information as she was required to do on 
her SCA. She acknowledged she was aware of the debts, but was overwhelmed by the 
questions and therefore gave negative responses. Because she was aware of the 
debts, and consciously decided to exclude them, I am persuaded that she deliberately 
failed to list her debt information on her SCA in 2014. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s 
falsifications. Falsifying information on a security clearance application is not a minor 
offense and doing so casts doubt on her trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not shown a track 
record of financial stability. The record lacks evidence that Applicant has made an 
overall good-faith effort to resolve her debts. She also deliberately provided false 
information on her SCA. Therefore, she failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate 
the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.gg:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
