 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-02412 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 20, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies and was convicted of driving 
under the influence of alcohol or drugs (DUI) in 2010. He failed to mitigate the financial 
consideration and alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 3, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 3, 2015, the Department of Defense 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 24, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 19, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 21, 2016, scheduling the hearing for March 2, 2016. The hearing was held 
as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was left open until April 6, 
2016, for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. Applicant did not present any further 
documentation and the record closed on April 6, 2016. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on March 9, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He has been employed with a Government contractor 
since August 2014. He was unemployed from April 2013 to August 2014, after he was 
terminated for cause by his previous employer. He served in the Navy from 1988 
through 1994 and achieved the rate of E6. He is married to his second wife and has four 
children. (GE 1; AE B.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance, in part, 
because he has made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise 
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. The SOR alleged that Applicant was delinquent in payments to four 
creditors, totaling $16,203. In his Answer, Applicant admitted SOR subparagraphs 1.a, 
1.b, and 1.c. He denied SOR subparagraph 1.d, because he was unaware of that debt. 
All of the delinquencies were listed in credit reports dated September 11, 2014; 
February 27, 2015; January 4, 2016; and February 28, 2016. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.)  
  
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his unemployment from April 2013 
to August 2014. He testified he was terminated by his employer in 2013, after he failed 
a urinalysis. He claimed he did not use illegal substances knowingly. However, his 
company had a zero tolerance policy and Applicant’s employment was terminated as a 
result of the positive drug test.  
 
 Applicant’s debts consist of the following: a delinquent credit card debt in the 
amount of $7,478 (SOR subparagraph 1.a), which has been delinquent since 2012; a 
vehicle loan, of which the remainder of $7,176 was placed for collections after the 
vehicle was repossessed and sold at auction (SOR subparagraph 1.b); another 
delinquent credit card debt in the amount of $1,473 (SOR subparagraph 1.c), which has 
been delinquent since February 2013; and a $76 debt owed to Applicant’s city of 
residence, which has been delinquent since 2012 (SOR subparagraph 1.d). Applicant 
testified that he intends to resolve all of his delinquencies, but that his current budget 
 
3 
 
does not allow for him to resolve these debts at the present time. He has little money 
left over after he meets his monthly expenses.  
  
Alcohol Consumption 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance due to his 
alcohol consumption. Applicant admitted SOR allegation 2.a. (Answer.)  
 
Applicant was arrested in October 2010 and charged with DUI. He had been 
drinking at a football game and consumed eight beers over a 10 hour period. He took a 
party bus from the game to his brother-in-law’s house. He waited a couple more hours 
and then attempted to drive his vehicle home. When he was stopped by the police for 
missing registration stickers, he was given a breathalyzer test. His blood alcohol content 
was 0.11%. He was arrested and later found guilty of DUI. Applicant was required to 
complete an 18-month 2nd offender program1; perform three days of community service; 
complete a victim impact panel; and pay fines and fees. He was placed on probation for 
five years. He completed all requirements of his sentence and he was released from 
probation. (AE A; GE 2; Tr. 24-29.) 
 
Applicant stopped drinking alcohol for two years after his DUI arrest. He now 
consumes approximately one alcoholic drink per month. He no longer consumes alcohol 
to the point of intoxication. (Tr. 28-29.) 
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant earned two Good Conduct Medals; four letters of Commendation; a 
Navy “E” Service Ribbon; a Sea Service Deployment Ribbon; a Southwest Asia Service 
Medal; and a National Defense Service Medal during his Navy service. He held a 
security clearance, without incident, from 1986 to at least 1993. (AE B.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
                                                          
1FBI records show Applicant was previously arrested and charged with a June 2002 DUI. It does not 
show the disposition of that charge. (GE 2.) This alcohol-related conduct will not be considered for 
disqualifying purposes under Guideline G, as it was not alleged, but will be considered when examining 
the mitigating evidence. 
 
4 
 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems, identified in allegations 1.a though 1.d, 
demonstrate that Applicant failed to address his financial obligations in a responsible 
manner for a four-year period from 2012 to present. The above disqualifying conditions 
apply. 
 
  Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial delinquencies, as alleged on the SOR, extend from 2012 or 
2013 to present, and remain unaddressed. Applicant lacks a track record of financial 
responsibility that would suggest future delinquencies are unlikely to occur. Given his 
past financial problems, I cannot find that future financial problems are unlikely to occur 
again. Applicant’s financial history continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant explained that his unemployment contributed to his financial 
delinquencies. However, he was unemployed after he was terminated after failing a 
urinalysis test, a situation which was not beyond his control. While Applicant contends 
 
6 
 
he was not using illegal substances, I find his claim incredible. Further, to be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant did not act responsibly by ignoring his delinquent debts since 
2013. AG ¶ 20(b) does not provide mitigation. 
 
 Applicant did not present evidence that he attended formal financial counseling. 
Further, he failed to present clear indications that his financial problems are under 
control or are being resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not mitigate the concerns. 
 
 Applicant did not present evidence to show that he formally disputed any 
allegations. AG ¶ 20(e) does not provide mitigation. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The disqualifying conditions raised by the evidence are: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.     
  
 Applicant was convicted of a DUI incident in 2010, after he consumed alcohol to 
the point of impaired judgment. The DUI incident raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 
22(a) and 22(c). 
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security 
concerns. The following mitigating conditions have been considered: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
 
7 
 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant has been arrested 
twice for DUI. His arrests span eight years. He was only recently released from 
probation. In this instance, not enough time has passed since his 2010 DUI, to find that 
it is unlikely that he will not drive after becoming intoxicated again. He is beginning to 
establish a pattern of responsible use, but it is too soon to conclude that Applicant fully 
established mitigation under the terms of AG ¶¶ 23(a) or 23(b). Although Applicant has 
participated in court-ordered alcohol treatment, he has a history of recidivism. He has 
not attended inpatient or outpatient counseling, or rehabilitation, or offered a favorable 
prognosis by a qualified medical professional since his 18-month court-ordered 
treatment was completed, and he resumed the use of alcohol. AG ¶¶ 23(c), and 23(d) 
do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. Applicant honorably served in the Navy and successfully held a security 
clearance for many years. However, he failed to acknowledge the seriousness of his 
financial situation. Further, he has been arrested twice for DUI. As a result, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated 
either the Financial Considerations or Alcohol Consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
