 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00814 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 19, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
indebted to four creditors in the approximate amount of $97,771. Applicant has been 
making regular payments on two of the debts. He has documented a rational basis for 
disputing the two remaining SOR-listed debts. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 26, 2014, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. On August 1, 2015, the 
Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 15, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 19, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for March 1, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was left open for 
Applicant to submit additional exhibits and on March 24, 2016, Applicant presented six 
additional exhibits marked AE B through AE G. Department Counsel had no objection to 
AE B through AE G and they were admitted. The record then closed. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 7, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a government contractor. He has worked 
for his employer since 2013. He served on active duty with the Air Force from 1984 to 
1986. He served on Active Duty with the Navy from 1986 to 2006. He retired in 1986 
with an honorable discharge at the rank of commander. He held a security clearance for 
32 years, without incident. He is married and has three children. (GE 1; Tr. 14-17, 29-
31.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant was indebted to four creditors in the approximate 
amount of $97,771. Applicant admitted SOR subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c. and 1.d in his 
Answer, with clarifications. He denied the debt in SOR subparagraph 1.b. His debts are 
listed in an incident report and the credit reports entered into evidence. (Answer; GE 2; 
GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
 SOR subparagraph 1.a alleged that Applicant was $34,028 past due on a home 
equity line of credit. Applicant fell delinquent on this debt in 2012. He documented that 
he has been making payments on this debt since 2013. The balance has decreased to 
$23,394.81 as of March 2016. Applicant is resolving this debt. (AE C; Tr. 24-26, 31-36, 
48.) 
 
 SOR subparagraph 1.b alleged that Applicant was indebted on a collection 
account in the amount of $28,794. This debt is held by the same creditor identified in 
subparagraph 1.a. Applicant contests this debt. He presented a letter from this creditor 
that indicated the debt identified in subparagraph 1.a “is currently the only debt that you 
owe to [creditor.]” Applicant has provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
this dispute. (AE B; AE C; Tr. 24-26, 31-36, 48.) 
 
 SOR subparagraph 1.c alleged that Applicant was indebted to a for-profit 
educational institution in the amount of $8,091. Applicant disputes this debt, as noted on 
his Equifax credit report. He documented that he made payments on this debt in 2014 
and 2015 that were not credited to his account. He has the funds to fully resolve this 
debt, but will not remit them until the creditor responds to his inquiries as to why his 
account has not been properly credited with his previous payments. Applicant is acting 
responsibly with respect to this debt. (AE E; Tr. 26-27, 37-40.) 
 
3 
 
 SOR subparagraph 1.d alleged that Applicant was indebted to the Federal 
Government on a tax lien entered against him in April 2013 in the amount of $26,858 as 
a result of a mistake he made on his 2008 federal income tax return. Applicant testified 
he has a payment agreement with the IRS to resolve this debt through monthly 
payments of $250. He presented documentation showing he successfully made $250 
payments in December 2015, January 2016, and February 2016. He further claimed to 
have been making payments for the past two-and-a-half years. He documented his 
balance has declined to $18,300.81. Applicant is resolving this debt. (AE A; AE F; Tr. 
27, 41-42.) 
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquencies to the failure of a construction business he 
started in 2004. The investor in the project withdrew in 2006 due to the downturn in the 
economy, leaving Applicant with a significant amount of debt. He did his best to remain 
solvent, including listing his home for sale in 2010. However, it did not sell. Applicant 
focused on resolving his debts through payments and was able to pay off a significant 
amount of debt over time, as reflected in his credit reports. His most recent credit report 
shows he is not getting further into debt and is working diligently to address all of his 
remaining delinquencies. (GE 6; Tr. 14-17, 44-48.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
 
4 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant became delinquent on three financial obligations totaling $68,977, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d. Applicant’s home equity line of credit 
was delinquent for six months in 2012. He became delinquent on his tuition in 2011. He 
erred on his 2008 Federal income tax return which caused a debt to the Federal 
Government of $26,858, and a tax lien to be filed in that amount in 2013. The 
Government established that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations 
 
5 
 
with respect to these three debts, which established a case for disqualification under 
Guideline F. 
 
 The creditor for SOR subparagraph 1.b, however, has indicated that Applicant is 
not indebted on that account and I find it was incorrectly reported on Applicant’s credit 
report. 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial obligations. The following are applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties are unlikely to occur again and they do not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Since the downturn in 
the economy and the failure of his construction business in 2006, he has diligently 
worked to repay his creditors. He is currently repaying two of his three remaining 
creditors on a monthly basis. Over the past few years, he has resolved $10,633 on the 
home equity line of credit, and $8,557 on his Federal tax debt. He is acting responsibly 
with respect to these debts. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) was 
established with respect to SOR subparagraphs 1.a and 1.d. 
 
 Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) is established with respect to SOR subparagraphs 
1.b and 1.c. The creditor in subparagraph 1.b verified that the credit report entry was in 
error. With respect to subparagraph 1.c, Applicant provided documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of his dispute. In this instance, he is acting reasonably by 
withholding payment until he is sure that the funds he remits will be properly credited to 
 
6 
 
his delinquent account. He has the funds available to fully resolve this debt once the 
creditor will allow him to do so. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant 
honorably served in the military for 22 years. He held a security clearance for 32 years, 
without violation. He has acted responsibly by addressing his debts. There is little 
likelihood of recurrence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
