1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-02115 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on July 17, 2014. On 
September 29, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 23, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
December 10, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on January 6, 2016. On January 
14, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that 
2 
 
the hearing was scheduled for February 4, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 9 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which were 
admitted without objection. I kept the record open until March 4, 2016, to enable him to 
submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX D through F, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on February 12, 
2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d, 1.f, 1.h-1.r, 1.v-
1.z, 1.bb-1.dd, and 1.hh-1.jj. He denied SOR ¶ 1.e, 1.g, 1.s-1.u, 1.aa, and 1.ee-1.gg. 
His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old pipefitter employed by defense contractors since 
January 2013. He worked for a defense contractor from September 2011 to March 
2012. He has held a second job as a security officer since February 2012. He held non-
federal jobs from August 2008 to January 2012, with a two-month period of 
unemployment in August-September 2011. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy 
from November 1995 to March 2003 and received an honorable discharge based on 
medical disability. (Tr. 32.) He held a security clearance from January 1996 until it was 
revoked in April 2013 because of his financial problems. (GX 2 at 45-46; GX 4 at 4.) 
 
 Applicant married in February 1999, and his marriage was annulled in March 
2000 because his first wife was already married to someone else. (Tr. 34.) He married 
in June 2003 and divorced in July 2008. He married again in November 2008. He and 
his third wife separated in October 2014, and they expected their divorce to be granted 
at the end of February 2016. (Tr. 28.)  
 
Applicant has a 12-year-old son from his second marriage, for whom he is 
obligated to pay child support of $400 per month. He is in arrears for about $6,548, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.y. His child-support payments are now collected automatically from 
his pay, at the rate of $129 per week, with about $116 being applied to the arrearage. 
(AX B; Tr. 35-36.) He has two stepdaughters, ages 23 and 25, who are the daughters of 
his third wife. (Tr. 51-52.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he works two jobs, and he depended on his third wife to 
pay the bills and file their income tax returns. She did neither. Instead, she filed a 
bankruptcy petition solely in her name. When she discovered that she could not 
proceed with her bankruptcy until their income tax returns were filed, she filed their 2012 
federal income tax return. Applicant was notified in September 2014 that he owed about 
$8,000. He contacted the Internal Revenue Service and negotiated a payment plan for 
$200 per month. He has been making the payments since November 2014 (AX A; Tr. 
35-39.) This debt was not alleged in the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant testified that he was unsure about the basis for the judgment alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. He admitted the debt in his answer to the SOR, but he has taken no action 
to identify, resolve, or dispute the debt. (Tr. 46.) 
 
 Applicant testified that the judgment for unpaid rent alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was 
incurred by one of his stepdaughters and that she had resolved it. He did not provide 
any documentation to support his testimony. (Tr. 46-47.) 
 
 Applicant testified that the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was for the deficiency 
after his third wife’s car was repossessed. It is being collected by garnishment of his 
pay. (Tr. 49-50; GX 9.) 
 
 Applicant testified that the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f was for unpaid rent on 
an apartment for another stepdaughter. Applicant co-signed the lease, and his 
stepdaughter failed to pay the rent. (Tr. 51-52.) This debt is included in the collection 
account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.v. (Tr. 57.) 
 
 Applicant denied the judgment for a delinquent credit-card account alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e and the delinquent credit card accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.s. He 
testified that he has never had any credit cards until recently, when he obtained a 
secured credit card account. (AX C; Tr. 53.) His testimony is contradicted by the credit 
bureau reports (CBRs) submitted by Department Counsel. The February 2005 CBR 
reflected a credit card issued by the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s that was placed for 
collection and then closed at his request, with the last activity occurring in March 2001. 
(GX 5 at 4.) The April 2012, August 2014, and February 2015 CBRs reflect the charged-
off credit card alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g and another credit card issued by a different credit 
grantor that was closed by the grantor in April 2004 and not alleged in the SOR. (GX 6 
at 5-6; GX 7 at 6, 10; GX 8 at 2,4.)  
 
 Applicant testified that the deficiency after a car repossession alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.h occurred after he bought his second wife a car in his name and she failed to make 
the payments. He admitted that he is liable for the debt, which is unresolved. (Tr. 45, 
54.) 
 
 Applicant admitted the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i-1.o, 1.q, and 1.bb-
1.dd. Four of the medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.q and 1.bb-1.dd) are for less than $100. He 
testified that the debts were the result of his third wife’s medical problems. They are 
unresolved. (Tr. 54-55.) 
 
 The delinquent cellphone account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p was incurred by 
Applicant’s second wife. It is unresolved. (Tr. 55.) 
 
 Applicant testified that the satellite television account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.r was 
incurred during his third marriage and became delinquent because his wife failed to pay 
it. It is unresolved. (Tr. 55-56.) 
 
4 
 
 Applicant denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.t and 1.u in his answer to the 
SOR and at the hearing. He has done nothing to validate or dispute these debts. (Tr. 
56.) 
 
 The delinquent cellphone accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.w and 1.x are duplicates. 
The debt was incurred during his third marriage. It is unresolved. (Tr. 57-58.) 
 
 Applicant denied the collection accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.ee-1.gg in his 
answer to the SOR and at the hearing. He has done nothing to validate or dispute them. 
(Tr. 60.) 
 
 Applicant admitted the jewelry store debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.hh. He has taken no 
action to resolve it.  
 
 Applicant admitted the garnishments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.ii and 1.jj. The 
garnishment in SOR ¶ 1.ii is being collected at the rate of $350 per pay period. (GX 9.) 
He testified that the garnishment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.jj was to collect a penalty for early 
termination of a lease, and that it has been satisfied. (Tr. 48.) He did not submit any 
documentation to support his testimony that it was satisfied.  
 
Applicant has not disputed any of the debts alleged in the SOR. He testified that 
he did not know how to file a dispute and that he thought he needed a lawyer to do so. 
(Tr. 66-67.) 
 
 Applicant’s net monthly income from his primary job is about $3,700. He earns 
about $1,300 per month from his second job as a security officer. (Tr. 41-42.) He 
testified that his net monthly remainder after paying his rent and living expenses is 
about $2,000. (Tr. 62.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
5 
 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
6 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The cellphone debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.w and 1.x appear to be the same debt. 
When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of 
the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 
03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). I will resolve SOR ¶ 
1.w for Applicant. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the CBRs establish two disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 
19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). AG ¶ 19(g) (“failure to file annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the 
same”) may not be an independent basis for denying Applicant a security clearance 
because his failure to file his federal income tax return for 2012 was not alleged in the 
SOR. However, it may be considered to assess Applicant=s credibility; to decide whether 
a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether he has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
7 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant has encountered conditions largely 
beyond his control: his multiple marital breakups, two months of unemployment in 2011, 
and the medical expenses incurred by his third wife. The failure of his second wife to 
make the payments on her car was not a condition beyond his control, because he 
voluntarily obtained the financing in his name. The failures of his stepdaughters to pay 
their rent were not conditions beyond his control, because he voluntarily co-signed their 
leases. If family members opened credit-card accounts in his name, their fraud would be 
a condition beyond his control. However, he has not refuted the evidence in the CBRs, 
nor has he shown evidence of identity theft. The failure of his third wife to file his federal 
income tax return for 2012 was not a condition beyond his control; it was a product of 
his inattention to his financial responsibilities. In any event, he has not acted responsibly 
toward most of the debts alleged in the SOR. He has acted responsibly toward his 
federal income-tax debt and his child-support obligation, but he has done virtually 
nothing to dispute, settle, or otherwise resolve the other delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR. 
 
 SOR ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has not sought or received financial 
counseling, and his financial situation is not under control. 
 
SOR ¶ 20(d) is established for the child-support arrearage alleged in SOR 1.y 
and the federal income-tax debt that is not alleged. It is not established for the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.ii, and 1.jj, because collection by involuntary garnishment “is 
not the same as, or similar to, a good-faith initiation of repayment by the debtor.” ISCR 
Case No. 09-5700 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2011), citing ISCR Case No. 08-06058 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 21, 2009). 
 
 SOR ¶ 20(e) is not established. Although Applicant denied owing the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g, and 1.s, he submitted no evidence to support his denials, and he has 
not disputed the debts with the original creditors or the credit reporting agencies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
8 
 
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.v, 1.x, and 1.z-1.jj:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.w and 1.y:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
