KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The record shows that Department Counsel advised Applicant that she had 30 days
from receipt of the FORM to submit documents “setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation,
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate.”  Applicant’s copy of the FORM was accompanied by
a DOHA cover letter, which advised Applicant of her right to submit objections “or any
additional information you wish to be considered.”   The DOHA official enclosed a copy of the
Directive, which explains an applicant’s rights in detail, and he advised Applicant how she could
access the Directive on line. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-00092.a1
DATE: 04/08/2016
DATE: April 8, 2016
In Re:
-----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-00092
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 17, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On January 28, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Roger C. Wesley denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant had been adequately
apprised of her right to submit evidence and whether the Judge failed to consider all of the evidence
in the record, resulting in a decision that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent
with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor in a job she has held since August 2014.  She
served in the National Guard from 1993 to 2002.  Between late 2010 and early 2014, Applicant
acquired numerous delinquent debts that are still outstanding.  She provided documentation for her
dispute of one of the SOR debts. She claimed to have disputed two others but provided no
corroboration.  Applicant’s delinquent debts resulted from chronic health problems at a time when
she was uninsured.  She also states that a divorce impaired her financial condition.  Applicant
documented some payments to creditors, although it is not clear whether they are for debts listed in
the SOR.  Her reply to the File of Relevant Material (FORM) does not shed light on this difficulty. 
Applicant provided no performance evaluations or evidence of community contributions.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that the record is not clear as to the extent to which Applicant’s divorce and
lack of insurance played an important role in her debts.  He stated that she had not provided
sufficient evidence of responsible action in regard to her debts, in any event.  The Judge observed
that most of Applicant’s documented payments were to creditors other than those in the SOR.  He
concluded that Applicant’s security concerns are not resolved through a whole-person analysis,
insofar as the mitigating evidence in the record was limited.
Discussion
Applicant states that she could have submitted performance evaluations, if she had known
that it was appropriate.  The record shows that Department Counsel advised Applicant that she had
30 days from receipt of the FORM to submit documents “setting forth objections, rebuttal,
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate.”  (emphasis added)  Applicant’s copy of the
2
FORM was accompanied by a DOHA cover letter, which advised Applicant of her right to submit
objections “or any additional information you wish to be considered.”  DOHA Letter, dated
September 22, 2015.  The DOHA official enclosed a copy of the Directive, which explains an
applicant’s rights in detail, and he advised Applicant how she could access the Directive on line. 
Under the circumstances, the record shows that Applicant was adequately advised of her right to
submit evidence in her own behalf.  While the various communications from DOHA personnel did
not specifically mention performance evaluations, these communications were sufficient to have
placed a reasonable person on notice as to the general extent of an applicant’s right to present
evidence.  Applicant was not denied adequate notice of her rights.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-
11221 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 19, 2013). 
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence, citing to her efforts
at debt resolution, her military service, etc.  The Judge made findings about this evidence.  His
ultimate conclusion that Applicant had not provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the concerns in
her case is consistent with the record that was before him.  Applicant has not rebutted the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Neither has she shown that
the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06093 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2015).
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  It is an applicant’s job to present evidence sufficient to mitigate the concerns raised in his
or her case, and the applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion that he or she should be
granted a clearance.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had not met her
burden of persuasion is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.      
Signed: Michael Ra’anan               
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields               
William S. Fields
3
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
