 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01191 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 14, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is alleged to be delinquent on 13 debts in the total amount of $20,221. 
All 13 delinquencies remain unresolved. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 8, 2014, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP.) On September 15, 2015, the Department of Defense 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
On October 2, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 7, 
 
2 
 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 10, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf. The record was left open for receipt of documentation until February 17, 2016. 
Applicant failed to submit any documentation and the record closed on February 17, 
2016. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 19, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He is a high school graduate and has attended some 
college. He has been employed by his current employer, a defense contractor, since 
2013. He served on active duty in the Navy from 2002 to 2004. He achieved the rank of 
E-3. He has been divorced twice and has one minor child. His most recent divorce was 
finalized February 10, 2014. (GE 1.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on 13 debts in the 
total amount of $20,221. Applicant admitted the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.c, 1.i, and 1.j. He denied the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.h, and 
1.k through 1.m. His debts are identified in the credit reports entered into evidence. 
(Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant’s debts consist of: a delinquent vehicle loan in the amount of $8,204 
(SOR ¶ 1.a); a delinquent furniture loan in the amount of $4,078 (SOR ¶ 1.b); a 
delinquent credit account totaling $2,563 (SOR ¶ 1.c); six delinquent medical accounts 
totaling $1,427 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.g, 1.k, and 1.l); a delinquent debt owed to 
television service provider in the amount of $89 (SOR ¶ 1.h); a credit union debt in the 
amount of $2,000 (SOR ¶ 1.i); a delinquent credit card debt of $1,391 (SOR ¶ 1.j); and a 
collection agent for a cell phone provider in the amount of $469 (SOR ¶ 1.m). These 
debts became delinquent between 2011 and present. They continue to remain 
delinquent. He has not resolved or formally disputed any of his delinquent debts. (Tr. 
18-32; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4.)  
 
Applicant testified that he wanted to fix his credit but did not know how to resolve 
his debts because the creditors wanted more than he could afford on his limited income. 
He has not been in recent contact with his creditors. Applicant attributed his debts to his 
second ex-wife. (Tr. 18-19, 25.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
 
3 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
4 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by the credit 
reports in evidence that substantiate all of the allegations. He has been unable or 
unwilling to address his delinquencies and has not had recent contact with the majority 
of his creditors. The evidence raises security concerns under both of these disqualifying 
conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. He has 13 unresolved delinquent 
accounts, as identified on the SOR. He has not demonstrated that future financial 
problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
5 
 
 Applicant blamed his financial problems on his second divorce and ex-wife. His 
divorce may have been a circumstance beyond his control. However, he failed to act 
responsibly under the circumstances, and did not address his debts in a timely manner. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been fully established. 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling. Further, there are no 
clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. All 
of his SOR-listed debts remain unaddressed. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) has not been 
established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. While Applicant 
denied some of his debts in his Answer because he did not recognize them, he has not 
provided evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) 
has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant 
honorably served in the Navy for two years. His financial problems are partially 
attributable to his recent divorce. However, he is a mature adult and responsible for his 
choices and financial obligations, and he lacks the resources to fully address his 
voluntarily incurred debts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security 
concerns.  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
