 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED VERSION )  ISCR Case No. 11-10903 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
raised by his prior Russian military service, his then possession of a Russian clearance, 
and having immediate family members who are citizens and residents of Russia. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant provided an affidavit on February 17, 2011; submitted a security 
clearance application (SCA) on September 1, 2015; was interviewed by a government 
investigator on October 21 and 23, 2015; and responded to interrogatories on May 21, 
2017. After reviewing the information gathered during the background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 24, 
2017, alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). Applicant 
answered the SOR on July 14, 2017, and requested a decision based on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence supporting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
August 11, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on August 29, 2017. He was allowed 30 
 
2 
 
 
days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, 
and mitigate the concerns. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
received Applicant’s response to the FORM (a one-page statement with five exhibits) 
on September 5, 2017. The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2017. There 
were no objections raised by either party, and I admitted and made part of the record all 
of the proffered documents. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of facts concerning 
Russia. (FORM, Item 5) There were no objections, and I took administrative notice as 
requested. The noted facts are in the administrative notice request and will not be 
repeated here. Some of the more important facts were noted in the decision (infra).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, and 1.h through 1.k. 
He denied the allegations in ¶¶ 1.c through 1.e, and 1.g. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old research electronics and software engineer. At the 
time of his 2015 SCA, he was working part time for a federal contractor while seeking 
clearance eligibility required for employment with a second federal contractor. He 
worked full time for a third federal contractor between 2000 and 2012. The U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security gave him access to confidential information in 2003. 
Applicant established his own business in 2007, and has worked part time on his 
business between 2007 and present.  
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Moscow, Russia. He joined the 
Soviet Union Army to achieve his educational goals. He served as an officer in the 
Soviet Army from 1982 to 1993. During his military service, the Soviet Army paid for his 
education. He completed bachelor’s and master’s degrees in 1987, and a postgraduate 
degree in 1993. Applicant, and the educational and research institutes he attended, 
were under the control of the Soviet’s military intelligence agency, and his work had 
intelligence and military applications. He held supervisory and leadership positions over 
fellow military and civilian researchers. While in the research institute, Applicant 
received three patents, two of which were financed by the Soviet Army. 
 
The Soviet Army investigated Applicant’s background in 1982, and granted him a 
secret clearance. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Applicant resigned his 
position as an officer and “joined the civilian part of the field.” He stated that he never 
swore allegiance to the Russian Federation Army. 
 
Applicant entered the United States in 1995, and became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 2009. He maintains frequent telephonic and computer contact with his 
 
3 
 
 
relatives living in Russia and with his mother-in-law. Since immigrating to the United 
States, Applicant has frequently travelled to Russia for extended periods (between 
seven to thirty days) to visit family and friends. He visited Russia in 2002, 2004, 2006, 
2007, 2008 (twice), 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2015. Applicant applied for 
Russian citizenship for both of his children born in the United States.  
 
Applicant believes he relinquished his Russian permanent residency when he 
sold his Russian apartment in 2012. He maintains a valid Russian passport solely for 
the purpose to facilitate his travels to Russia. He claimed he only uses the Russian 
passport to visit Russia, and his U.S. passport to travel to any other country. He 
expressed his willingness to surrender his Russian passport as a condition of access.  
 
Applicant does not consider himself a dual U.S.-Russian citizen because the 
Russian government does not recognize any of his U.S. documents, and his allegiance 
lies with the United States. He and his family have no plans of returning to live in 
Russia. They plan to retire in the United States. He averred he and his family enjoy 
living an American lifestyle. He stated he is a loyal U.S. citizen.  
 
Applicant’s wife was born, raised, and educated in Russia. She worked for the 
Russian government when they met. They were married in 1993, and they have two 
children (ages 10 and 21), and a 27-year-old stepchild. She held her Russian 
citizenship until 2006, when she and her daughter became naturalized U.S. citizens. 
 
Applicant’s mother (age 73) and father (age 82) are residents and citizens of 
Russia. Both of them worked for the Soviet government in research centers in areas 
with intelligence and military applications. His father and his father-in-law were 
members of the Soviet Union’s Communist Party. His father held a sensitive leadership 
position in a research center. His mother-in-law (age 77) is a dual citizen of the United 
States and Russia. She worked for a sensitive Soviet government agency. 
 
Applicant’s sister, aunt, and two nieces are citizens and residents of Russia. He 
maintains contact with at least three Russian friends. At the request of a Russian friend 
with contacts with the Russian military, Applicant assisted a Russian company to obtain 
certain U.S. certifications for a foreign product.  
 
I take administrative notice of the following relevant facts concerning the Russian 
Federation (Russia). Russia has a highly centralized, authoritarian political system 
dominated by President Vladimir Putin. Although the United States has long sought a 
full and constructive relationship with Russia, current relations between the two old war 
allies appears to have again turned adversarial. In August 2017, the President signed 
into U.S. law sanctions targeting Russia for, in part, Russian interference in the 2016 
U.S. elections and Russia’s aggression in Ukraine, including its continuing unlawful 
annexation of Crimea  
 
In 2016, the then Director of National Intelligence reported to Congress that the 
leading state intelligence threats to the United States will continue to be Russia and 
 
4 
 
 
China, based on their capabilities, intent, and broad operational scope. A recent human 
rights report from the U.S. State Department reflects the commission of significant 
human rights violations in Russia, including restrictions on political participation and 
freedom of expression, electoral irregularities, and the lack of due process in politically 
motivated cases. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
 
5 
 
 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Russia. Applicant’s parents, sister, 
aunt, and two nieces are citizens and residents of Russia. His mother-in-law is a dual 
U.S.-Russian citizen residing in the United States. He is close to his parents, sister, and 
other relatives living in Russia. He visits them almost every year. Applicant has frequent 
contact with his parents, sister, and relatives living in Russia.1 He does not have any 
financial or property interests in Russia.  
                                            
1 See ISCR Case No. 09-03114 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2010) (contact once a month is 
considered to be “frequent” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8). 
 
6 
 
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection for 
his parents and sister as indicated by his frequent contact with them and his almost 
annual visits to Russia to visit them.   
 
Applicant’s relationships with residents of Russia create a concern about 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to 
help his relatives, who live in Russia. For example, if intelligence agents or government 
officials in Russia wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on 
his relatives residing in Russia. Applicant would then be subject to coercion through his 
relatives and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
An applicant’s possession of close family ties with their family living in a foreign 
country are not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, its 
history of intelligence gathering, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing 
the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion 
or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the 
foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
collection operations against the United States. The adversarial relationship of Russia 
with the United States, and Russia’s “history of conducting espionage against the 
United States puts a heavy burden of proof on Applicant” to demonstrate that his 
relationships with family members living in Russia do not pose a security risk. See ISCR 
Case No. 12-04780 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2013).  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives from any foreign country seek 
or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
relatives living in Russia. Nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in 
 
7 
 
 
the future. Applicant’s relationships with family members living in Russia create a 
potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about his desire to assist relatives in Russia by providing sensitive or 
classified information.  
 
Moreover, Applicant’s parent’s, his in-laws, his wife’s, and his personal long-term 
relationships and connections to the Russian government and prior military service 
establish an inherent conflict of interest. Applicant, his parents, and his in-laws worked 
for the Russian government or the military in intelligence-related areas with military 
applications. He and his relatives are known in the Russian government and military 
circles. Applicant held leadership positions and a Russian secret clearance. He received 
three patents with funds provided to him by the Soviet government or the military. These 
connections create a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the Applicant’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information or technology.  
 
Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts or 
relationships with family living in Russia, raising the issue of potential foreign pressure 
or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are established and further inquiry is 
necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
 
8 
 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contact with 
his parents and sister, who are citizens and residents of Russia. He visits his relatives in 
Russia almost every year, and he has frequent telephonic or computer contact with his 
parents and her sister.  
 
Applicant’s loyalty and connections to family living in Russia are positive 
character traits. However, for security clearance purposes, those same connections 
negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c), and Applicant failed to 
fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with 
family living in Russia] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant’s relationship 
with the United States must be weighed against the potential conflict of interest created 
by his relationships with family living in Russia.  
 
There is no evidence that the Russian government or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family to coerce Applicant 
for classified or sensitive information. However, there would be little reason for U.S. 
competitors or enemies to seek classified information from an applicant before that 
applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access. 
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States – Russia adverse relationship. Applicant’s family living in 
Russia could become potential targets of intelligence agents because of Applicant’s 
support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential access to classified information 
could theoretically add some risk to Applicant’s family living in Russia.   
 
Applicant established significant connections to the United States since he 
immigrated in 1995, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2009. He has had more 
limited connections to Russia since 2009. Notwithstanding, his connections to his family 
 
9 
 
 
living in Russia are significant. Security concerns are not analyzed in a piecemeal 
assessment. Instead, the overall situation must be considered. Applicant’s close 
relationship to his relatives, who are vulnerable to potential Russian coercion, outweighs 
his connections to the United States in the security analysis. Moreover, Applicant and 
his family are personally vulnerable to coercion when he visits Russia, as he does 
almost annually. Foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B are not 
mitigated.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in 
my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under that guideline, 
but some warrant additional comment. 
There are some facts supporting a grant of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant, 53, entered the United States in 1995, and became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 2009. His wife and children are dual citizens of the U.S. and Russia 
residing in the United States. He has no investments in Russia. He offered to surrender 
his Russian passport, if necessary for him to obtain his access. He has successfully 
worked for a federal contractor for several years. Applicant offered his inventions and 
patents to the United States and federal contractors. He believes that such offer shows 
his complete freedom from foreign influence.  
Notwithstanding, Applicant’s Russian family connections, viewed in light of him 
having served in the Russian military, his education, his work in sensitive matters, and 
having held a Russian security clearance, outweigh the favorable evidence contained in 
the record. (See ISCR Case No. 14-04937 (App. Bd. December 6, 2016) (“there is a 
rational connection between service in a foreign military and access to a foreign 
country’s national secrets (which imposes a fiduciary relationship with that country) and 
susceptibility to pressure or persuasion to aid that foreign country at the expense of the 
U.S.) See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-00824 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 6, 2012) (Prior 
involvement with a foreign defense establishment or prior access to sensitive foreign 
military projects raises “significant questions that require scrutiny in evaluating an 
applicant’s security eligibility.”) 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning a foreign country must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation and dangers in that country including from intelligence agents.2 
The danger of coercion from the Russian government or intelligence agents is more 
likely than in many other countries. Russia competes with the United States militarily, 
diplomatically, and through trade. Russia has a history of espionage targeting U.S. 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
 
10 
 
 
military and industrial secrets. Russia and the United States have an adversarial 
relationship. 
The weight of the evidence supports denial of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant has close ties of affection and obligation to his immediate 
relatives who are citizens and residents of Russia. “It is not to question Applicant’s 
patriotism to acknowledge that the record in [Applicant’s] case raises the reasonable 
concern that [he] could be placed in a position of having to choose between [his] ties to 
the U.S. and [his] obligations to [his] foreign family members.” ISCR Case No. 07-02485 
at 5 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008) (reversing grant of security clearance because of Chinese 
connections). I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the foreign influence security 
concern. 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.k:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
