KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline L; Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant was given an opportunity to request a hearing and clearly responded that as
far as he was concerned the documentary record was sufficient.  There was no ambiguity in this
response, which placed the Judge on notice that Applicant had no objection to his consideration
of the existing transcript.  In any event, forum choice is a responsibility of the parties, not of the
Judge.  Moreover, if Applicant believed that a full and complete understanding of his
circumstances required his live testimony, it was his duty to request a hearing.  In a DOHA
proceeding, it is the applicant’s job to present evidence in mitigation of the concerns raised in an
SOR.  The Judge is an advocate for neither side and bases his Decision on the evidence
presented to him by the parties.  He has no independent duty to obtain additional evidence.
Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 12-10335.a2
DATE: 12/29/2017
DATE: December 29, 2017
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-10335
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Adam R. Webber, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 26, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), Guideline L (Outside
Activities), and Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On April 21, 2017, after the
hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Philip S. Howe
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
On July 21, 2017, we remanded the case.  On September 7, 2017, Administrative Judge Mark
Harvey issued a Decision on Remand, denying Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant again appealed pursuant to the Directive.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process; whether
the Judge’s findings contained errors; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guidelines B and L are not at
issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Beginning
around 2002, Applicant worked for a company, for which he attempted to market technology to the
DoD and other prospective partners.1  The company stopped functioning in 2007, and by 2010
Applicant and the company were deeply in debt, though by 2015 Applicant had paid off more than
$450,000.  Applicant’s debt now totals about $30,000.  
The company employed an accountant, who was responsible for preparing its tax returns as
well as Applicant’s.  This accountant was fired in 2007.  Applicant’s SOR alleges that he failed to
file his Federal and state tax returns in a timely fashion for tax years 2008 through 2011. Although
he hired a CPA to assist him, Applicant did not provide her all of the relevant information.  His
returns have subsequently been filed.  By the close of the record, Applicant still owes about $30,000
in Federal, state, and local taxes.
The SOR also alleges a debt of a little over $11,000 owed to a law firm for representation
provided during the course of a lawsuit in which the company was a party.  This account is in
collection.  Applicant states that this debt was owed by the company and not by himself, although
1Applicant testified that he started the company himself.  Tr. at 70.  
2
the creditor contends that Applicant is liable.2  This debt appears as Applicant’s on a credit report
by one of the three reporting agencies. 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to several things: that he lacked the financial
expertise to run the company; he provided financial support to his parents and in-laws; the death of
his son and resulting litigation; his own serious medical problems due to stress; fraud perpetrated
by an employee and accountant against the company; a groundless lawsuit filed against the
company; and modifications that Applicant made to his residence.
Applicant enjoys a excellent reputation for honesty, reliability, and trustworthiness.  He
called two witnesses at the hearing, one of whom was generally aware of the nature of Applicant’s
difficulties.
The Judge’s Analysis
Although he resolved most of the SOR debts in Applicant’s favor, the Judge entered adverse
findings regarding the two discussed above.  Though noting that some of the conditions that
contributed to Applicant’s financial problems were beyond his control, he concluded that others,
such as undertaking duties without the appropriate degree of financial expertise, were not. 
Concerning the debt to the law firm, the Judge stated that Applicant did not provide documents
about this matter, including a contract with the law firm or any correspondence with it.  He stated
that this debt is substantial and remains on Applicant’s credit report.  The Judge also noted that
Applicant had failed to file his tax returns in a timely fashion and to pay his taxes for several years. 
He acknowledged  evidence that Applicant’s returns have now been filed, but he concluded that this
was not sufficient to mitigate Applicant’s lengthy history of tax delinquencies.3
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to the testimony of Applicant’s character
witnesses that he is reliable, trustworthy, and honest, though too trusting of others.  He also noted
the progress that Applicant had made in resolving his delinquent debts.  However, he found that
Applicant had not demonstrated responsible action regarding the debt to the law firm.  He also stated
that Applicant had known about his obligation to file and pay taxes for several years but did not file
until late 2016.  He stated that Applicant’s having filed his returns shortly after the hearing in his
case was not sufficient to mitigate the concerns arising from them.
2“[Q]: Have you written them or otherwise communicated to them that you dispute the debt? [A]: I have called
them and I have written a letter.  And the response is, you still owe us this.”  Tr. at 122.  
3The Judge noted evidence that Applicant owed tax for 2012 through 2014, although this was not alleged in the
SOR.  He stated that he was considering this non-alleged tax debt in on the questions of mitigation, rehabilitation,
credibility, and the whole-person concept.  Decision at 12, note 7.  
3
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred by not convening a hearing upon remand.  As he
notes, after considering his original appeal, we remanded the case for the Judge to consider an
additional document.  We stated that, if the case were to be “remanded to a different Judge, he or
she should inquire of the parties whether a new hearing is required or whether the Judge can rely on
the transcript of the original hearing.”  ISCR Case No. 12-10335 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 21, 2017).  On
July 31, 2017, the Judge inquired through Department Counsel whether Applicant requested a new
hearing.  By email dated August 3, 2017, Applicant replied as follows:
We believe that the additional documents and the testimony and evidence adduced
[at the original hearing] is sufficient . . . That said . . . if your Honor believes that this
case will turn on a subjective assessment of [Applicant’s] credibility, sincerity,
honesty, loyalty, or dependability under the whole-person concept, we believe it
would be fitting and proper for your Honor to hear live testimony from [Applicant]
directly.  Hearing Exhibit 5.
Accordingly, the Judge decided the case on the existing record as supplemented by Applicant’s
additional documentary evidence.
Applicant now contends that the Judge erred by not convening a hearing.   He argues that
the Judge’s adverse decision includes an implicit negative credibility determination, which he should
not have performed without personally observing Applicant and hearing him testify.  He states that
an evaluation of his credibility and his live testimony were crucial to a proper resolution of the case
and that under the circumstances the Judge decided the case without all of the evidence.  
As Department Counsel observes in his Reply Brief, Applicant was given an opportunity to
request a hearing and clearly responded that as far as he was concerned the documentary record was
sufficient.  There was no ambiguity in this response, which placed the Judge on notice that Applicant
had no objection to his consideration of the existing transcript.  In any event, as Department Counsel
argues, forum choice is a responsibility of the parties, not of the Judge.  See Directive ¶¶ E3.1.4;
E3.1.7; E3.1.8.  Moreover, if Applicant believed that a full and complete understanding of his
circumstances required his live testimony, it was his duty to request a hearing.  In a DOHA
proceeding, it is the applicant’s job to present evidence in mitigation of the concerns raised in an
SOR.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The Judge is an advocate for neither side and bases his Decision on the
evidence presented to him by the parties.  He has no independent duty to obtain additional evidence. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01925 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 26, 2015). We conclude that Applicant
waived any right he had to a second hearing.  Applicant was not denied the due process afforded by
the Directive.     
To the extent that Applicant is challenging a purported credibility determination, the Judge
does not appear to have made one.  In fact, he made findings about the favorable character testimony
of Applicant’s witnesses, and he addressed that testimony in his analysis.  Nowhere in the Decision
does he express a view of Applicant’s character or credibility contrary to the opinions of these
4
witnesses. The mere fact that a Judge has entered an adverse decision does not mean that he found
the applicant to be lacking in credibility.  It is not inconsistent for a Judge to find an applicant to be
honest and believable but, nevertheless, reasonably to conclude that the applicant’s presentation is
not sufficient to meet his or her burden of persuasion as to mitigation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
05795 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2016).
Applicant argues that the Judge’s findings of fact contain errors.  For example, he argues that
the Judge erred in finding that he still owes about $30,000 in taxes.  The Judge based this finding
upon Applicant’s own evidence, a letter from his CPA, which avers a $37,000 debt to Federal, state,
and local tax authorities.  Applicant Exhibit Q, dated August 24, 2017.  The Judge credited
Applicant with a $7,300 payment for tax year 2011, of which he thought the CPA may have been
unaware, reducing the amount accordingly.  Decision at 6.  Even if the Judge erred in determining
the amount of Applicant’s tax debt as of the closure of the record upon remand, it did not likely
affect the outcome of the case.  His analysis relied in large measure not upon the precise amount of
such debt but, rather, upon the dilatory nature of Applicant’s efforts to address his tax problem.4  
See ISCR Case No. 15-03778 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2017) for the proposition that timing of debt
payments is relevant in evaluating an applicant’s case for mitigation.     
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he is responsible for the debt to the law firm. 
We note evidence that the firm holds Applicant responsible for the debt (see note 2, supra) and that
it appears as his liability on a credit report.  The contents of a credit report are normally sufficient
to meet the substantial evidence standard for allegations of indebtedness.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-03612 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015).  The Judge’s finding is a reasonable interpretation of the
evidence.  In any event, Applicant admitted that he signed the contract with this law firm on behalf
of the company.  Tr. at 121.  Business-related debts can have a bearing upon the judgment and
reliability of company officials who incurred them.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01231 at 4 (App.
Bd. Feb. 10, 2015).  Therefore, even if the Judge’s finding was erroneous, he could still reasonably
have found that the totality of circumstances underlying it raised concerns about Applicant’s
judgment.  Accordingly, any error did not likely affect the overall outcome of the case.  Applicant
has cited to no harmful error in the Judge’s findings.  The Judge’s material findings of security
concern are based upon substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn
from the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-00276 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2017).
The balance of Applicant’s brief is a challenge to the Judge’s weighing of the evidence. 
Among other things, he argues that the Judge should have extended greater weight to evidence of
Applicant’s personal circumstances.  However, we find no reason to conclude that the Judge
weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.   See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 15-08711 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 24, 2017).  The Judge examined the relevant evidence and
articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, both as to the mitigating conditions and the
whole-person factors.  A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as
4The Judge cited to Applicant’s “lengthy history of noncompliance” with tax laws.  “There is insufficient
evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater progress sooner in the filing of his tax returns [and] in the
payment of his tax debts[.]” Decision at 14.
5
filing tax returns and paying taxes when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good
judgment and reliability required of those granted access to classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 15-06707 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 15, 2017).  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also
Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
6
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
 
    
  
7
