 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05205 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela, C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 19, 
2014. On February 2, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued on or after 
that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 12, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 26, 2017, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant 
received it on June 13, 2017. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 
through 8. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not provide a response to the FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or 
submit documents. The case was assigned to me on September 26, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 7, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the 2014 background 
investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, which is required under ¶ 
E3.1.20 of the Directive.2 Likewise, Section 5(a) of Executive Order 10865 prohibits 
receipt and consideration of “investigative reports” without authenticating witnesses. The 
Directive provides no exception to the authentication requirement. Indeed, the 
authentication requirement is the exception to the general rule that prohibits 
consideration of an ROI.  
 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the 
authentication requirement. Nevertheless, the written record does not demonstrate that 
Applicant, who has not replied to the FORM, understood the concepts of authentication, 
waiver, and admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that he understood the 
implications of waiving an objection. Accordingly, given the lack of an authenticating 
witness, I have not considered the ROI in reaching my decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in his Answer to the SOR. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He has never married and has no children. He earned 
a high school diploma in June 1992, and he attended college classes in 2004, but did 
not earn a degree. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 1993 through 1997 
and received an Honorable Discharge. He also served in the U.S. Navy  Reserve for 
three months in 1998. He has been employed by his present employer, a federal 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
2 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.).  
 
 
3 
 
 
contractor, since June 2002. In his SCA, Applicant disclosed two part-time jobs in 
addition to his full-time employment for the period of March 2006 to March 2008. 
Applicant has been employed steadily since 2002, and he was granted a secret  
clearance in March 2004. On his SCA, Applicant disclosed that he moved in with his 
parents in February 2006 and lived with them for over a year in an effort to get his 
finances in order.  Applicant also listed that he moved in with his friend in August 2011 
after he was evicted from his apartment. He listed several delinquent debts on the SCA, 
and disclosed that he had been going out quite often, eating at casual dining 
establishments about 4-5 times a week.  He also listed that he had been taking 
vacations when he should have been saving money. Applicant acknowledged that he 
had not maintained his personal budget.3 
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit reports from 
March 2014, August 2015, and April 2017. Applicant admitted he owed the delinquent 
debts cited in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.m (ranging from $10,533 to $163; totaling $27,692). 
The largest debt, SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($10,533), is an unsecured financial installment account 
that was charged off as a bad debt in approximately 2013. The next two largest debts, 
1.d ($6,440) and 1.e ($3,148), are car loan accounts also charged off as bad debts. The 
SOR also alleged that Applicant had not filed his Federal and state income tax returns 
for tax year 2010.  Applicant admitted in his Answer that he had not yet filed these tax 
returns and that he also owed the state Department of Revenue $2,300. (See SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. and 1.b). Applicant also admitted that from 2005 to at least March 2013, he 
gambled to excess, which caused him to be delinquent on rent, utility bills, car loans, as 
well as personal loans he took out to pay off his delinquent debts during that time. (SOR 
¶¶ 1.n.)4 
 
I have inferred from Applicant’s SCA and his Answer to the SOR that his financial 
problems stem from periods of over-spending, gambling, and not maintaining a personal 
budget.  He listed on the SCA that he intended to obtain another part-time job to assist 
him with his mounting expenses. There is no evidence that he participated in any type 
of financial counseling. There is also no evidence to indicate that Applicant sought debt 
consolidation or had begun to address his delinquent debts.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
                                                          
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Item 1, 2, 5, 6, 8. 
 
5 Items 2, 4.  
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (f) failure to file…annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or 
 failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required. 
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulty beginning in 2002 even though he was 
working full time with his current employer in June 2002. His financial problems have 
continued despite Applicant working part-time jobs in addition to working full time for his 
current position. The delinquent debts alleged are unresolved. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant began experiencing financial problems in 2002 after recklessly 
spending money, gambling, and failing to live within his means. Applicant has numerous 
debts that remain unresolved. He has not provided proof that he has paid or resolved 
even the smallest debt in the SOR. His financial issues are ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s gambling and unrestrained spending were not conditions beyond his 
control. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant is enrolled in a credit service or undertaken 
financial counseling. There is insufficient evidence to show that he has made a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. He did 
not provide sufficient evidence to show he disputed the legitimacy of any of the 
delinquent debts alleged or provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of a 
dispute or evidence of actions to resolve the issues. Insufficient evidence was provided 
to apply AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 43 years old and had financial setbacks beginning in 2002, which 
caused him to move into his parents’ home in order to save money to pay mounting 
debts. He started working for his current employer in June 2002.  During March 2006 to 
March 2008, Applicant was working part-time jobs in addition to his full-time job.  He 
continued to accumulate debts due to reckless spending, gambling, and an inability to 
live within his means. Applicant did not file 2010 income tax returns or pay Federal and 
state taxes due to running late on his rent, paying past due bills, and dealing with a 
couple of vehicle repossessions.6  Insufficient evidence was provided by Applicant to 
conclude his debts are paid or being resolved, or that his Federal and state tax returns 
were filed or otherwise resolved. Applicant failed to show he is responsibly managing 
his finances. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
   
                                 
               
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6 Item 4. 
