 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06814 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. Applicant mitigated personal conduct security 
concerns; however he did not present sufficient information to mitigate criminal conduct 
and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 23, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator from the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on June 24, 2013. (Government Exhibit (GX) 
2, Personal Subject Interview (PSI)). After reviewing the results of the background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings 
required to issue a security clearance. On November 27, 2015, DOD issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for criminal 
conduct under Guideline J, personal conduct under Guideline E, and financial 
considerations under Guideline F. These actions were taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 15, 2015. He admitted five and 
denied three of the eight allegations of criminal conduct. Since the personal conduct 
allegations are cross-alleged from the criminal conduct allegations, Applicant admitted 
the personal conduct allegation. He admitted one and denied four of the financial 
considerations allegations.  
 
 Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 18, 2016, and I was 
assigned the case on February 15, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on July 20, 2017, for a hearing on August 16, 2017. 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered 15 exhibits that I marked 
and admitted into the record without objection as Government exhibits (GX) 1 through 
15. Applicant testified and offered one exhibit that I marked and admitted into the record 
without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A.  
 
 I received an e-mail from Applicant on October 3, 2017, which I marked and 
admitted as AX B. Applicant’s e-mail apologized for s his conduct at the hearing. I did 
not consider Applicant’s conduct as egregious or improper. I will consider the remorseful 
sentiments raised by Applicant in the e-mail in my decision. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 24, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant is 38 years old. He received his General Education 
Diploma (GED) in 1997. He never married, but he has a 14-year-old child. Applicant 
was unemployed from December 2002 until September 2011 except for two weeks in 
September 2006. He supported himself from disability payments. He is not presently 
employed, but he has a job offer as a desktop technician from a defense contractor. He 
never served in the military. Applicant presented a letter of thanks from a brigadier 
general for his support and work on a program he worked in 2002. (Tr. 21-23, 62-63; 
GX 1, e-QIP, dated September May 22, 2013; GX 2, Personal Subject Interview, dated 
June 24, 2013; AX A, Letter, dated January 25, 2002))  
 
The SOR alleges the following criminal conduct for Applicant; he was charged 
with and found guilty in July 1998 of theft of items less than $300 in value (SOR 1.a); he 
was charged with and found guilty of sale or distribution of marijuana in February 2002 
(SOR 1.b); a charge of possession of marijuana was nolle prossed in July 2005, (SOR 
1.c); he was charged with and found guilty of driving under revocation/ suspension in 
June 2006 (SOR 1.d); charges of sale and distribution of marijuana and distribution of a 
controlled substance were nolle prossed in July 2010 (SOR 1.e); he was found guilty of 
reckless driving and driving on a suspended license in June 2011 (SOR 1.f); he was 
found guilty of possession of marijuana in June 2011, (SOR 1.g); and the charges of 
 
3 
 
 
operating an unregistered vehicle and displaying vehicle license plates belonging to 
another vehicle were nolle prossed in February 2013 (SOR 1.h). The same conduct is 
also charged in one allegation of personal conduct under SOR 2.a. 
 
The government introduced court and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
records to verify the criminal charges. (GX 3 to GX 10) Applicant pled not guilty to the 
theft charge at SOR 1.a. He represented himself at trial. Applicant testified he went to a 
store to purchase a corn cob pipe, but discovered he did not have his wallet. He was 
going to the door of the store to signal a friend in his car that he needed his wallet. As 
he exited the door with the pipe in his hand, he was apprehended by store security. He 
was found guilty of a misdemeanor level theft offense and paid a fine. (Tr. 24-26; GX 3. 
Case Information) 
 
Applicant admitted in the PSI and at the hearing that he sold marijuana to a 
friend in February 2002. (SOR 1.b) He had been selling marijuana for about six months 
to make money. The police searched his house and discovered more marijuana. He 
was sentenced to three years confinement with all but 60 days suspended. He was 
placed on probation for three years. He successfully completed the period of probation. 
(Tr. 26-33; GX 2, PSI, dated June 24, 2013) 
 
Applicant was given a pack of cigarettes by a friend. The pack was in Applicant’s 
car. Police stopped Applicant for speeding. A search of his car revealed marijuana in 
the cigarette pack. Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana, but the case 
was not prosecuted. (SOR 1.c; Tr. 33-37; GX 2, PSI, dated June 14, 2013) 
 
Applicant admitted he was charged with driving on a revoked/suspended driver’s 
license in June 2006. He believes his driver’s license was revoked because he failed to 
pay a fine. He did not appear at the hearing, but was found guilty in absentia. He does 
not remember the punishment he received. (Tr. 37-38; GX 2, PSI, dated June 14, 2013 
at 2) 
 
Applicant admits he was arrested for sale and distribution of marijuana and 
unauthorized distribution of controlled paraphernalia in July 2010. (SOR 1.e) Police 
apprehended Applicant and two acquaintances as they sat in a car in front of the 
friend’s house. Police searched the car and found marijuana and a glass pipe in the car. 
The case was nolle prosssed. Applicant believes the case was dropped because of 
wrongful police action. (Tr. 38-41; GX 2, PSI, dated June 14, 2013, at 2) 
 
Applicant admits he was stopped for speeding and driving on a suspended 
license in June 2011. (SOR 1.f) He was arrested and taken to the local jail. When he 
was searched on in-processing, marijuana was found on his person. (SOR 1.g) He did 
not know the marijuana was on his person, but he pled guilty to a misdemeanor 
possession charge to avoid a felony conviction. He was sentenced to 30 days 
confinement. (Tr.41-46)  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant admits he was arrested for operating an unregistered vehicle, and 
displaying license plates issued to another car. (SOR 1.h) However, the dealership 
where he purchased the car inadvertently provided the wrong car information on the 
registration form. The charge was nolle prossed. (Tr. 46-47)  
 
The SOR also alleges, and credit bureau reports (GX 11, dated June 10, 2015; 
GX 12, dated October 29, 2014; GX 13, dated June 1, 2013; GX 14, dated January 5, 
2012) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a judgment for a bank for 
$4,439 (SOR 3.a); a credit card debt placed for collection for $1,415 (SOR 3.b); a credit 
card account placed for collection for $1,927 (SOR 3.c), and a credit card account 
placed for collection for $2,152 (SOR 3.d). The SOR alleges that Applicant filed a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2004 that was discharged in 2004. (SOR 3.e) 
Applicant stated that he received a traumatic brain injury when he fell down a 
flight of stairs in February 2002. He remained in the hospital for over 70 days incurring 
large medical bills. He was required to file bankruptcy because of the medical debts. 
(SOR 3.e) The debts were discharged in bankruptcy in 2004. (Tr. 51-54) 
Applicant has been unemployed, except for three or four months, for the last ten 
years. He receives about $1,800 a month in disability. He looked for work when 
unemployed and had many interviews. He believes that he was not offered a job 
because of his felony drug possession conviction. (Tr. 54-57) 
Applicant testified that he received fraudulent money orders as payment for two 
computers he sold. He deposited the money orders in his bank account and withdrew 
the funds. When the money orders did not clear the bank, he owed the bank for the 
funds he withdrew. The debt eventually grew because of penalties and interest. The 
bank obtained a judgment against Applicant. He has not made any payments to the 
bank on the debt. (Tr. 57-61) 
Applicant admitted at the hearing that he incurred the credit card debts at SOR 
3.b, 3.c, and 3.d because he was foolish and irresponsible in his management of the 
credit card accounts. The allegation of fraud was raised only as to the debt at SOR 3.a. 
Applicant has not made any payment on these credit card accounts. (Tr. 61-62)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
5 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations (AG ¶ 30). Applicant’s arrests and/or 
convictions from 1998 until 2011 for sale and possession of marijuana, driving on a 
suspended license, reckless driving, and operating an unregister vehicle and displaying 
license plates belonging to another vehicle raises security concerns and questions 
about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and his ability and willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. The following Criminal Conduct Disqualifying 
Conditions under AG ¶ 31 are of concern: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
 
6 
 
 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
The court and arrest records as well as Applicant’s admissions are competent 
evidence of Applicant’s arrests and convictions. The available records establish a 
pattern of offenses that are minor but in combination cast doubt on Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Once a concern is raised regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant 
or maintenance of a security clearance. After the Government presents evidence raising 
criminal conduct security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or mitigate 
those concerns. Applicant stated that his past criminal conduct is not a security concern.  
 
I considered the following Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 32: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;   
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.  
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. The evidence shows that Applicant has 
established a pattern of criminal activity over a long period. While Applicant admitted the 
details of some of his criminal activities, he denies others. However, the evidence is 
sufficient to find that he committed the offenses charged. There is no evidence of 
remorse for his criminal conduct or successful rehabilitation. Applicant was involved in 
possession and sale of illegal drugs only six years ago in 2011. Applicant has not 
demonstrated the maturity and life style to conclude that his involvement in illegal drugs 
in unlikely to recur. There is not a significant passage of time, since the last reported 
criminal activity occurred in 2013, to demonstrate changed circumstances or conduct 
sufficient to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation. The evidence of a pattern of 
 
7 
 
 
criminal activity is sufficient to raise issues of Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 
15)  
 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct including theft and the possession and sale of 
marijuana raises the following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 As noted above, Applicant’s criminal conduct and sale and possession of 
marijuana over an extended period of time shows lack of judgment, untrustworthiness, 
and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It leads to the conclusions 
that his lack of candor shows that he may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. SOR ¶ 2.a cross-alleges under the personal conduct guideline, the same 
conduct alleged under the criminal conduct guideline. All of Applicant’s conduct causing 
a security concern under SOR ¶ 2.a is explicitly covered under Guideline J, and is 
sufficient to warrant revocation of his security clearance. Guideline E concerns 
constitute a duplication of the concerns under Guideline J, and accordingly, personal 
conduct security concerns in SOR ¶ 2.a is found for Applicant  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) The 
financial security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might 
knowingly compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security 
clearance adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
8 
 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet his financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
Credit reports and Applicant’s admissions reveal that he has a judgment against 
him and extensive delinquent credit card debts that have not been resolved. The record 
shows that Applicant used credit cards to purchase items he could not afford. He admits 
that his use of credit cards was irresponsible and foolish, and indicates 
mismanagement. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
The information raises issues about Applicant’s self-control, judgment, and 
willingness and ability to meet his financial obligations. Bankruptcy is a legal and 
permissible means of resolving debt. Medical debts caused Applicant’s bankruptcy in 
2004. I find for Applicant as to SOR 3.e. Once the Government has established an 
adverse financial issue, the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the 
issue. 
  
I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
9 
 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. The debts 
consist of an unpaid judgment and normal consumer credit card debts. Applicant is 
unemployed and had significant periods of unemployment. His only source of income is 
a disability payment. He does not have sufficient income to pay significant credit card 
debt. Applicant did not present any evidence of financial counseling.  
 
Accordingly, he has not established a good-faith effort to pay his debts. There is 
no clear evidence that his debt problems have been resolved, and his finances are 
under control. Overall, he has not provided evidence or proof that he acted with reason 
and responsibility towards his finances. His living beyond his means, and his late and 
limited efforts to resolve his financial problems are a strong indication that he may not 
protect and safeguard classified information. Applicant did not present any information 
of payments made on these debts. In sum, Applicant did not present sufficient 
information to mitigate financial security concerns.  
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and 
the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s e-mail in 
which he stated the he has changed since he was 22 years old. He knows he can 
perform most jobs. He realizes he made reckless, foolish, and dumb choices in the past 
but they should not affect his present life.  
Applicant did not present adequate information to establish that sufficient time 
has passed without criminal activity to show he has been rehabilitated. Applicant’s 
 
10 
 
 
history shows that he is not reliable and trustworthy and that he does not have the 
ability to protect classified information. The record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate criminal conduct and financial 
considerations security concerns. Personal conduct security concerns are mitigated as 
a duplication. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3; Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a – 3.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 3.e:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
