 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08828 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish that he is financially responsible 
and that his financial problems have been resolved or are under control. Moreover, he 
deliberately falsified his 2015 security clearance application (SCA) to cover up his 
financial problems and felony charges. The financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a SCA on June 25, 2015. After reviewing it and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on September 2, 2016, alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline E 
(personal conduct). Applicant answered the SOR on September 29, 2016, and 
requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
January 3, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on January 17, 2017. He was allowed 
30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
 
2 
 
 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant responded to the FORM with a one-
page document (received by DOHA on February 2, 2017) that provided some 
corrections to it. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included his 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator from 
September 15, 2015. (FORM, Item 4) Applicant was informed he could object to the 
summary of his interview and it would not be admitted or considered by me, or that he 
could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it 
accurate. Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be construed as a waiver and the proposed FORM evidence would be 
considered by me. Applicant responded to the FORM, submitted some corrections, and 
raised no objections. I admitted the FORM with its proffered evidence and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, 1.h, 1.o, and 2.c. He 
admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.i through 1.n, 2.a and 2.b. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old heavy equipment mechanic employed by a federal 
contractor. He attended high school, but left before receiving a diploma. He married his 
wife in 1983, and they have a 34-year-old son.  
 
Applicant’s employment history indicates that he was employed by federal 
contractors between 2005 and May 2015. A federal contractor hired Applicant in 
September 2013, and he submitted his first SCA in June 25, 2015. During the following 
background investigation, Applicant was interviewed in September 2015 (PSI). 
Applicant told the investigator that he was laid off from his job because of medical 
problems in May 2015. Applicant stated he had been unemployed from May 2015 to the 
day of the interview in September 2015. He was supporting himself with his 
unemployment compensation benefits. (GE 4) On December 13, 2017, Department 
Counsel confirmed that Applicant’s employer is still sponsoring Applicant for a 
clearance. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1) 
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed that he was charged with sexual 
assault (a felony) and indecent assault (misdemeanor) in May 2006. He pleaded guilty 
to the indecent assault charge, and the sexual assault charge was nolle prossed-
withdrawn. He was sentenced to prison for a period between 7 and 23 months. He was 
placed on probation from December 2006 to November 2008. (GE 7) 
 
The investigation also revealed that in 1975, Applicant was charged with theft of 
a car, conspiracy to commit theft, operating a vehicle without the consent of the owner, 
 
3 
 
 
corruption of minors, and conspiracy to corrupt minors. He was convicted of the charge 
of corruption of minors. In January 1976, the court sentenced Applicant to imprisonment 
for 23 months. Applicant was placed on parole in August 1976. He failed to comply with 
the term of his parole, and his parole was revoked. He was remanded to serve the 
remainder of his January 1976 sentence, starting in October 1976. Applicant was 
paroled again in April 1977, and released from parole in October 1977. 
 
The investigation further revealed that during the last seven years Applicant had 
accumulated numerous delinquent accounts, many of which were over 120 days 
delinquent, and had been turned over to collection agencies. 
 
Section 22 (Police Record (Ever)) of Applicant’s June 2015 SCA asked Applicant 
whether he had ever been charged with a felony offense. Applicant answered “No” and 
failed to disclose that in 1975 he was charged with automobile theft (third degree 
felony), and with conspiracy to commit theft (felony) and corruption of minors. He also 
failed to disclose that in 2006 he was charged with sexual assault (felony). 
 
During his September 2015 interview, Applicant was confronted with the omitted 
2006 sexual assault felony charge. Applicant acknowledged the charge and explained 
that he did not disclose the felony offense in his 2015 SCA because the charge was 
dismissed when he pleaded guilty to indecent assault. He offered no explanation for his 
omission of the 1975 felony offense. 
 
In his response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of his June 2015 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed no delinquent accounts or debts in collection. During his September 2015 
background interview, Applicant was confronted with 17 delinquent medical accounts 
reflected in his credit report. Applicant admitted to knowing that he had delinquent 
medical bills that had been turned over for collection, and delinquent accounts that were 
over 120 days delinquent. He told the investigator that he did not disclose the debts in 
his June 2015 SCA because he could not recall the details of each account.  
 
Applicant acknowledged the delinquent debts and stated he was not disputing 
them. He explained that he acquired the delinquent medical debts within the last three 
years because of his cancer treatment. Applicant claimed that he had paid some 
accounts, made partial payments on some debts, and established payment plans with 
some creditors or collectors. He indicated his intent to establish payment plans and to 
pay the accounts in full. He averred he was currently capable of meeting his financial 
obligations. He considered his current financial status was good, except for the medical 
bills he owes. Applicant noted he had acquired no additional delinquent accounts. He 
believes the likelihood of recurrence is small, unless he received additional large 
medical bills he cannot afford. (2015 PSI) 
 
Applicant submitted no documentary evidence to corroborate his claims of 
payment agreements, payments made, or of debts paid. He presented no documentary 
evidence of any efforts to remain in contact his creditors or to otherwise resolve his 
delinquent accounts. Applicant presented no evidence about his current financial 
 
4 
 
 
situation, including his income, outstanding debts, whether his income is sufficient to 
pay for his living expenses, and whether his financial problems are resolved or under 
control. He gave no indication that he had participated in financial counseling.  
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG, and 
are applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. I decided 
this case under the current AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
 
5 
 
 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. AG ¶ 19 
provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; ”(b) unwillingness to satisfy 
debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” The record established the above disqualifying conditions, requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised by the 
facts in this case and they do not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial 
problems are recent and ongoing. Apparently, he acquired most of the medical bills 
because of his cancer treatments. As such, his financial problems may have resulted 
from circumstances beyond his control. Nevertheless, he presented no evidence of a 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
good-faith effort to pay his debts or that he has been financially responsible under his 
circumstances. There is no evidence he participated in financial counseling or that he is 
following a budget. There is no evidence of Applicant’s current financial situation, 
including his income, and whether his income is sufficient to pay for his living expenses 
and debts. He presented no evidence to show that his financial problems are being 
resolved or are under control. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant omitted relevant and material information from his 2015 SCA when he 
failed to disclose that he had financial problems that included numerous delinquent 
accounts past due over 120 days and in collection. Moreover, he failed to disclose that 
he was charged with felony offenses in 1975 and 2006. Applicant’s omissions, if 
deliberate, would trigger the applicability the following disqualifying condition under AG 
¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. (ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006)). Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s 
age, education, work experience, his 2015 statement to a government investigator, and 
his SOR answer, I find that Applicant’s omissions were deliberate or made with the 
intent to mislead the Government. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable. Additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
8 
 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s evidence is 
insufficient to mitigate the Guideline E security concerns. Applicant was charged with 
felony offenses in 1976 and 2006. He went to court in both instances, pled guilty to 
misdemeanor offenses, and the felonies were dismissed. He served time in jail, and 
was on parole for significant periods. Under such circumstances, it is not credible he 
forgot about the felony charges and the circumstances surrounding them. His claims of 
honest mistake or lack of recollection are not credible.  
 Most of the debts alleged in the SOR were delinquent within the preceding seven 
years. Applicant acknowledged his delinquent debts and explained he did not disclose 
them because he did not have all the information for each account. Instead, he elected 
to mislead the government about his financial situation and indicated he had no financial 
problems or any delinquent debts. A statement in his SCA indicating he had financial 
problems, but did not recall specific debts would have sufficed to place the Government 
on notice. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find Applicant deliberately falsified his 
2015 SCA. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
 
9 
 
 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 62, has been employed with federal contractors since 2005. He failed 
to demonstrate financial responsibility and that his financial problems have been 
resolved or are under control. The financial considerations security concerns are not 
mitigated. Moreover, he deliberately falsified his 2015 SCA to cover his financial 
problems and omitted relevant and material information concerning past felony charges.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.o:    Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
