 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-00524 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not submit sufficient information to overcome the security concerns 
raised by his criminal conduct and financial problems. His request for eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On June 26, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew his eligibility for access to classified 
information as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the 
completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could 
 
2 
 
not determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
 
On August 21, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). At the time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF 
applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new 
set of AGs, effective for all security clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 
8, 2017. I have based my decision in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.2 
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On November 28, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support 
of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on December 6, 2016, and had 30 days from 
the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.4 Applicant timely responded to 
the FORM. He submitted additional information, but did not object to the admissibility of 
any of the information presented in the FORM. The record closed on January 18, 2017. 
I received the case on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has worked for the same defense contractor since November 2001. 
The Government alleged in the SOR that in November 2004, Applicant was charged 
with grand larceny and that the charge was dismissed in August 2005 (SOR 1.a); that 
on December 23, 2011, he was charged with possession of marijuana, a charge to 
which he pleaded guilty in January 2012. He was fined and his driver’s license was 
suspended for six months (SOR 1.b). The Government also alleged that Applicant was 
charged three months later with driving on the driver’s license that was suspended for 
the offense listed in SOR 1.b. He was fined and the suspension of his license was 
extended another three months (SOR 1.c). Finally, the Government alleged that in April 
2014, he was charged with public profanity and intoxication. In May 2014, Applicant was 
adjudged guilty, fined and assessed court costs (SOR 1.d). (FORM, Items 1 and 3) 
 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (as amended) 
(Directive). 
2 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
3 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on seven enclosed 
exhibits (Items 1 – 7). 
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the Guideline J allegations. They are also documented 
in his e-QIP and the FBI arrest record provided by the Government. Applicant discussed 
all of his arrests with a government investigator in subject interviews conducted in 
August and October 2014. (FORM, Items 1 – 3, 5 – 7) 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $23,619 for 12 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 2.a – 2.l). In response to the Guideline F allegations, 
he denied SOR 2.b, 2.i, and 2.j, but admitted the other nine allegations. Additionally, 
these allegations are documented by Applicant’s e-QIP disclosures and by the credit 
reports provided in the FORM. Applicant discussed his debts with a government 
investigator during subject interviews conducted in August and October 2014. (FORM, 
Items 1 – 6, 8) In addition, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 During an August 26, 2014 interview with a government investigator during his 
background investigation, Applicant stated that his financial problems began around 
2008 and arose from his own poor financial decisions. He also claimed that uncovered 
costs resulting from emergency surgery in 2012 exacerbated his financial difficulties. At 
the time of his interview in August 2014, he described his finances as “shaky.” During a 
second subject interview in October 2014, Applicant stated that he had a plan to contact 
all of his creditors and to resolve his debts. In response to the FORM, Applicant 
submitted a handwritten note stating his intent to contact his creditors and pay his 
debts.5 There is no information in the file that shows he has paid or otherwise resolved 
any of his debts. (FORM, Items 5 and 6) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d) of 
the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
                                                 
5 Applicant also provided a copy of the FORM and its exhibits; however, he made no other comments and 
provided no other documents in support of his case. 
 
6 Directive 6.3. 
 
4 
 
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.8 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.9 
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information.10 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.11 
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s arrest record reasonably raised 
the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 30: 
 
  Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Available information requires the application of the disqualifying conditions at 
AG ¶¶  31(a) (a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be unlikely 
to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in combination cast doubt on 
the individual's judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness) and 31(b) (evidence (including, 
                                                 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
8 Directive, E3.1.14. 
9 Directive, E3.1.15. 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
11 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
but not limited to, a credible allegation, an admission, and matters of official record) of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, 
prosecuted, or convicted). 
 
 As to the pertinent mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 32, none apply. Although 
Applicant’s last instance of criminal conduct occurred in 2014, all of the alleged conduct 
occurred after Applicant started working for a defense contractor and after he received a 
security clearance in 2004. Applicant did not provide any information that suggests he 
has been rehabilitated, that his circumstances have changed, or that he is remorseful 
for his criminal conduct. On balance, he did not mitigate the security concerns under 
this guideline. 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s delinquent debts reasonably 
raised the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Available information requires application of the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 
19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(b) (unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the 
ability to do so); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). Applicant did 
not provide information sufficient to support application any of the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20. At most, his discussion of his emergency surgery raises the potential 
applicability of AG ¶ 20(b): 
 
the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 
6 
 
For this mitigating condition to apply, Applicant must also establish that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. He did not do so. As to the other mitigating 
conditions available to Applicant, he did not corroborate his claimed intentions to 
resolve his debts and there is no information in this record about the state of his current 
finances. He has not received financial counseling or other assistance in resolving his 
debts. The security concerns raised by the adverse information about Applicant’s 
finances are not mitigated. 
  
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guidelines F and J, I have reviewed the record before me in 
the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Doubts about his suitability 
remain because of Applicant’s longstanding financial problems and his history of 
criminal conduct. He has not established that his financial problems have been or will be 
resolved, and his criminal conduct is too recent to justify a conclusion it will not recur. 
Because protection of the interests of national security is the principal focus of these 
adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved against the granting of access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.l:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
