KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant contends that his circumstances do not raise disqualifying condition 19(c)
arguing that he does not have a history of not meeting financial obligations. We resolve this
issue adversely to Applicant. Failure to have filed, and in some instances failure to have paid,
income taxes over a course of several years constitutes a history within the meaning of the
Directive. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-06731.a1
DATE: 12/6/2017
DATE: December 6, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-06731
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Gatha Manns, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Jeffrey D. Billett, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
7, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On August 9, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is 53 year-old.  He retired from the military in 2008 and has worked for Defense
contractors since.  His military career included assignments in acquisition.  He held a clearance
while in the military and retained it during his subsequent civilian employment.  He has a master’s
degree that he completed in 2015.
Applicant and his wife separated in 2007, divorcing three years later.  During the marriage,
Applicant depended on his wife to file important documents.  After moving out of the marital home,
Applicant became increasingly disorganized and misplaced his tax documents.  He failed to file
Federal and state income tax returns for 2011 and for the years following.  He stated that he became
busy with family responsibilities, college courses, and church activities.  He hired a tax preparer in
2015, who filed his returns for him in March of that year.  The IRS had notified him that his returns
had not been filed, but he waited a year to contact a preparer.  Applicant was entitled to refunds for
some years but owed money for others.  He has paid his tax debts.  
Applicant enjoys as excellent reputation for the quality of his work performance as well as
for his honesty, reliability, and trustworthiness.  His performance appraisals for 2012 through 2015
rate him as exceeding standards.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s tax filing delinquencies raised two disqualifying
conditions: 19(c) and 19(f).1  In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation, the Judge stated that he
had not demonstrated a sufficient track record of tax compliance.  Though noting Applicant’s marital
problem, which was beyond his control, the Judge found that Applicant had not demonstrated
responsible action in regard to his debts.  He did note that Applicant had established two mitigating
conditions, 20(c) and 20(g),2 citing to evidence that Applicant had hired a tax preparer and had filed
his returns and paid past-due tax obligations.
1Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations;” and ¶ 19(f): “ failure to file 
. . . annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns[.]”  
2Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(c): “the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the
problem from a legitimate and credible source . . . and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or
is under control;” and ¶ 20(g): “the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or pay
the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.”  
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge stated that Applicant was credible in his hearing
presentation and that he was remorseful.  However, he also stated that Applicant is mature and well-
educated and that his experience in Federal acquisition should have placed him on notice of his duty
to comply with well-established rules and regulations.  He found that Applicant’s repeated failure
to have filed his returns suggests a lack of responsibility.  
Discussion
Applicant cites to record evidence that he contends the Judge did not consider, thereby
impairing the sufficiency of the Judge’s findings of fact.  After considering Applicant’s brief in its
entirety, we conclude that Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all
of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-08688 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 6, 2017).  The
Judge’s material findings are supported by substantial evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420
at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).
Applicant contends that his circumstances do not raise disqualifying condition 19(c), arguing
that he does not have a history of not meeting financial obligations.  We resolve this issue adversely
to Applicant.  Failure to have filed, and in some instances failure to have paid, income taxes over
a course of several years constitutes a history within the meaning of the Directive.  Even if the Judge
had not addressed this condition, however, his overall decision would have been the same, given the
clear applicability of 19(f).3  In any event, the Directive presumes a nexus between proved conduct
under any of the Guidelines and an applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
15-06050 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2017).  Under the facts of this case, the Judge did not err in the
manner in which he analyzed Applicant’s security concerns.  
Applicant notes that the Judge found two mitigating conditions to have been “established”
yet rendered an adverse decision anyway.  He argues that the Judge failed to explain why, if these
conditions were established, he did not arrive at a favorable result.  However, it is not inconsistent
for a Judge to find that one or more mitigating conditions apply to an applicant’s case yet determine
that, under the facts of the case, the conditions are not enough to outweigh the concerns raised by
the applicant’s security-significant conduct.  Given Applicant’s education and experience, which
includes military acquisition; the multi-year nature of his delinquencies; and his failure to have
provided a plausible excuse for his failures, we find no deficiency in the Judge’s analysis, nor do
we conclude that Applicant has shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-08688 at 3, supra.   
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, as to both the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  Failure to file tax
returns suggests that an applicant has a problem complying with well-established governmental rules
3Applicant also contends that the Judge’s decision to apply two disqualifying conditions in this case renders
his analysis multiplicious.  Multiplicity is a doctrine applicable in criminal law, not in a security clearance decision.  In
any event, the pleading in Applicant’s case–the SOR–contains only one allegation.  It does not impermissibly multiply
the security concerns contained in Applicant’s tax delinquencies or otherwise make his problems appear to be more
serious than they are.
  
and  regulations, voluntary compliance with which is essential to protecting classified information. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016).  The decision is sustainable on
this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being
considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy              
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
