 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04722 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. He mitigated the Guideline H, drug involvement security concerns. Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 21, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines E, personal conduct, G, alcohol consumption, and 
H, drug involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 7, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Government subsequently amended the SOR and 
Applicant answered the amended SOR on March 6, 2017. The case was assigned to 
me on June 9, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on October 17, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
November 13, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 10. The exhibits 
were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and did not offer any 
exhibits. The record was held open until November 28, 2017, to permit Applicant to 
provide documents. He did not provide any documents, and the record closed. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on November 22, 2017.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 In the amended SOR, the Government withdrew the Guideline E allegation in ¶ 
1.c and the Guideline G allegation in ¶ 3.a. At the hearing, the Government moved to 
withdraw the Guideline E allegation in ¶ 1.h. The motion was granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d through 1.g, and 1.j. 
He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.i.1 through 1.i.5, 1.k, and 2.a. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in physics and a 
master’s degrees in engineering. He married in 1997 and divorced in 2000. He has a 
19-year-old son from the marriage. He remarried in October 2007 and has two 
stepchildren and a biological child ages, 16, 14, and 7 years old. He has worked for his 
present employer, a federal contractor, since 2002 and has held a security clearance 
since approximately May 2004.2 
 
 In February 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with operating a vehicle 
while intoxicated (DUI), reckless operation of a vehicle, and possession of an alcoholic 
beverage in a motor vehicle. When the police officer arrived to the crash scene he met 
with the drivers of the vehicles and an independent witness. The witness told the police 
officer that he observed a van driving with its flashers on and rapidly changing lanes. 
Traffic on the Interstate had stopped. The van was driven by a white male. The witness 
observed the van hit a stopped vehicle in the left traffic lane. The witness then observed 
the male driver trade seats with the female passenger. The police officer met the 
occupants of the van. The female identified herself as the driver of the vehicle and 
provided her driver’s license. Although not married at the time, the license belonged to 
Applicant’s wife. The police officer noted that the position of the driver’s seat was too far 
                                                          
2 Tr. 23-27. 
 
 
3 
 
 
from the steering wheel for Applicant’s wife to properly operate the vehicle. On the 
driver’s side floorboard was an alcoholic beverage in a mug style glass with ice.3 
 
 Applicant was identified and described by the police officer as highly intoxicated. 
Applicant admitted he consumed two glasses of Scotch and one he was drinking while 
the vehicle was in motion. Applicant failed the field sobriety test. His blood alcohol 
concentration was .177%. The police officer noted there were three children in the 
vehicle, two girls, ages three and five, and a nine-year-old boy.4 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that he was attending a funeral for a 
relative, he had several drinks and used bad judgment when he attempted to drive back 
to his hotel. He changed lanes and hit a vehicle that was in the right lane. He was 
arrested, served 100 hours of community service, paid fines, and attended DUI school.5  
 
 Applicant testified that he pled guilty to the DUI offense and was sentenced as a 
first offender. When asked if he reported the incident to his employer’s facility security 
officer (FSO), he stated: “Two days after I returned from [state], almost immediately.”6  
 
Applicant was confronted with a JPAS entry made by his FSO in December 
2008. It stated that the FSO sent an email reminder to all cleared personnel about their 
responsibility to self-report certain events. The FSO stated in the report that almost 
immediately Applicant reported that in 2007, while attending a parade with his family, he 
received a call that his uncle was not doing well and was in the hospital. They left the 
parade, and his wife was driving. It was raining and there was a car stopped in the 
center lane with no lights or hazards on. Cars were swerving around it, and his wife hit 
the brakes and skid into the vehicle barely denting it. He and his wife jumped into the 
back seat because the kids were screaming. When the police showed up the owner of 
the other vehicle claimed Applicant and his wife switched seats and then the police 
started to harass them. Applicant was drunk and began arguing and was arrested and 
released without bail. He explained that the district attorney told Applicant’s wife that if 
she testified he would charge her with perjury. Applicant pled guilty, and he told the 
judge about the threat. The judge would not accept his plea. Later it was agreed that 
Applicant would plead to a lesser charge. Applicant paid a fine, court costs, and 
completed community service, and an alcohol program. His report to the FSO stated 
that he was then released from probation and is having his case expunged. He further 
reported that his uncle passed away and, he was in jail for a crime he did not commit.7  
 
                                                          
3 GE 3, 5, 6, 10. 
 
4 GE 3, 5, 6, 10. 
 
5 Answer to SOR. 
 
6 Tr. 29.  
 
7 GE 5. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant was asked at his hearing why the FSO indicated that Applicant made 
the report in December 2008 instead of days after the incident as stated by Applicant in 
his earlier testimony. He testified that he remembered the FSO’s email and submitting 
the report. He said: “I remember him sending out this email and I reported it. I’m not 
exactly sure of the date. I thought it was right after the incident happened in February.”8 
He then stated: “I didn’t report the arrest. I reported the DUI after it was closed and I 
was charged with the DUI.”9 He said that the reason he did not report the arrest was 
because, “I was unsure at the time that I was required to do that.” He said he was not 
aware he had to report the arrest until after there was a conviction. He was waiting for 
“closure to be able to report the sentence and the charge of DUI.”10 When asked when 
the case closed, he stated it was August 2007. He was then asked why he failed to 
report it until December 2008. He did not have an explanation and stated he thought he 
had disclosed it in a timely manner. I left the record open for him to provide any 
evidence to show he reported it earlier. None was provided.11 
 
Applicant was questioned about whether he and his wife changed seats during 
the DUI incident as noted by the police and a witness. He denied they changed seats. 
He did not recall why his wife told the police officer she was driving. He was again 
confronted with the information he provided to his FSO where he said his wife was 
driving at the time. He stated that this information was incorrect. He admitted he was 
driving at the time. His wife was sober. He pled guilty because she was threatened by 
the district attorney with a perjury charge. Applicant testified that the police were correct, 
he was driving. The FSO got the information about his wife driving from him. He then 
stated he could not recall why he told his FSO his wife was driving. He stated: “Clearly I 
was in the wrong for lying to my FSO.”12 Applicant continued to equivocate about who 
was driving and claimed he was the driver.13  
 
Applicant testified that in January 2005 he had a party at his house and cocaine, 
marijuana, and drug paraphernalia were present in the house. He asserted the items 
belonged to guests attending the party. Although he was aware that drugs were in his 
house, he denied using them. He admitted he was working for his present employer at 
the time and held a security clearance. The police arrived and he was arrested. He 
testified that the case was dropped against him. He testified he did not inform his FSO 
of the arrest because he thought the case would be dropped. He further testified that his 
                                                          
8 Tr. 30.  
 
9 TR. 31. 
 
10 Tr. 34. 
 
11 Tr. 34-35; GE 3, 5, 10.  
 
12 Tr. 43. It was not alleged that Applicant failed to timely report his DUI arrest and conviction to his FSO. I 
have not considered this for disqualifying purposes. I may consider his testimony when making a 
credibility determination, in the application of mitigating conditions, and when analyzing the whole person. 
 
13 Tr. 24-44.  
 
 
5 
 
 
bail was revoked because the bail bondsman thought he was a flight risk, and 
subsequently he was rearrested on February 4, 2005, for the same incident. He testified 
all charges were dismissed.14  
 
County jail arrest records document that on January 30, 2005, Applicant was 
arrested for possession of cocaine and drug paraphernalia. The County jail arrest 
records also indicate that in February 2005, Applicant was arrested for possession of 
cocaine, possession of paraphernalia and possession of marijuana. Applicant disputed 
that he was arrested for two different incidents. Applicant disputed the accuracy of the 
statements he made to the Government investigator explaining the different and distinct 
incidents.15 The evidence from the municipal court shows that in December 2005, the 
charge from January 2005 for possession of drug paraphernalia was “retire to file”; and 
the charge for possession of marijuana was “retire to file”; and  for the possession of a 
controlled substance charge “defendant entered a plea of guilty” and was fined $357.16 
Applicant’s arrest for illegal possession of a controlled substance in January 2005 was 
also reported in the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) criminal justice information 
services division report.17 Applicant did not disclose the January or February 2005 
arrests or his later conviction on his 2014 SCA.18 The disposition of the offenses from 
February 2005 are unknown. 
 
In December 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with being drunk in 
public. The documentary evidence shows the date Applicant was arrested as December 
1, 2005, and his court date was January 17, 2006. He pled guilty and was found guilty 
of the offense. He was fined $240, which included court costs, which he paid. Applicant 
testified that he was not arrested, rather he received a ticket for this incident. He 
testified that he did not disclose this on his 2014 SCA because he was not arrested.19  
 
SCA Section 22-Police Records asks: Do you have any other offenses where 
any of the following happened to you? In the past seven (7) years have you been issued 
a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in a criminal proceeding against you? (Do not 
include citations involving traffic infractions where the fine was less than $300 and did 
                                                          
14 Tr. 47-57. 
 
15 GE 4 was admitted into evidence after Applicant reviewed it and had no objection. During his hearing, 
he disputed facts summarized by the investigator in the report. I will not consider GE 4. However, I have 
considered GE 8 the county arrest record which notes there were two separate arrests on two different 
dates. The record was held open to allow Applicant to provide documents to corroborate his version of 
the incident. None were provided.  
 
16 Tr. 52-59; GE 8, 9. 
 
17 GE 6.  
 
18 GE 3. 
 
19 Tr. 45-47; GE 2, 8. 
 
 
6 
 
 
not include alcohol or drugs).20 I find Applicant could have been reasonably confused in 
answering this question, even though his arrest was not a traffic infraction and did 
involve alcohol, but it was outside the seven year period. He was required to disclose 
this under the section that asked if he had EVER been charged with an offense 
involving alcohol or drugs. However, under these circumstances, I conclude there was 
legitimate confusion, and he did not intentionally fail to disclose the December 2005 
drunk in public offense. I find in his favor for SOR ¶ 1.i.1. 
 
Applicant disclosed on his January 2004 security clearance application (SCA) 
that he was arrested in August 1997 and charged with felony burglary of a building. He 
disclosed the disposition was “probation and non-adjudication.”21 He testified that the 
charge was reduced to a misdemeanor. A document from the Department of 
Corrections notes the county where the offense occurred; the charge was nonresidential 
burglary; a felony; the sentence was 36 months, imposed on November 3, 1999; and 
the status of the sentence was probation. A court record document notes the judgment 
of the court as “no jurisdiction.” Applicant did not disclose this felony on his June 2001 
public trust application (PTA) or on his 2014 SCA as was required.22 
 
 Applicant disclosed on his 2004 SCA that he had been arrested in July 1996 for 
possession of marijuana and that the charge was dismissed and expunged. He did not 
disclose that 1996 possession of marijuana charge on his 2014 SCA or on his 2001 
PTA. He did disclosed on the 2001 PTA that he was arrested in October 2001 for 
possession of marijuana. Other than this admission, there is no other evidence of his 
October 2001 arrest nor was it disclosed on his 2004 or 2014 SCAs.23 
 
 Applicant disclosed on his 2014 SCA that he was arrested in February 2007 for a 
“DUI first offense.” He reported it was a misdemeanor, and he was fined and received 
probation. He reported that he was convicted in July 2007 and was on probation until 
January 2008.24 No other criminal conduct was reported on his 2014 SCA.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
20 GE 3. 
 
21 GE 2. 
 
22Tr. 59-62; GE 1, 2, 3, 7, 9. 
 
23 Tr. 62-63; GE 1, 2, 3, 7. I have not considered any derogatory evidence that was not alleged in 
applying the disqualifying conditions. I may consider the information in making a credibility determination, 
in the application of the mitigating conditions, and when analyzing the whole person.  
 
24 GE 3. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Section 22-Police Record of the 2014 SCA asks:  
 
Other than those offenses already listed, have you EVER had the following 
happen to you? Have you EVER been charged with a felony offense? . . . Have 
you EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?25 
 
Applicant responded “No.” He failed to disclose his February 4, 2005 arrest and 
charge of possession of marijuana (SOR ¶ 1.d); the January 30, 2005 charge of 
possession of a controlled substance and drug paraphernalia (SOR ¶ 1.e) and 
subsequent plea of guilty to the possession charge; the 1997 felony burglary arrest and 
charge (SOR ¶ 1.f); and the 1996 possession of marijuana charge (SOR ¶ 1.g).  
 
 Applicant’s 2005 arrests and charges for possession of a controlled substance, 
possession of marijuana, and possession of drug paraphernalia occurred after he was 
granted a security clearance in May 2004.26 He responded “no” to SCA Section 23-
Ilegal use of Drugs or Drug Activity, which asked: “While Possessing a Security 
Clearance: Have you EVER illegally used or otherwise been involved with a drug or 
controlled substance while possessing a security clearance other than previously 
listed?” He admitted he had been arrested for drug possession while holding a security 
clearance and that he did not report his arrest to his FSO.27 
 
 Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR:  
 
I have never intentionally or deliberately withheld or denied any of my past 
transgressions, I simply made the mistake of misinterpreting the questions 
on the [e-Qip] form. To my knowledge I have always made a truthful 
account of any and all of my arrests and charges that have followed me 
through my past. After my incorrectly answered e-QIP, I was interviewed 
on 3/10/2015 and was open and honest about the accounts that I could 
recall. I did not attempt to mislead, misguide or interfere with the 
investigator at this time.28 
 
I am not denying any of my arrests or charges, although most of them 
have been expunged from public record. I am denying that I attempted to 
withhold them from the government record. I was aware that all of this 
information had already been submitted as part of my clearance history 
and to deny any of this now or in 2014 would have been ill-advised.  
 
                                                          
25 GE 3. 
 
26 Tr. 64-65. 
 
27 Tr. 78. 
 
28 Applicant disputed the information summarized by the investigator in GE 4, and it was not considered. 
 
 
8 
 
 
I apologize my actions have led to continued investigation and a hearing. I 
do not recall the exact circumstances while filling out the e-QIP as I had 
never filled out this form before, but I know I was working that day and I 
believe I was caught up in the previous “seven year” questions and 
checked the next answers incorrectly. These events and decisions 
happened long ago and I regret them and have tried to leave this in the 
past although I do acknowledge that they did happen.29 
 
Applicant denies deliberately failing to disclose any of the information that was 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i.1 through 1.i.5 because he misunderstood the questions and 
because he disclosed them later in his interview. He testified: “I thought I had disclosed 
them on this e-QIP”30. He denied he deliberately failed to disclose the felony arrest and 
the drug and alcohol arrests on his 2014 SCA because he thought he was only required 
to disclose convictions. He also thought the questions only required him to disclose if he 
was charged. He did not disclose the felony burglary because he stated it was reduced 
to a misdemeanor. He testified he misinterpreted the questions. He testified that he did 
not fill out the form correctly and messed it up. He had moved on with his life and was 
trying to block out the incidents and was having difficulty recalling them.31   
 
 In his answer, Applicant stated that he has moved on since these events. He has 
relocated twice, remarried, and has a new life. He is a valued employee and he asked 
forgiveness. He acknowledged the mistakes he made and he did not foresee mistakes 
of this magnitude happening again. He testified he has grown up and has changed. He 
no longer associates with the people he did before. He has not had any incidents in the 
past ten years. He said he takes seizure control medication because he had brain 
surgery in August 2007 and again in November 2007, which had an impact on his long-
term memory.32  
 
 I did not find Applicant’s testimony or his explanations credible. I find Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose the January 2005 and February 2005 drug arrests and 
later conviction of possession of a controlled substance. Although he stated the second 
arrest was for the same incident, I did not believe his explanation nor does it negate the 
fact he did not report either to his security officer. I find he deliberately failed to report 
the felony burglary charge. Applicant did report that charge on his 2004 SCA, but failed 
to report it on the 2001 PTA and 2014 SCA, as required. I have only considered the 
2014 omission. Applicant’s 1996 possession of marijuana charge was reported on his 
2004 SCA, but not on his 2001 PTA. He failed to report it on his 2014 SCA. Based on 
                                                          
29 Answer to SOR. 
 
30 Tr. 67. 
 
31 Tr. 66-76. GE 7 reflects Applicant was found guilty and was sentenced to probation. GE 9 indicates the 
court had no jurisdiction. Regardless of the disposition, the evidence supports that he was arrested and 
charged with a felony and was required to disclose it. 
 
32 TR. 75-77; Answer to SOR  
 
9 
 
 
the totality of Applicant’s testimony and demeanor, I conclude his omissions were 
deliberate and an attempt to conceal his history related to drugs and criminal conduct.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
10 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual group. Such conduct includes: 
(1) engaging in activities which if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant was arrested in February 2007 and charged with operating a vehicle 
while intoxicated, reckless operation of a vehicle, and possession of an alcoholic 
beverage. Three young children were in the vehicle when he crashed his van into the 
back of another car. He was convicted of DUI. (SOR ¶ 1.a)  
 
Applicant was arrested in January 2005 and February 2005 for illegal drug 
possession of marijuana and cocaine, and possession of drug paraphernalia. He was 
convicted of a possession of a controlled substance and was fined. These incidents 
occurred after Applicant was granted a security clearance. He deliberately failed to 
disclose his arrests and conviction on his 2014 SCA. (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.i.2, 1.i.3) 
 
Applicant was arrested in December 2005 for drunk in public. He pled guilty and 
paid a fine. I have found in his favor regarding his failure to disclose this incident on his 
2014 SCA. (SOR ¶ 1.b and 1.i.1) 
 
 
11 
 
 
Applicant was arrested in 1997 and charged with felony burglary of a building.  
He deliberately failed to disclose his felony arrest on his 2014 SCA. (SOR ¶ 1.f) 
 
Applicant was arrested in 1996 for possession of marijuana. He deliberately did 
not disclose this information on his 2014 SCA. I did not find Applicant’s testimony or 
explanations credible for failing to disclose the information on his 2014 SCA. I have 
considered that inconsistent information was disclosed on his 2001 PTA, 2004 SCA, 
and 2014 SCA. I conclude that Applicant intentionally withheld reporting his past drug 
and criminal history on his 2014 SCA.  
 
Applicant’s deliberate falsifications on his 2014 SCA and his drug involvement 
while holding a security clearance raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or otherwise inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations.  
 
The SOR alleges Applicant’s DUI arrest, felony burglary charge, and three 
charges for possession of illegal drugs, which occurred from 1996 through 2007. The 
2005 possession of a controlled substance charge occurred while Applicant held a 
security clearance. He was having a party and was aware that others had brought illegal 
drugs to his house. He did not report his arrest to his FSO for his 2005 drug arrest. He 
did not timely report his 2007 DUI arrest and conviction. Applicant has not been 
involved in any illegal activity since that DUI, which was more than 12 years ago. He 
has moved twice and no longer associates with people involved in criminal activity. I do 
not believe he will be involved in future illegal activity. AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(g) apply to 
his personal conduct as it relates to his prior criminal conduct involving drugs, alcohol, 
 
12 
 
 
and burglary. However, there remains serious concerns about Applicant’s drug 
possession offenses while holding a security clearance and his deliberate omissions of 
the information on his SCA.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct his 
omissions before being confronted with the facts. Applicant’s testimony and 
explanations were not credible. He testified that he did not believe he had to report 
arrests, but only had to report a conviction; yet he did not report on his 2014 SCA the 
felony, which he testified was reduced to a misdemeanor, or his January 2005 
possession of a controlled substance offense where he pled guilty and was fined. 33 AG 
¶ 17(a) does not apply.  
 
Deliberately failing to disclose required information on a SCA is not a minor 
offense. Applicant’s deliberate omissions cast doubts on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply. 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for drug involvement and 
substance misuse is set out in AG & 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations.  
 
AG ¶ 25 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacturing, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession 
of drug paraphernalia. 
  
 Applicant was arrested and charged in January 2005 with possession of cocaine 
and drug paraphernalia. He was arrested in February 2005 with possession of cocaine, 
possession of marijuana, and possession of drug paraphernalia. He pled guilty to the 
January 2005 charge of possession of a controlled substance. Applicant was arrested 
and charged in 1996 for possession of marijuana. The above disqualifying condition 
applies.  
                                                          
33 Applicant testified this offense was reduced to a misdemeanor, but the evidence does not support his 
position. He also testified that the 2005 possession of a control substance charge was dismissed. The 
evidence supports he pled guilty to the charge.  
 
13 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions to overcome the problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were being used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
Applicant’s last drug-related incident was in early 2005. There is no evidence of 
recent involvement with illegal drugs. He stated he has moved twice, remarried, 
matured, and put these behaviors behind him. He no longer associates with friends 
involved with drugs. There has been a significant period of time since his last drug 
incident and the evidence supports a finding that a future drug-related incident is 
unlikely to recur. I find AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
14 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a history of drug involvement. It appears he has put that behind 
him and has not had a drug-related incident since 2005. He has mitigated the security 
concerns regarding his drug involvement. Applicant has a history of inconsistently 
reporting criminal arrests, charges, and convictions. His deliberately failed to disclose 
this history and explained that he was unaware he was required to do because he had 
not been convicted. I considered Applicant’s testimony that medication he takes impacts 
his memory. However, I did not find it persuasive or that it directly affects his ability to 
honestly disclose required information. Applicant’s testimony lacked candor and 
credibility. His omissions, concealments, and falsifications are a serious security 
concern and raise questions about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concern arising under Guideline H, drug involvement, 
but failed to mitigate the Guideline E, personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.c:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs: 1.d-1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.h:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph:   1.i.1:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.i.2:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.i.3:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph:   1.i.4:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.i.5:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.k:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph: 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline G:    WITHDRAWN 
   
  Subparagraph: 3.a:    Withdrawn Applicant 
 
15 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
