 
 
1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  REDACTED )   ISCR Case No. 15-04903 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant made donations to an IRS-recognized charity that was established by the 
Muslim Brotherhood, an entity which the U.S. Congress in 2017 considered for designation 
as a foreign terrorist group. Applicant stopped his contributions in 2013 when the 
organization was no longer involved in supporting a local youth program. He intends to 
never again make a charitable contribution to any U.S.-based nonprofit with ties to any 
foreign group. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 17, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing a 
security concern under Guideline B, foreign influence, and explaining why it was unable 
to grant or continue security clearance eligibility to him. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order 10865 (EO), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on March 20, 2017, and he requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). On June 1, 2017, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to 
determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. On June 28, 2017, I scheduled a hearing for August 2, 
2017. At the request of Applicant’s counsel and with no objection from the Government, 
on June 30, 2017, I rescheduled Applicant’s hearing for August 1, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a hearing, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 establishing new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require national 
security eligibility or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. With the original notice of 
hearing, I provided Applicant’s counsel with prehearing guidance as well as an 
amendment to that guidance notifying him that Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
would be adjudicated under the new AG.1 
 
I convened the hearing on August 1, 2017, as rescheduled. Six Government 
exhibits (GEs 1-6) and 14 Applicant exhibits (AEs A-N) were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, as reflected in a hearing transcript (Tr.) received on 
August 8, 2017. 
 
On August 2, 2017, Applicant’s counsel moved to reopen the record to submit an 
additional letter of recommendation. The document was admitted as AE O without any 
objection from the Government. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline B that, from approximately 2010 through 2013, 
Applicant made charitable donations to a U.S.-based organization (organization X) that 
has ties to the Muslim Brotherhood (SOR ¶ 1.a). When he answered the SOR allegation, 
Applicant admitted making the contributions but indicated that he had disclosed the 
contributions during his interview for his background investigation; that he stopped his 
contributions in 2013 when he decided that the organization was not serving the inner-
city youth; that he has no financial interest in the organization; and that the organization 
had a U.S. tax-exempt identification, which meant to him that the group had been vetted 
by the U.S. government. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old native of Egypt, who acquired his U.S. citizenship by 
naturalization in April 1987. Applicant has worked as a senior systems engineer for his 
defense-contractor employer most recently since September 2016. He was initially 
granted a DOD secret clearance in 1987 during his previous tenure with the company 
from June 1987 to January 1992. His clearance was renewed most recently in 2009, when 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision 
in this case. 
 
 
3 
he was working for a different defense contractor. (GE 1; AE C; Tr. 19.) He needs to retain 
security clearance eligibility for his current employment. (AE O; Tr. 21.) 
 
Applicant came to the United States at age 14 in 1976. He attended high school 
and college in the United States. He earned a bachelor’s degree in May 1987 and a 
master’s degree in January 1992, both in electrical engineering. (GE 1; AEs D-E.) He was 
married to a U.S. native citizen from May 1989 to October 2002, and they had four 
children now ages 20, 22, 26, and 27. Applicant married an Egyptian citizen in Egypt in 
August 2004. She came to the United States legally, but returned to Egypt after she and 
Applicant divorced in October 2005. (GEs 1-2; AEs B-C; Tr. 20.) Applicant obtained an 
Egyptian passport in February 2004 for ease of travel to Egypt to marry his second wife 
and because it was needed to officially register their marriage in Egypt. Applicant retained 
that passport until August 18, 2009, when he surrendered custody of the passport to his 
then employer’s facility security officer for destruction. (GEs 1-2.) 
 
Applicant worked as a senior member of the technical staff for his current employer 
from June 1987 to January 1992, and he held a DOD secret clearance throughout that 
employment. His clearance was transferred to him for his work with another defense 
contractor from January 1992 to January 1995. For the next 14 years, he was employed 
in the commercial sector in the field of cellular communications. Applicant returned to the 
defense industry in August 2009, and his secret clearance was renewed. (GE 1.) 
 
While working for a previous employer as a senior principal systems engineer, 
Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) on October 13, 2011, for a top secret clearance. Applicant indicated 
that he had contact with two maternal uncles in Egypt about twice a year to exchange 
greetings. He also disclosed contact with a maternal aunt in Egypt once every two 
months. Applicant last visited these relatives in Egypt in July 2004. Applicant denied any 
foreign financial interests and any foreign travel within the last seven years. (GE 1.) 
 
On November 21, 2011, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator 
for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). He explained that he held dual 
citizenship with Egypt and the United States until August 2009, when he surrendered his 
Egyptian passport for destruction to his then employer’s facility security officer. He denied 
any connection to Egypt apart from his three elderly relatives. Applicant explained that he 
married his first cousin in an arranged marriage in August 2004, and his second wife 
came to the United States under his sponsorship. Their marriage did not last due to 
cultural differences, and she returned to Egypt in October 2005. He denied any contact 
with his ex-wife since then. (GE 2.) 
 
Applicant had a second interview with an OPM investigator on May 21, 2013. 
When queried about his finances, Applicant disclosed that he has occasionally given 
about $100 to $200 to a religiously-affiliated relief fund to support orphans in response to 
disasters. Additionally, he volunteered that he supports his local religious/cultural center 
at $150 a month, and that he has donated $100 to $150 per month to organization X since 
about 2010. He expressed his belief that it is appropriate to aid the less fortunate and to 
 
 
4 
contribute to the maintenance costs of the religious/cultural center he attends. (GE 2; AE 
A.) 
 
On November 21, 2016, DOHA inquired of Applicant whether he was ever aware 
that organization X had ties to the Muslim Brotherhood and whether he or a relative or 
associate had ever made any charitable donations to several named organizations or 
groups linked to terrorism. On December 21, 2016, Applicant responded that he renewed 
his U.S. passport in August 2015, his maternal aunt in Egypt had died, and he had contact 
with his two uncles in Egypt about once a year. He indicated that he was not aware that 
organization X had ties to the Muslim Brotherhood and explained: 
 
I was not aware of any ties between [organization X] and Muslim 
Brotherhood. I am aware there are some claims about such ties in certain 
publications from islamophobic groups. But I know they are not true. I used 
to make donations to [organization X] because I was interested in the work 
they championed with inner city youth . . . . The focus of these activities is 
to engage the young kids and mentor them with positive role models as a 
way to fight back against radicalization. I stopped making donations to 
[organization X] about 3 years ago when the youth work became less of a 
focal point. 
 
Applicant responded negatively concerning whether he provided any charitable 
organizations to the terrorist groups listed, including the Muslim Brotherhood. He added:  
 
As a basic principle, I only make donations to organizations that are based 
in the US AND have a valid US Tax ID. That tells me that the organization 
has been vetted by the government and that donations to it can be claimed 
it as a tax deduction. Neither myself, nor my family members were ever a 
member, supporter, or representative of the listed groups. No one I 
associated with is a member, supporter, or representative of the listed 
groups as far as I know. (GE 2.) 
 
 The Government’s evidence indicates that the Muslim Brotherhood is a 
fundamentalist Sunni Islamic organization based in Egypt that has sought to influence the 
internal politics in various Arab states for over 50 years. Its overall objective is the creation 
of a modern political community based on Islamic precepts. Historically, the Muslim 
Brotherhood was willing to influence the policy of secular regimes in the Arab world by 
non-violent means. (GE 5.) The Muslim Brotherhood has operated largely in secret in the 
United States since the 1960s. Its activities are unknown to many Muslims in the United 
States. In 1993, it established a nonprofit 501(c)(3) operating under the name of 
organization X. Because of its increasingly conservative and extremist stance, the Muslim 
Brotherhood had alienated many moderate Muslims in the United States. By 2004, the 
leadership of organization X was denying any connection to the Brotherhood, but some 
45 percent of its 1,500 “active members” (those in its highest membership class) 
reportedly belonged to the Brotherhood. Through charitable contributions, organization X 
has had a significant and ongoing impact on Islam in the United States, helping to 
 
 
5 
establish mosques, Islamic schools, summer youth camps, and prominent Muslim 
organizations. (GE 6.) The current U.S. Administration considers the Muslim Brotherhood 
to be an agent of radical Islam. (GE 4.) On January 9, 2017, both the U.S. Senate and 
U.S. House of Representatives introduced bills to require the U.S. Secretary of State to 
submit a report to Congress within 60 days on whether the Muslim Brotherhood meets 
the criteria for designation as a foreign terrorist organization. (GE 3.) The evidence does 
not show that the Muslim Brotherhood has been designated as a foreign terrorist 
organization. 
 
Organization X describes itself as “a dynamic charitable, religious, social, cultural, 
and educational organization,” with more than 50 chapters in the United States. Its stated 
focus is on “the personal development of individuals through a comprehensive Islamic 
educational curriculum,” by providing opportunities for “community service, interfaith 
initiatives, youth programs, and civic engagement.” (AE N.) 
  
On July 19, 2017, Applicant executed a statement of intent to never again make a 
charitable donation to a U.S.-based nonprofit that has ties to any foreign groups and to 
continue to have minimal or no foreign contacts outside of any official duties and that any 
conversations would remain strictly casual and infrequent. Applicant consented to 
automatic revocation of his security clearance for any violation. (AE F; Tr. 27.) 
 
Applicant expresses allegiance only to the United States. (GE 2; AE A.) He 
admitted at his hearing that, with the understanding that organization X was a 501(c)(3) 
charity, he made charitable contributions from approximately 2010 to 2013 because the 
organization was helping refugee youth in his area against threats of criminalization 
(drugs and gangs) and Internet radicalization. He stopped his contributions when the 
organization began to focus on education rather than on inner-city youth. He first learned 
of the activities of organization X at his religious/cultural center and was unaware at the 
time that it had any organizational ties to the Muslim Brotherhood, but he had been told 
that organization X was an approved nonprofit by the IRS. It was his understanding that 
organization X had received a federal grant and that its existence as a valid faith-based 
organization was validated for him by a political event in his area attended by his state’s 
previous governor, the chief justice of his state’s supreme court, and the city’s mayor. 
Applicant testified that he works against the beliefs of Muslim extremist groups. (Tr. 21-
33.) As of August 2017, Applicant was receiving solicitations for donations from 
organization X, but he testified that he ignores them or indicates that he is not interested. 
(Tr. 36.) 
 
Work Performance and References 
 
 Applicant received a program achievement award for his work with a previous 
defense-contractor employer in June 1994. As a group leader for systems engineering 
for a commercial communications company between August 1999 and December 2005, 
he exhibited broad technical expertise and drive and commitment. He was recognized for 
exceptional performance in September 2005. Applicant displayed excellent analytical 
skills and good working knowledge while employed as a lead systems designer for his 
 
 
6 
next employer.  He continued to show dedication and commitment while working for the 
defense contractor that employed him from August 2009 to September 2016. (AEs G-J.)  
 
 Applicant was rated for his performance three months into his current employment 
and assessed as having met his employer’s expectations. (AE K.) According to 
Applicant’s current manager, Applicant has integrated well in the department and its 
ongoing systems engineering work. Applicant was able to learn their advanced 
technology quickly. Applicant volunteered for new proposal work, which can be quite 
demanding, and he was “doing quite well in his job.” (AEs L-M.) Applicant’s hiring 
manager has had routine encounters with Applicant at work and indirect contact through 
discussions with other managers about Applicant’s assignments and qualitative 
performance. He has found Applicant to be “highly technically competent, very 
professional, and strongly committed to completing his assignments in a timely manner 
and with high quality.” This manager sees great potential for Applicant to be a significant 
lead technical contributor to future programs, but it is necessary that Applicant retain his 
current clearance. (AE O.)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be 
considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present 
evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
security decision. 
 
 
 
7 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern about foreign influence is articulated in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that 
is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The undisputed evidence is that Applicant made contributions of $100 to $150 per 
month from 2010 to 2013 to organization X, which was established in 1993 by the Muslim 
Brotherhood, an entity that Congress has considered for designation as a foreign terrorist 
organization. Material support, financial or otherwise, to a U.S.-based organization with 
ties to a group associated with a risk of terrorism raises considerable foreign influence 
concerns under AG ¶ 7(b), which provides: 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology. 
 
However, the evidentiary record also shows that Applicant’s financial support for 
organization X was intended for local refugee youth to counter religious radicalism and 
engagement in criminal activity, and it was not knowingly for any purposes inconsistent 
 
 
8 
with U.S. interests. Applicant was unaware that the organization had any tie to the Muslim 
Brotherhood. It was reasonable for him to assume that his contributions were going to an 
approved U.S.-based charity, given that organization X was recognized by the IRS as a 
501(c)(3) charity. Under those circumstances, it is understandable that he would dismiss 
the claims made in publications from “Islamophobic” groups of an affiliation between 
organization X and the Muslim Brotherhood. Had Applicant any concern that his 
contributions would have been viewed as supportive of a group with anti-American goals, 
he would not likely have self-reported his contributions when he was interviewed by an 
OPM investigator. He stopped donating in 2013 when the youth work became less of a 
focus of the organization, which was well before the SOR was issued and before 
Congress sought to designate the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist organization.  
 
Applicant executed a statement of intention to never again make a charitable 
donation to any U.S.-based nonprofit with ties to any foreign groups. Since immigrating 
to the United States at age 14, he has established considerable ties to the United States, 
including a record of professional accomplishment in the defense industry, which make it 
likely that he will abide by that commitment. Mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(b) provides: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Applicant has lived in the United States for 41 years and has American values and 
principles. He was educated through his master’s degree in the United States. He raised 
four children who are lifelong resident U.S. citizens. Although he renewed his Egyptian 
passport in February 2004 to officially marry his first cousin in Egypt in August 2004, they 
divorced in October 2005. He has not seen his second wife since then, and he 
surrendered his Egyptian passport to the custody of his then employer’s facility security 
officer in August 2009. He obtained his U.S. citizenship in 1987 and recently renewed his 
U.S. passport in 2015. His work references and evaluations attest to his contributions and 
dedication in the U.S. defense industry. He has no allegiances outside of the United 
States, and his contact with foreign citizens is limited to once yearly contact with two 
elderly uncles in Egypt following the death of his aunt. There is no evidence that he has, 
or that he has ever had, any contact with radical extremists that could influence him to 
act contrary to U.S. interests. The foreign influence concerns raised by his past 
contributions to organization X are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
 
 
9 
2(d).2 Applicant’s contributions to an organization that was founded by the Muslim 
Brotherhood raised a legitimate inquiry, given the Muslim Brotherhood’s secretive nature 
and increasing radicalism over the years. Yet, the evidence does not show that Applicant 
knowingly supported goals or activities which are contrary to U.S. interests. His work 
references did not express any concern about his loyalties or allegiance. For the reasons 
noted above, I find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Finding 
 
Formal finding for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, is: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
