 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06533 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of delinquent debts. He did not disclose them or information 
about previous investigations in security clearance applications. He failed to mitigate the 
resulting financial and personal conduct security concerns. National security eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On March 12, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86). 
On June 17, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD after September 
 
 
 
 
2 
1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions 
issued after that date.1 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 24, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on April 27, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on May 16, 2017, setting the hearing for June 26, 2017. On that date, Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9 into evidence. Applicant testified, 
and offered Exhibit (AE) A into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objections.2 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 5, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old and married for 30 years. He has four adult children. He 
enlisted in the U.S. Army in 1985 and was honorably discharged in 2011 as an E-7. He 
deployed to the Middle East twice, where he served for almost a year during each 
deployment. He received a Bronze Star in 2005 and a Purple Heart in 2004. After leaving 
the Army, he attended college fulltime and earned an associate’s degree in 2013. In 2014, 
he began working for defense contractors. He has worked for them continually, except 
for six months when he was unemployed as a consequence of a work-related hand injury. 
His wife works for a school district. (Tr. 20-27, 33-34.)  
 
 Applicant initially filed a SF 86 in 1985 and was subsequently granted a security 
clearance. In 2002, he submitted another SF 86 for re-investigation for purposes of 
receiving a promotion. In 2003, the Army revoked his clearance on the basis that he failed 
to answer a Statement of Reasons that alleged delinquent debts. In 2008, he submitted 
another SF 86. The Army subsequently issued another SOR alleging delinquent debts. 
In 2009, Applicant’s request for a security clearance was denied after he failed to respond 
to the second SOR. In 2015, he submitted another SF 86, which is the subject of this 
investigation. (GE 1, GE 5, GE 7, GE 8, and GE 9.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from June 2017, April 2015, and February 
2008, the 2015 SOR alleged 15 delinquent debts that totaled $37,035. Seven of those 
debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g) became delinquent between 2009 and 2014. Eight of 
them (SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.o) became delinquent between 2003 and 2006. (GE 3, GE 
4, GE 6.) Applicant admitted owing the debts. (Answer). All of the debts remain 
unresolved except the following three: 
 
 (¶ 1.b) Applicant began making monthly payments of $70 in June 2017. It will be 
paid in six months. (Tr. 29-30.) 
                                            
1I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2Department Counsel offered Hearing Exhibit 1 as demonstrative evidence. It is a summary of the SOR- 
alleged debts. Applicant had no objection to this exhibit. (Tr. 19.)   
 
 
 
 
3 
 (¶ 1.e) The $455 debt owed to a satellite company was paid in May 2017. (Tr. 34-
35; GE 4.) 
 
 (¶ 1.k) The $680 debt owed for a returned check was paid by his wife. (Tr. 39.)  
 
  Applicant attributed his history of delinquent debts to earning insufficient income 
and mismanaging that income over the years. (Tr. 49-50.) He has not participated in credit 
counseling or financial budgeting. (Tr. 51.) Three new debts appeared on his 2015 CBR 
that are not alleged in the SOR: two telephone bills and one medical debt, totaling 
$1,492.3 (GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a budget. His net total monthly income is about $5,800, and 
includes his retirement and disability payments. After paying expenses, he has $1,500 
remaining at the end of the month. His wife earns $1,300 a month, which is not included 
in his budget. (Tr. 46-48, 51; AE A.) He anticipated receiving a $20,000 payment from the 
insurance company responsible for compensating him for his hand injury. He intended to 
use that money to resolve his delinquent debts. (Tr. 44-45, 46.) 
 
 The SOR also alleged that Applicant failed to disclose requested information in his 
2008 and 2015 SF 86 (GE 3, GE 6.). Those allegations are as follows: 
 
 (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.d) He did not disclose in his 2008 and 2015 SF 86 that he had 
been investigated by the U.S. Government for security clearance eligibility in 2002 and 
2008; 
 
 (SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.e) He did not disclose in his 2008 and 2015 SF 86 that his 
clearance had been revoked in 2002; 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.c) He did not disclose delinquent debts in his 2015 SF 86. 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.f) He did not disclose in his 2008 SF 86 that he had a vehicle 
repossessed; and 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.g) He did not disclose in his 2008 SF 86 the delinquent debts alleged in  
SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.o. 
  
  Applicant admitted these allegation in his Answer, but denied, while testifying, that 
he had intentionally falsified the information. (Tr. 53; Answer.) He said he knew he had 
delinquent debts, but did not know how old they were until he saw the SOR. He did not 
list the previous investigations because he thought they were too far in the past and not 
required to be disclosed. He said he was not paying close attention to the questions in 
the 2015 SF 86 while he was completing the form. He acknowledged that he made a 
                                            
3These unalleged debts shall not be considered in an analysis of the disqualifying conditions; however, 
they may be considered in the analysis of mitigating conditions, the whole-person concept, and Applicant’s 
credibility. 
 
 
 
 
4 
serious mistake by not disclosing the required information and accepted responsibility for 
it. (Tr. 54-58.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial difficulties starting in 2002, as documented by 
CBRs and his admissions. He has been unwilling or unable to satisfy or resolve these 
debts. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, 
and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that his delinquent debts were attributable to insufficient 
income and financial mismanagement. The majority of the alleged debts remain 
unresolved. There is minimal evidence to conclude that similar problems will not recur. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant’s lack of income over the years may have been a circumstance beyond 
his control. However, financial mismanagement was within his control. There is 
insufficient evidence documenting that he acted responsibly under the circumstances and 
during the accumulation of the delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) applies minimally. 
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that he participated in credit or financial 
counseling and there is scant evidence that his debts and finances are under control. The 
evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). He made a good-faith effort to 
pay or resolve three debts. He established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) as to those 
debts. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant admitted that he failed to disclose requested information in his 2008 and 
2015 SF-86s. While testifying, he denied that he intentionally falsified his security 
 
 
 
 
7 
clearance applications. He stated that he did not carefully read his 2015 SF 86 while 
completing it. He thought the information regarding delinquent debts, previous security 
clearance investigations, and the revocation of his clearance were facts too old to be 
included in either SF 86. He also appeared to be unfamiliar with some debts. Given the 
scope of the information left out on both SF 86s, his explanations for not disclosing the 
requested information alleged in the SOR are not credible. Additionally, he had been on 
notice that his delinquent debts created security concerns since 2002 or earlier. The 
evidence established the above disqualifying condition. 
AG ¶ 17 includes two conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
personal conduct: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Applicant did not make a prompt or good-faith effort to correct the 
misrepresentations he made in his 2008 and 2015 SF 86s, prior to or during the 
investigations related to his security clearance. AG ¶ 17(a) does not provide mitigation. 
Failing to intentionally disclose information in a security clearance application is not a 
minor offense. AG ¶ 17(c) does not provide mitigation for the SOR allegations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult and 
is accountable for the decisions that lead to his history of delinquent debts and the 
resulting security concerns. A significant concern in this case is the fact that Applicant 
has encountered security clearance problems in 2002, 2008, and again in 2015, related 
to delinquent debts; and in 2008 and 2015 for delinquent debts and undisclosed 
information. While fully recognizing Applicant’s impressive and commendable service and 
weighing that in his favor, at this time, he has not established a sufficient track record of 
managing debts or disclosing requested information to outweigh the negative factors in 
this case. Additionally, he has been on notice of the Government’s repeated concerns 
about his financial situation for about 15 years. Overall, the evidence raises doubt as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraph 1.a:        Against Applicant 
       Subparagraph 1.b:        For Applicant 
     Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:                 Against Applicant 
       Subparagraph 1.e:        For Applicant 
     Subparagraphs 1.f through 1.j:                 Against Applicant 
       Subparagraph 1.k:        For Applicant 
     Subparagraphs 1.l through 1.o:      Against Applicant 
  
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
        Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.g:      Against Applicant  
         
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
