 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08248 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle P. Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns relating to her 
connections to Nigeria. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 18, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Position (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1. On June 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on 
September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign influence 
guideline. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant provided an undated response to the SOR. HE 3. On July 9, 2016, 
Applicant requested a hearing. Transcript (Tr.) 15. On August 31, 2016, Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed. On April 17, 2017, the case was assigned to another 
administrative judge, and on September 12, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On 
May 22, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing, setting the hearing for October 12, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as 
scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered one exhibit; Applicant offered 
two exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Tr. 18-23; GE 1; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-B. On October 20, 2017, DOHA 
received a copy of the transcript of the hearing. On November 14, 2017, Applicant 
provided three exhibits, which was admitted without objection. AE C-AE E. The record 
closed on November 15, 2017. Tr. 51, 55-56. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which are 
applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs 
supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective on June 8, 2017. I have evaluated 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered a summary for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Nigeria with 
seven attachments. Tr. 18-19; HE 4; I-VII. Administrative or official notice is the 
appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 16-
02522 at 2-3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 
12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Applicant objected to me 
taking administrative notice of the proffered documents because of lack of relevance. 
Tr. 19-21. Her objection is overruled, and Department Counsel’s request for 
administrative notice is granted. Tr. 21. Applicant provided information about Nigeria 
after the hearing; there was no objection; and I have briefly summarized Applicant’s 
submitted information in the first three paragraphs of the Nigeria section, infra. AE C-AE 
D. The remainder of the “Nigeria” section is quoted from Department Counsel’s 
administrative notice request (bullet symbols and internal footnotes are omitted).  
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Findings of Fact2 
 
The SOR alleges: Applicant’s parents are dual citizens of the United States and 
Nigeria (¶ 1.a); her sister is a citizen and resident of Nigeria, and she is employed by an 
entity of the Nigerian Government (¶ 1.b); and her sister, parents-in-law, and two 
siblings-in-law are citizens and residents of Nigeria (¶ 1.c). HE 2. Applicant admitted the 
SOR allegations in her response to the SOR. HE 3. She also provided mitigating 
information. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old director of professional services for a government 
contractor who has employed her for two years. Tr. 7, 9; GE 1. Applicant was born in 
the United States. Tr. 49. When she was an infant, her parents, who were Nigerian 
citizens, moved to Nigeria. Tr. 25. In 2000, she graduated from high school in Nigeria. 
Tr. 7, 25. In 2002, she returned to the United States. Tr. 25. In 2005, she received a 
bachelor’s degree in the United States, and in 2006, she received a master’s degree in 
the United States in management and information systems. Tr. 8-9. She has not served 
in the U.S. military or the military of any other country. Tr. 9. 
 
In 2006, Applicant married, and her four children are ages 10 months, 6, 8, and 
14. Tr. 9. Her spouse was born in Nigeria and naturalized as a U.S. citizen. GE 1. Her 
Nigerian passport is expired, and she has a U.S. passport. Tr. 24. She has never voted 
in a Nigerian election. Tr. 24. Applicant’s spouse and children are U.S. citizens. Tr. 54. 
Applicant and her spouse vote in U.S. elections. Tr. 55.  
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Nigeria. GE 1. In 2012 or 2013, they became 
U.S. citizens. Tr. 27; GE 1. Applicant’s mother died in the summer of 2017, and her 
father is currently staying in Nigeria. Tr. 26. He intends to return to the United States. Tr. 
27. Her brother who is a citizen of Nigeria is a permanent resident of the United 
Kingdom, where he has lived since 2005 or 2006. Tr. 28-29. Her sister has lived in the 
United Kingdom since 2004, and she is a citizen of the United Kingdom. Tr. 31.  
 
Applicant has two sisters who are citizens and residents of Nigeria. Tr. 32, 36. 
One sister is an accountant for a Nigerian Government agency that facilitates tourism 
and encourages public debate, patriotism, and public knowledge about Nigeria. Tr. 32-
33, 50; AE C. She is 10 years older than Applicant, and her husband is deceased. Tr. 
36, 38. Applicant is not familiar with her duties and does not know whether she is a 
supervisor. Tr. 34. Applicant communicates with her older sister about twice a month. 
Tr. 35. They do not discuss Applicant’s work. Tr. 35. Applicant communicates with her 
younger sister on a weekly basis. Tr. 37. Her younger sister does not have ties to the 
Nigerian Government. Tr. 38. Her younger sister’s husband works for a hotel chain 
based in the United States. Tr. 38. Applicant does not send her sisters money. Tr. 35, 
38. 
 
                                            
2The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and her family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant visited Nigeria three times in the past 15 years: in August 2017, for her 
mother’s funeral; in 2010; and in 2005. Tr. 37, 45. For each visit, she stayed 10 to 21 
days. Tr. 47. 
 
Applicant’s parents-in-law immigrated to the United States in 2014, and they are 
U.S. permanent residents. Tr. 39; AE B. Applicant’s sister-in-law and brother-in-law are 
citizens and residents of Nigeria. Tr. 43. Applicant has contact with her sister-in-law and 
brother-in-law about every six weeks. Tr. 43-44. Her in-laws do not and did not work for 
the Nigerian Government, and they do not have ties to the Nigerian Government. Tr. 42-
44. She has not sent any of her in-laws funds. Tr. 39-44. The only times she met any of 
her in-laws were during her Nigerian visits in 2010 and August 2017. Tr. 45. 
 
Applicant’s spouse works for the U.S. Government in information technology. Tr. 
53. Applicant and her spouse’s annual salary totals $250,000. Tr. 53. Their total U.S. 
net worth is about $700,000, and they do not have any financial interests in Nigeria. Tr. 
54. In November 2017, Applicant formally renounced her Nigerian citizenship. Tr. 48; 
AE E.  
 
Nigeria 
 
Nigeria is a federal republic that gained independence from Britain in 1960.  
Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa with a population in 2017 of more than 
180 million. The country’s area is about the same as California, Nevada, and Arizona 
combined. The United States is Nigeria’s largest trading partner. Oil and gas exports 
from Nigeria are most of Nigeria’s export income. The United States is the largest 
foreign investor in Nigeria, and U.S. investment is mostly in mining and petroleum.    
 
Since the restoration of basic democracy in Nigeria in 1999, the bilateral 
relationship between the United States and Nigeria has continued to improve, and 
cooperation on many important foreign policy goals, such as regional peacekeeping, 
has been excellent. On April 6, 2010, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Nigerian 
Secretary to the Government of the Federation Yayale Ahmed inaugurated the U.S.-
Nigeria Binational Commission, a formalized commitment to hold bilateral talks on four 
key areas: good governance, transparency, and integrity; energy and investment; Niger 
Delta and regional security; and agriculture and food security. During her first official trip 
to Africa, Secretary Clinton visited Nigeria on August 12, 2009. Nigeria’s President 
Jonathan met with President Barack Obama at the White House on June 8, 2011.  
 
Nigeria has three tiers of government. Nigeria utilizes a Presidential System of 
Government with a National Assembly with two chambers (similar to the U.S. 
Congress). Each of the 36 states in Nigeria has a State Assembly. There are also 774 
local governments. An estimated one million Nigerians and Nigerian Americans live, 
study, and work in the United States, while over 25,000 Americans live and work in 
Nigeria.  
 
Nigeria has suffered from ethnic, regional, and religious violence. Reports of 
serious human rights abuses have been ongoing. Abuses have been committed by the 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
militant terrorist group, Boko Haram, and Nigerian security forces. Civilian authorities 
have not always maintained effective control over security services.  
 
Nigerian security forces, particularly the police, have been accused of serious 
human rights abuses. The Government lacked effective mechanisms and sufficient 
political will to investigate and punish security force abuse and corruption. The police 
and military remained susceptible to corruption, committed human rights abuses, and 
operated with widespread impunity in the apprehension, illegal detention, torture, and 
extrajudicial execution of suspects. The government took few steps to investigate or 
prosecute officials who committed abuses and impunity remained widespread at all 
levels of government.  
 
Non-governmental organizations and international human rights groups have 
accused the security services of illegal detention, inhuman treatment and torture of 
demonstrators, criminal suspects, detainees, and prisoners. Other serious human rights 
problems included vigilante killings; prolonged pretrial detention, often in poor conditions 
and with limited independent oversight; civilian detentions in military facilities, often 
based on flimsy evidence; denial of fair public trial; executive influence on the judiciary; 
infringement on citizens’ privacy rights; restrictions on freedoms of speech, press, 
assembly, and movement; official corruption; violence against women and children, 
including female genital mutilation/cutting; sexual exploitation of children; trafficking in 
persons; early and forced marriages; discrimination based on sexual orientation and 
gender identity; discrimination based on ethnicity, regional origin, religion, and disability; 
forced and bonded labor; and child labor.  
 
The most serious human rights problems during 2015 and 2016 were those 
committed by Boko Haram, which each year conducted numerous attacks on 
government and civilian targets throughout the country, resulting in thousands of deaths 
and injuries, widespread destruction, forced internal displacement of an estimated 1.8 
million, and external displacement of almost 200,000 refugees to neighboring countries. 
Boko Haram is a Nigeria-based militant group with links to al-Qa’ida in the Islamic 
Maghreb (AQIM) that is responsible for thousands of deaths in northeast and central 
Nigeria over the last several years including targeted killings of civilians. Also operating 
in Nigeria, Ansaru is a Boko Haram splinter faction that earlier in 2013 kidnapped and 
executed seven international construction workers. While northeastern Nigeria is the 
epicenter of Boko Haram activities, the group has taken responsibility for attacks in Jos, 
the Federal Capitol Territory, and Lagos. Boko Haram has targeted churches, schools, 
mosques, government installations, educational institutions, and entertainment venues 
in Adamawa, Bauchi, Borno, Gombe, Kaduna, Kano, Plateau, Taraba, the Federal 
Capital Territory, and Yobe states. Hundreds of thousands of Nigerians have been 
displaced as a result of violence in the north. Islamic State West Africa, which is now a 
distinct group from Boko Haram, is present in Nigeria, and may seek to attack locations 
frequented by westerners including major population centers. 
 
In its response to Boko Haram, and at times to crime in general, security services 
perpetrated extrajudicial killings and engaged in torture, rape, arbitrary detention, 
mistreatment of detainees, and destruction of property. A vigilante group known as the 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Civilian Joint Task Force (C-JFT) continued to recruit children. The government took 
few steps to investigate or prosecute officials who committed violations, whether in the 
security forces or elsewhere in the government. Authorities did not investigate or punish 
the majority of police or military abuse. 
 
Kidnappings remain a security concern throughout the country. Kidnappings in 
recent years have resulted in the deaths of foreign nationals, including several killed by 
their captors during military-led raids/rescue operations. Criminal groups continued to 
abduct civilians, often to collect ransom payments. Prominent and wealthy figures were 
often targets of abductions. Abductions by Boko Haram continued.  
 
Security forces personnel have arbitrarily arrested numerous persons. Prisoners 
and detainees were treated improperly, and were frequently extorted by guards and 
prison officials. Prison officials, police, and other security force personnel often denied 
inmates food and unethical treatment to punish them or extort money. Only prisoners 
with money or support from their families had sufficient food.  
 
In March 2015, Abubakar Shekau, the leader of Boko Haram, pledged his 
allegiance to ISIS, rebranding the group as the Islamic State in West Africa.” “Boko 
Haram and ISIS-West Africa continued to carry out killings, bombings, and attacks on 
civilian and military targets in northern Nigeria, resulting in thousands of deaths, injuries, 
and significant destruction of property in 2016.” “The Nigerian government actively 
cooperated with the United States and other international partners to prevent further 
acts of terrorism in Nigeria against U.S. citizens, citizens of third countries, and Nigerian 
citizens. Nigerian law enforcement agencies cooperated with the U.S. FBI to assist with 
counterterrorism investigations, including disruptions, information sharing, and 
interviews.” 
 
The Nigerian government expected to confront a wide range of challenges in 
2016, many of which are deeply rooted and have no “quick fixes.” Tasks include 
reviving a struggling economy - Africa’s largest - diversifying sources of government 
revenue beyond oil, reining in corruption, forming parastatal organizations, and 
developing the power, agriculture, and transportation sectors. Nigeria will continue to 
face internal threats from Boko Haram. Despite losing territory in 2015, Boko Haram will 
probably remain a threat to Nigeria and will continue its terror campaign within the 
country and in neighboring Cameroon, Niger and Chad.  
 
The Department of State warns U.S. citizens of the risks of travel to Nigeria and 
recommends that U.S. citizens avoid all but essential travel to Adamawa, Bauchi, 
Borno, Gombe, Kano, and Yobe states because the security situation in northeast 
Nigeria remains fluid and unpredictable. There are significant risks associated with 
travel in Nigeria, including terrorist attacks, kidnappings, crime, and communal or 
political violence. 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
   
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant has frequent contacts3 with her relatives, including in-laws, who are 
citizens and residents of Nigeria. Applicant did not establish that her husband did not 
                                            
3 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
have frequent contacts with his relatives in Nigeria. Their frequent contacts are a 
demonstration of their care and concern for relatives living in Nigeria. A Nigerian 
Government entity employs Applicant’s sister.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living 
in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B; however, 
if an applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case 
No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001).  
 
Applicant lives with and is close to her spouse. Her spouse has relatives living in 
Nigeria. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). “[A]s a matter of common sense 
and human experience, there is [also] a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of 
affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” 
ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 
at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(e). Indirect influence 
from a spouse’s relatives living in Nigeria could result in a security concern. See ISCR 
Case No. 09-05812 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (finding “presence in India of close 
family members, viewed in light of that country’s troubles with terrorism and its human 
rights abuses, and his sharing living quarters with a person (his spouse) having foreign 
family contacts, establish the ‘heightened risk’” in AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e)).   
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Nigeria with the United States, 
places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
demonstrate that her relationships with her family members living in Nigeria do not pose 
a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where she might be forced 
to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist relatives living in 
Nigeria.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Nigeria 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or her 
family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services, and Nigeria has a serious problem with terrorism. 
Applicant’s relationships with relatives living in Nigeria create a potential conflict of 
interest because terrorists could place pressure on her family living in Nigeria in an 
effort to cause Applicant to compromise classified information. These relationships 
create “a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” 
under AG ¶ 7. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s 
contacts with family in Nigeria and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry is necessary 
about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists five conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; and 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶¶ 8(b) applies. Applicant has frequent contact with her relatives, who are 
citizens and residents of Nigeria. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant was born in the 
United States, and she returned to the United States from Nigeria after completion of 
high school in Nigeria. Her spouse and children are U.S. citizens. Her parents-in-law are 
U.S. permanent residents. Her father is a U.S. citizen.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by her relationships with relatives who are citizens 
and residents of Nigeria. Like every other resident of Nigeria, they are at risk from 
terrorists. 
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to her relatives living in Nigeria are less 
significant than her connections to the United States. Her employment in support of the 
U.S. Government, family living in the United States, and U.S. citizenship are important 
factors weighing towards mitigation of security concerns. She has no financial 
connections to Nigeria. She only has two visits to Nigeria in the previous 10 years. Her 
connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome and 
mitigate the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guideline B are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Nigeria must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in Nigeria, as well as the dangers existing in Nigeria.4 While there 
is no evidence Nigeria is a collector of U.S. intelligence and sensitive economic 
information, Nigeria has very serious economic, military, political, judicial/legal and 
social problems. Nigeria and the United States are closely related in trade and 
diplomacy. Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa and about one million 
Nigerians live in the United States. The United States is Nigeria’s largest trading 
partner.  
    
Applicant was born in United States. When she was an infant, her family went to 
Nigeria, where her parents were born. Applicant attended grammar school and high 
school in Nigeria. Applicant’s sister-in-law, brother-in-law, and two sisters are citizens 
and residents of Nigeria. Applicant’s father is a dual citizen of the United States and 
Nigeria, and he is currently staying in Nigeria. An entity of the Nigerian Government 
employs Applicant’s sister. Her sister is an accountant, and her sister is not part of the 
military or diplomatic parts of the Nigerian Government. Applicant frequently 
communicates with her relatives living in Nigeria, and these communications are a 
manifestation of her affection for them. 
 
After graduating from high school, Applicant returned to the United States; she 
earned bachelor’s and master’s degrees in the United States; and she has been 
employed in the United States. In November 2017, Applicant renounced her Nigerian 
citizenship. Her spouse and four children are U.S. citizens, and they all reside in the 
United States. Applicant and her spouse’s annual salary totals $250,000. Their total 
U.S. net worth is about $700,000, and they do not have any financial interests in 
Nigeria.  
 
The possibility of attempted exploitation of Applicant through her family in Nigeria 
is low. Applicant’s strong connections to the United States and especially to her U.S. 
family, community and employment establish “deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S., [that she] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the U.S. interest.”   
 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
After weighing the evidence of her connections to Nigeria and to the United 
States, and all the facts in this decision, I conclude Applicant has carried her burden of 
mitigating the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
