 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06745 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Justin B. Kalemkiarian, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns due to his connections to 
Iraq. Applicant has not contacted relatives in Iraq since 2013. He has served as a 
linguist in Iraq for about six years. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 27, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Position (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1. On April 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on 
September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs). Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign influence 
guideline. 
 
On June 6, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. HE 
3. On February 15, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On June 22, 
2017, the case was assigned to me. On September 21, 2017, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for 
September 25, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled using video 
teleconference. Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and 
location of the hearing. Transcript (Tr.) 12-13. 
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits; Applicant offered 
five exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Tr. 18-23; GE 1-3; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-E. On September 26, 2017, 
Applicant provided one exhibit, which was admitted without objection. AE F. On October 
3, 2017, DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made 
applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs 
supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or 
after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered a summary for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Iraq with four 
attachments. Tr. 17-18; HE 4; I-IV. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate 
type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 16-02522 at 2-3 
(App. Bd. July 12, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); 
ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 
802 F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR proceedings 
is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, 
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice). Applicant did not object to me taking administrative notice of the 
proffered documents. Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice is 
granted. The “Iraq” section is quoted from Department Counsel’s administrative notice 
request (bullet symbols and internal footnotes are omitted). 
 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Department Counsel provided an article, by Christine Allison, “The Yazidis,” 
Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Religion (Jan. 2017), which was admitted without 
objection. GE 4. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
The SOR alleges the following relatives of Applicant are citizens and residents of 
Iraq: father (¶ 1.a); mother (¶ 1.b); and mother-in-law (¶ 1.c). Applicant did not admit or 
deny the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c because he has not communicated 
with his parents since 2013, and he had not communicated with his mother-in-law since 
2003. HE 3. He did not know whether the three relatives are alive. He also provided 
some mitigating information. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of 
record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old linguist and cultural advisor. Tr. 24. For the previous 31 
months and currently, he has been serving with an elite U.S. Special Operations Force 
(SOF) unit in Iraq. Tr. 24. Applicant was born in Iraq. Tr. 25. Applicant and his family are 
Yazidis. Tr. 25. Some Iraqi Muslims view Yazidis as infidels. Tr. 25. Applicant and his 
brothers did not serve in the Iraqi Army. Tr. 54. Applicant’s father served in the Iraqi 
Army. Tr. 55. Applicant’s two children are ages 11 and 12. Tr. 61. His spouse and 
children were born in Iraq, and they intend to become U.S. citizens. Tr. 61. Applicant’s 
net worth for property and investments in the United States is about $155,000. Tr. 64. 
He does not have any property or investments in Iraq. Tr. 64. 
 
From 2005 to 2009, Applicant worked for the U.S. Army in Iraq as a cultural 
advisor and linguist. Tr. 26. In 2009, he immigrated to the United States, and in 2014, 
he became a U.S. citizen. Tr. 27; GE 1. He returned to Iraq to work with U.S. forces 
from August 2015 to present. Tr. 33; SOR response. 
 
Applicant’s parents were farmers in a Yazidi community. Tr. 28. The last time 
Applicant saw his parents was in 2009, just before he left Iraq. Tr. 30. The last time he 
spoke with his parents was in 2013. Tr. 30. In 2013, he sent his mother $5,000 so she 
could have back surgery. Tr. 30, 50, 54. The last time he saw or spoke with his 
spouse’s parents was in 2003. Tr. 31, 52. In August 2014, ISIL attacked the area where 
his parents lived in Iraq. Tr. 47. His spouse has not spoken to her mother since August 
2014. Applicant’s father-in-law is deceased. GE 1. ISIL insisted that the Yazidi men 
convert to Islam, or they were killed. Tr. 48. ISIL took the Yazidis’ property and enslaved 
the women and children. Tr. 48. Applicant believed that ISIL was aware Applicant and 
his brothers assisted the United States, and ISIL destroyed his parents’ farm. Tr. 50. He 
does not know where his parents or in-laws are located. Tr. 31. He believes his relatives 
who were in Iraq are either refugees, kidnapped, or deceased. Tr. 34, 51. They could be 
refugees if they were able to go to Kurdistan or Europe. Tr. 51. Something on social 
media indicated they were refugees. Tr. 59. He does not believe his parents, if they are 
alive, will return to Iraq because ISIL probably destroyed their farm, and Iraq is not safe 
                                            
2 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
for them. Tr. 65. He was unsure about the status of the land his parents owned in Iraq. 
Tr. 68. 
 
Applicant’s two brothers worked for the United States in Iraq as linguists, and 
they immigrated to the United States in 2012. Tr. 29, 42, 44-45. Applicant and his 
brothers were approved to immigrate to the United States because of the danger for 
U.S.-employed linguists in Iraq. Tr. 27. Applicant’s brothers are employed in the civilian 
community in the United States. Tr. 46. His two brothers are U.S. permanent residents, 
and they plan to apply for U.S. citizenship when they become eligible to do so. Tr. 46. 
Applicant’s spouse and two children live in the United States. Tr. 29. Applicant is proud 
to be an American, and he loves the United States. Tr. 35. On February 23, 2015, 
Applicant wrote a statement renouncing his Iraqi citizenship, and he provided the 
statement to his employer. Tr. 37, 65-66. He does not believe the Iraqi Government has 
a mechanism for renunciation of citizenship. Tr. 66. He does not consider himself to be 
a citizen of Iraq. Tr. 69. 
 
Character Evidence3 
 
In August 2017, SOF officers indicated Applicant had been working closely with 
SOF units for 31 months. AE A; AE B. Applicant performed “above and beyond” 
requirements. He is “an irreplaceable member” of the unit. He “operated in austere 
combat conditions with grave risk to his own life,” and he “has absolutely saved 
countless American lives.” He “willingly placed himself in dangerous situations to 
translate” for SOF teams. His energy, dedication, and professionalism has enhanced 
mission success. 
 
In 2016, an SOF officer who served closely with Applicant described him as a 
“reliable, hardworking, and honest linguist.” He is “an immensely valuable asset” and his 
work ethic is “unparalleled among his peers.” He recommended Applicant for a top 
secret clearance. In 2016, another lieutenant wrote Applicant “demonstrated 
professional acumen of the highest caliber.” His cultural advice was “truly invaluable.” 
Applicant has his “strongest recommendation of character, professionalism, and 
integrity.”  
 
In 2009, an Army officer who served with Applicant lauded his “irreplaceable 
work ethic and commitment to teamwork.” In 2008, an Army lieutenant colonel gave his 
“strongest and unqualified recommendation” to Applicant because of his selfless and 
tireless support to the United States. He lauded Applicant for his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and intelligence. In 2007, an Army brigadier general wrote that 
Applicant, “continues to courageously serve U.S. forces in Iraq in a role identified by the 
President of the United States as his top priority in Iraq right now that being the 
development of Iraqi Security Forces.” Applicant’s work has been outstanding. “The 
work [Applicant] performs is arguably the most dangerous role possible for a local 
national interpreter. . . .” He noted Applicant had “risked everything to serve the United 
States Armed Forces during this conflict.” In 2007, an Army major praised Applicant for 
                                            
3 Unless stated otherwise, all of the information in this section is from attachments to his SOR 
response.  
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
his outstanding performance of duty, responsibility, loyalty, diligence, dedication, and 
exceptional contributions to mission accomplishment. 
 
Applicant provided additional character evidence as follows: character letters 
from a linguist, one chief petty officer, one lieutenant, and three staff sergeants; two 
letters of appreciation certificates; four certificates of appreciation; and one certificate of 
achievement. SOR response; AE D-AE E.      
 
The Yazidis 
 
An article, by Christine Allison, “The Yazidis,” Oxford Research Encyclopedia of 
Religion (Jan. 2017) describes the plight of the Yazidis in Iraq as follows: 
 
One of the world’s most endangered religious minorities, the Yazidis are a 
predominantly Kurdish-speaking group numbering some 500,000 souls, 
who once inhabited a wide area stretching across eastern Turkey, 
northern Syria, northern Iraq, and western Iran. Of these territories, only 
the community in Iraq still numbers in the hundreds of thousands. Most 
come from two areas: Sheikhan, a collection of villages and towns to the 
northeast of Mosul, and Sinjar, a mountain to the northwest close to the 
border with Syria. Until recently these areas seemed stable; however, in 
August 2014, the so-called Islamic State (Da’esh) attacked the ancient 
community of Yazidis of Mount Sinjar, massacring hundreds of men, 
enslaving thousands of women and children, and driving the population of 
some 350,000 Yazidis into camps for internally displaced persons in the 
Kurdistan region. They are targeted because of their non-Abrahamic 
religion; for many years they have been erroneously known as “devil-
worshippers.” In fact, their belief system incorporates visible elements 
from the three “religions of the Book” (Judaism, Christianity, and Islam) 
and traces of lesser-known religions, upon a substratum that may derive 
from Iranian religions (Zoroastrianism or similar). It is not a proselytizing 
faith, and religious relationships within the community are determined by 
birth. Marrying out is traditionally forbidden. 
 
Iraq 
 
The U.S. State Department warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq remain at high risk for 
kidnapping and terrorist violence and to avoid all but essential travel to Iraq. The U.S. 
Government considers the potential threat to U.S. Government personnel in Iraq to be 
serious enough to require them to live and work under strict security guidelines.  
 
The ability of the U.S. Embassy to provide consular services to U.S. citizens 
outside Baghdad is extremely limited given the security environment. The Islamic State 
of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) controls a significant portion of Iraq’s territory. Within areas 
under ISIL control, the Iraqi government has little or no ability to exercise control and 
ensure public safety.  
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Anti-U.S. sectarian militias may threaten U.S. citizens and western companies 
throughout Iraq. Kidnappings and attacks by improvised explosive devices (IED) occur 
frequently in many areas of the country, including Baghdad. Methods of attack have 
included explosively formed penetrators (EFPs), magnetic IEDs placed on vehicles, 
human and vehicle-borne IEDs, mines placed on or concealed near roads, mortars and 
rockets, and shootings using various direct fire weapons. Such attacks often take place 
in public venues such as cafes and markets.  
 
Iraq witnessed a continued surge of terrorist activity in 2015, primarily as a result 
of the actions of ISIL. In 2015, the ISIL remained the greatest terrorist threat globally, 
maintaining a formidable force in Iraq and Syria, including a large number of foreign 
terrorist fighters. ISIL’s capacity and territorial control in Iraq reached a high point in 
spring 2015, but began to erode over the second half of 2015. Although the government 
of Iraq made significant progress in its campaign to retake occupied territory from ISIL, 
there remained a security vacuum in parts of Iraq.  
 
In its annual human rights report, the U.S. Department of State reported that ISIL 
committed the overwhelming number of serious human rights abuses, including attacks 
against civilians, especially Shia but also Sunnis who opposed ISIL, members of other 
religious and ethnic minorities, women, and children. ISIL members committed acts of 
violence on a mass scale, including killing by suicide bombings, improvised explosive 
devices, execution-style shootings, public beheadings, and other forms of executions. 
Sectarian hostility, widespread corruption, and lack of transparency at all levels of 
government and society weakened the Iraqi government's authority and worsened 
effective human rights protections. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should 
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President,  
Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant does not have frequent contacts4 with any citizens or residents of Iraq. 
He is unable to contact his relatives, and he and his spouse are unable to contact her 
mother because they are Yazidis, who were forced off their land by ISIL. They are 
refugees, kidnapped, or deceased. Applicant credibly described the plight of his parents 
and mother-in-law. AG ¶ 7(a) is not established because of the absence of contact 
between Applicant and his spouse and their relatives in Iraq. 
 
There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Iraq because of 
terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has voluntarily shared in those dangers on behalf of 
the DOD for about six years, and he is willing to do so in the future. Numerous linguists, 
supporting U.S. forces, have family living in Iraq. Thousands of the U.S. and coalition 
armed forces and civilian contractors serving in Iraq are targets of terrorists along with 
Iraqi civilians who support the Iraq Government and cooperate with coalition forces.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living 
in Iraq is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B; however, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
                                            
4 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant lives with and is close to his spouse. His spouse’s mother is a Yazidi 
who lived in Iraq. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection 
for, or obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-
03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). “[A]s a matter of common 
sense and human experience, there is [also] a rebuttable presumption that a person has 
ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s 
spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 
01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(e). Indirect 
influence from a spouse’s relatives living in Iraq could result in a security concern. See 
ISCR Case No. 09-05812 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (finding “presence in India of 
close family members, viewed in light of that country’s troubles with terrorism and its 
human rights abuses, and his sharing living quarters with a person (his spouse) having 
foreign family contacts, establish the ‘heightened risk’” in AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e)).   
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Iraq with the United States, 
and the situation in Iraq places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members 
living in Iraq do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position 
where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire 
to assist a relative living in Iraq.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Iraq seek 
or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services, and Iraq has an enormous problem with 
terrorism. Applicant’s relationships with relatives who may be living in Iraq create a 
potential conflict of interest because terrorists could place pressure on his family living 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
in Iraq in an effort to cause Applicant to compromise classified information. These 
relationships create “a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of 
Applicant’s contacts with family in Iraq and has raised the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry is 
necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) apply. Applicant does not have frequent contact with 
his mother-in-law or parents. They are or were citizens of Iraq; however, they may be 
deceased or refugees outside of Iraq. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” In 2009, 
Applicant immigrated to the United States, and in 2014, he became a U.S. citizen. His 
spouse lives in the United States, and she is a permanent U.S. resident. His children 
are residents of the United States. All of his siblings live in the United States.  
 
Applicant’s years of support to the DOD in Iraq as a linguist and cultural advisor, 
including the dangers that service entailed, weigh heavily towards mitigating security 
concerns. Applicant is currently serving in Iraq providing critical assistance to U.S. 
Armed Forces in a dangerous combat environment. He has offered to continue to risk 
his life to support the United States’ goals in Iraq. He has shown his patriotism, loyalty, 
and fidelity to the United States during his approximately six years of service in Iraq.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are or were 
citizens of Iraq and could possibly be located in Iraq. Applicant’s mother-in-law is or was 
a citizen of Iraq, and she may reside in Iraq. Like every other resident of Iraq, any of his 
relatives who may be living in Iraq are at risk from terrorists. 
 
It is important to be mindful of the United States’ huge investment of manpower 
and money in Iraq, and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in Iraq. 
Applicant and his relatives possibly living in Iraq are potential targets of terrorists, and 
Applicant’s potential access to classified information could theoretically add risk if his 
relatives are still living in Iraq from lawless elements in Iraq.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s possible future connections to his relatives living in Iraq are 
less significant than his connections to the United States. His employment in support of 
the U.S. Government, family living in the United States, performance of linguist duties in 
a combat zone, and U.S. citizenship are important factors weighing towards mitigation 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
of security concerns. His connections to the United States taken together are sufficient 
to fully overcome and mitigate the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline 
B.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guideline B are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant and his spouse do not have frequent contact with any relatives who are 
citizens and residents of Iraq. Any relationships with citizens and residents of Iraq raise 
important foreign influence security concerns, and they must be balanced against his 
connections to the United States.      
 
In 2009, Applicant immigrated to the United States, and in 2014, he became a 
U.S. citizen. His spouse lives in the United States, and she is a permanent U.S. 
resident. His children are residents of the United States. All of his siblings live in the 
United States. When he became a U.S. citizen, he took an oath of allegiance to the 
United States. There is no evidence that Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, 
abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or violated any of his employer’s rules. 
 
Applicant served as a linguist, translator, or cultural advisor for about six years in 
Iraq. He worked for U.S. government contractors. Applicant provided exceptional 
character references and certificates from SOF and Army personnel, who served with 
him in a U.S. designated combat zone. He made contributions to the U.S. military at 
personal risk. He is willing to continue to serve in Iraq in support of U.S. Armed Forces 
as a linguist, risking his life as part of his duties on behalf of the U.S. combat forces in 
Iraq. All these circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, 
resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to 
coerce or exploit him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). His 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
past honorable service as a linguist weighs heavily towards approval of his security 
clearance. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (affirming grant 
of security clearance and commenting “Applicant has served as a translator and as a 
cultural liaison between Americans and Afghan citizens, diffusing tensions and 
facilitating transactions between the two groups. . . . . Applicant put his life in danger on 
at least one occasion to protect American lives and interests in Afghanistan.”). 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Iraq must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.5 Iraq is a dangerous place because of violence 
from terrorists and insurgents. These entities continue to threaten the Iraq Government, 
the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, and those who cooperate and 
assist the United States. The Iraqi Government does not fully comply with the rule of law 
or protect civil liberties in many instances. The United States and Iraqi Governments are 
allies in the war on terrorism.       
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence security 
concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
5 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
