 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05743 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On August 11, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                            
1I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 23, 2016 (Answer). On October 
24, 2016, he emailed Department Counsel requesting a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on 
April 27, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 16, 2017, setting the hearing 
for June 28, 2017. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 
into evidence. Applicant testified, and offered Exhibits (AE) A through C into evidence. All 
exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
July 7, 2017. The record remained open until August 4, 2017, for the submission of 
additional exhibits. Applicant timely submitted another document that I marked as AE D 
and admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old and divorced since October 2003. He and his former wife 
have three adult children, ages 23, 20, and 19. The children live with him. Applicant 
earned an associate’s degree in 1985. From 1997 to 2001, he worked for his current 
employer. From 2001 to 2003, he worked for another defense contractor in the Middle 
East. He then resumed a position with his current employer. (Tr. 17-19; GE 2.) He said 
his performance evaluations have been “top notch.” (Tr. 20.) His employer is aware of 
this investigation and the underlying security concerns. (Tr. 20-21.) He has held a security 
clearance since 1989. (Tr. 8-9.) On March 12, 2015, Applicant submitted another security 
clearance application (SF 86). In it, he disclosed two delinquent debts that are described 
below.  
 
 In March 2003, Applicant and his former wife purchased a trailer home for $62,000 
in a trailer park to be closer to his mother-in-law.2 Several months later they divorced. 
After living there seven years, Applicant decided to move in May 2010 because of the 
unsafe environment in the park. He wanted to sell the trailer, but the landlord would not 
allow him to advertise it and the loan company would not negotiate a resolution. He then 
decided to abandon it and purchased another home in a safe area.  (Tr. 22-25; GE 1, GE 
2.) Subsequently, he defaulted on the trailer loan and the lease of trailer park space. 
 
 Applicant resolved the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a for $706. It was the unpaid lease 
for space in the trailer park. He paid it promptly after a judgment was entered in July 2010. 
He did not resolve the unpaid loan for the trailer home alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. The trailer 
was repossessed by the creditor in 2010 and charged off for $30,600 in April 2011. As of 
the date of the SOR, the delinquent account grew to $41,031. (Tr. 25-26; GE 2; GE 3; 
Answer.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he did not intend to pay the unpaid loan debt. He is current 
on all other obligations and bills. He stated that the loan debt is the only delinquent debt 
that has ever appeared on his credit report. He has not attempted to negotiate a 
settlement because he has not had sufficient money until recently. He previously 
liquidated all available accounts in order to purchase the new residence in 2010. He said 
                                            
2Applicant and his ex-wife co-signed the trailer loan and lease for the trailer park space.  
 
 
 
 
3 
the divorce negatively affected his finances over the years. He has not spoken to the 
creditor in over five years. The debt has been removed from his credit reports. (Tr. 27-
34.)  
 
 Applicant submitted a budget. His net monthly income is about $4,735. After 
paying expenses, he has about $360 remaining at the end of the month. (AE B.) Post-
hearing, he submitted an email stating that he attempted to contact the creditor about 
resolving the debt. He was told that the matter had been released from his credit history 
and there was nothing he could do to resolve it. (AE D.) He emphasized that he has not 
had financial problems other than this debt. (Tr. 34.) He provided copies of checking and 
investment accounts, which indicate that he has been managing his funds. (AE C.)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
 
 
 
 
4 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so. 
 
In May 2010, Applicant defaulted on a loan for a trailer home and lease of park 
space for it. The loan was charged off in April 2011. He has been unable or unwilling to 
satisfy the debt since June 2010 when he abandoned the trailer and purchased a new 
home. These facts establish prima facie support for the above disqualifying condition, and 
shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes two conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties:  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The two SOR-alleged delinquent debts arose after Applicant had chosen to move 
into a trailer park in order to be close to his former mother-in-law. After living there for 
seven years, he decided that the area was unsafe for his family. The likelihood that he 
will move into another unsafe trailer park is infinitely small. In addition, he has shown no 
indication that he intends to abandon his home and current mortgage. Despite having 
gone through a divorce in 2003, he has managed to keep other debts current and his 
financial situation has not had an adverse effect on his work performance or security 
record. An uncollectible $40,000 debt, half of which is his ex-wife’s, which no one can 
collect or has any interest in collecting, supports no security concerns about coercion or 
duress. Given his earlier competing priorities to raise three teenagers and pay all other 
debts since 2010, he acted sufficiently responsible over the past years. The 
circumstances surrounding the trailer loan debt are unique and old enough that they do 
not cast doubt on Applicant’s current trustworthiness. The evidence establishes mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(a) and AG ¶ 20(b) for both SOR allegations.  Additionally, he paid the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a immediately after a judgment was entered. The evidence 
established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) as to SOR ¶ 2.b.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and candid 
adult, who has successfully worked for defense contractors for over 20 years and held a 
security clearance for most of those years. In 2003, he and his wife jointly purchased a 
trailer in a trailer park. A few months later, they divorced in late 2003. In spring of 2010, 
Applicant abandoned the trailer because the environment was unsafe for his family. A few 
months later the landlord for the trailer park space obtained a judgment for unpaid rent. 
Applicant promptly paid the judgment. Subsequent to repossessing the trailer in 2010, the 
creditor for the trailer loan charged off the loan. Applicant recently contacted that creditor 
and was informed that the debt is unresolvable. These are the only two delinquent debts 
on Applicant’s credit record. Overall, the evidence does not raise doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraph 1.a:        For Applicant 
       Subparagraph 1.b:        For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is granted. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
