 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-08260 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Available information is sufficient to overcome the security concerns raised by 
the Government’s adverse information about Applicant’s financial problems. Applicant’s 
request for eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On July 1, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified 
information as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the 
completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could 
not determine that it was clearly consistent with the interests of national security for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
 
2 
 
 
On June 13, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2 
At the time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new set of AGs, effective for all security 
clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my decision 
in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.3  
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On October 28, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in support of 
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on November 16, 2016, and had 30 days from 
the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.5 Applicant timely responded to 
the FORM and provided extensive documentation in support of his case. I received this 
case on October 1, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 On August 25, 2015, a government investigator interviewed Applicant as part of 
Applicant’s background investigation. The investigator compiled a summary of that 
interview and included it in Applicant’s investigative file. Department Counsel provided 
an unauthenticated copy of that summary as Item 6 of the FORM. In his response to the 
FORM, Applicant objected to the admission of that summary based on the provisions of 
Directive E3.1.20. Applicant’s objection is sustained, and I have not considered FORM, 
Item 6. That document is retained in the FORM for reference on appeal if necessary. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes 
$32,293 for four delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.d). Applicant denied, with 
explanations, all of those allegations. Nonetheless, the information he provided in 
response to the SOR and in response to the FORM, as well as three credit reports 
provided by the Government, are sufficient to establish all four allegations. (FORM, 
Items 1, and 3 – 5) In addition to the facts thus established, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on six enclosed exhibits (Items 
1 – 6). 
5 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has 
worked since July 2010. Aside from a seven-month period of unemployment starting in 
November 2007, Applicant has been gainfully employed since he received an honorable 
discharge from the Air Force in July 2007. After leaving the Air Force, Applicant 
continued to serve part-time in the Air National Guard until July 2010. (FORM, Item 2) 
 
 Applicant and his wife have been married since June 2003. In response to the 
FORM, she submitted a letter accepting some of the blame for their financial problems 
and explaining that her medical issues also hurt their finances. (FORM, Item 2) 
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant established that the civil judgments 
enforcing the debts at SOR 1.a and 1.b were satisfied in November 2016. In his SOR 
response, Applicant showed that he was making payments on the mortgage-related 
debt at SOR 1.c. and that he was using an attorney to resolve that debt. In response to 
the FORM, Applicant established that he later resolved that debt through the sale of his 
house in November 2016. (FORM, Item 1) 
 
 Finally, Applicant established that the credit card debt at SOR 1.d was cancelled 
by the creditor. He provided an IRS Form 1099-C that attributed the amount of the debt 
to Applicant’s income for the 2012 tax year. There is no indication that Applicant did not 
account for this income on his tax returns. (FORM, Item 1) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
                                                 
6 See Directive, 6.3. 
 
4 
 
clearly consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.8 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.9 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information. A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.10 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s denials established those allegations as controverted issues of fact. 
Accordingly, the Government was required to produce substantial reliable information to 
support those allegations. Information provided with Applicant’s Answer, the information 
contained in FORM Items 3 – 5, and the information presented in response to the 
FORM are sufficient to establish the Guideline F allegations. The facts thus established 
reasonably raised the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
                                                 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
8 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
9 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 
 
 
More specifically, this information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). I have also considered whether the record supports application of 
any of the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
  
 All of the debts alleged have been paid or otherwise resolved. Applicant’s 
information generally supports a conclusion that he has acted to resolve his debts to the 
best of his abilities. His information also reflects actions taken to resolve other debts not 
alleged in the SOR. In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before 
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). A fair and 
commonsense assessment of the record evidence as a whole supports a conclusion 
that the security concerns raised by the Government’s information are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
