 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-05691 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Remand Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
This is a security clearance case in which the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) Appeal Board remanded the case to me on December 4, 2017, to 
consider post-hearing evidence. My initial decision in this case concluded that Applicant 
had a history of financial problems and a number of debts that were largely unresolved, 
and that she did not provide evidence of an improving financial status. I then concluded 
she did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, extenuate, mitigate, or explain her 
financial delinquencies and decided the case against her. Applicant appealed that 
decision to the Appeal Board. 
 
 The Appeal Board noted in its remand decision, that Applicant claimed to have 
timely submitted post-hearing documentation to Department Counsel in accordance with 
my direction at the hearing, however that information was not included in the record at 
the time of my decision of September 13, 2017. As a result of the remand, Department 
 
2 
 
Counsel forwarded Applicant’s exhibits (AE) A-M to me on December 6, 2017 (Record 
Ex. 1). AE A-M are admitted without objection. After consideration of her post-hearing 
evidence, I conclude that Applicant has sufficiently mitigated the Guideline F concerns 
raised in the SOR. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 8, 2015. 
On April 20, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F.1 Applicant responded to the SOR, submitted documentary evidence, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
December 13, 2016, and the hearing was convened on January 31, 2017. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 were admitted in evidence without objection. Department 
Counsel moved to amend the SOR to include allegation ¶ 1.w, failure to file and pay 2015 
Federal income taxes when due. The SOR was amended without objection. The record 
was held open to permit Applicant time to submit documentary evidence in mitigation. 
She requested an enlargement of time to April 10, 2017, which was granted. As stated 
above, post-hearing information was timely submitted and will be considered in this 
remand decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor, employed since 2013. 
She received a bachelor’s degree in 2010 and honorably served in the U.S. Army from 
1987 to 2010, when she retired as a master sergeant. She was married in 1993 and 
divorced in 2003. She remarried in 2010 and is now a widow. Applicant has two adult 
children.  
 
The SOR alleged Applicant twice filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The first case was 
filed with her first husband in 1999, and dismissed in 2000 while she was on active duty. 
She was unable to clearly articulate why the case was dismissed, but she relied on her 
husband to manage the family’s finances. 
 
She reported that her second husband was a retired military veteran who suffered 
from post-traumatic stress disorder. She stated that he was abusive, a substance abuser, 
and financially irresponsible. They began to experience financial difficulty in 2010, and 
Applicant’s financial problems have continued to the present. She received financial 
counseling in 2010 through the Army. The second bankruptcy was filed in 2012, and 
dismissed in 2013. The last case was filed to prevent Applicant from losing her home to 
foreclosure, but she was unsuccessful. Her spouse died in 2014. 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
 
The SOR also alleged 19 delinquent accounts2 that have been placed for 
collections or have been charged off. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR 
¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 1.e-1.i, 1.p-1.r, and 1.u-1.v. She was unsure about SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.c, 1.k-1.m, 
and 1.t. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.j, and 1.m-1.n. Applicant stated in her Answer that she 
arranged to pay or make installment payments on debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.i, and 1.p-
1.r. She provided some documentary evidence of payment arrangements, but no 
evidence of payments or compliance with payment plans. The debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.s 
(husband’s repossessed vehicle), has been satisfied. Applicant claimed in her answer 
and testimony to have disputed a mortgage deficiency, medical debts, and consumer 
debts. 
 
SOR allegation ¶ 1.w, failure to file and pay 2015 Federal income taxes when due, 
was added at the hearing to conform the SOR to the evidence. Applicant admitted the 
allegation, and confirmed that she did not file her 2015 tax return or pay taxes owed. She 
expressed concern that her tax preparer’s draft return showed that she owed more than 
she expected. She contacted the IRS, and discussed filing her 2015 return with her 2016 
return, and to request a payment plan at that time to repay overdue taxes. 
 
Applicant submitted post-hearing documentation of resolution of a large number of 
debts, and information about her budget, credit counseling, and life-events that 
significantly impacted her financial status. Applicant provided documentation to show that 
she resolved debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.h, 1.n, 1.s, 1.u, 1.v, and 1.w through payments, each 
resulting in zero balances, a payment plan for her Federal taxes, and a disputed account.  
 
Applicant showed debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.I, and 1.n, are charged-off accounts 
that she asserted are paid. SOR ¶¶ p-r, and t, are also charged-off accounts or medical 
accounts. Once an account is charged off, it is difficult to resurrect and resolve as it is 
dated, no longer in collection by the original creditor, and has typically been internally 
resolved in the creditor’s records. Applicant disputed the small medical debts as she has 
always carried military medical insurance and is unaware of any further unpaid medical 
claims. Applicant disputed SOR ¶ 1.v, and the creditor has not provided a timely 
response. She provided evidence that her 2015 Federal taxes are being resolved since 
she entered into a payment arrangement with the IRS to have automatic monthly 
deductions from her bank account, beginning the month following her post-hearing 
submission. Applicant has filed two Chapter 13 bankruptcies that were dismissed, most 
recently in 2013, while she was married in an abusive and manipulative relationship. She 
has since adequately addressed her debts since her last dismissed bankruptcy filing and 
the passing of her husband in 2014.  
 
Applicant expressed her dedication to the soldiers she serves in her job and to a 
non-profit group aiding veterans in abusive relationships. She was forthcoming in her 
testimony and fully discussed her debts and what she has done to address them. In her 
post-hearing submission, she stated that she worked with a military service credit 
counselor to prepare a budget. She submitted a financial statement showing monthly 
                                                     
2 The SOR lettering skipped ¶ 1.o. 
 
4 
 
income of $8,456 through her job, military retirement, and VA disability compensation. 
After payment of her debts and monthly expenses, she has a net remainder of $1,228 
that she is depositing into her savings account. She has been working with a consumer 
credit service and counseling agency to address her debts. She highlighted the anxiety 
she has felt through this process because of past trauma and abuse. She acknowledged 
her responsibility for the debts, poor decisions she has made in the past, and highlighted 
her military and civilian service to the country. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective on June 8, 2017. My ultimate 
decision would be the same under either set of adjudicative guidelines. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
 
5 
 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
 
6 
 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant had a history of financial problems, including two failed Chapter 13 
bankruptcies. She had unfiled and unpaid Federal taxes, and other unresolved delinquent 
debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem  and  provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s financial condition resulted from conditionw beyond her control, 
including an abusive relationship, her husband’s financial irresponsibility, and eventual 
untimely death. Since Applicant’s husband passed away in 2014, she has successfully 
regained control of her finances and has acted responsibly with regard to her delinquent 
debts.  
 
Applicant submitted post-hearing documentation showing resolution of a majority 
of her debts, and information about her budget, credit counseling, and life-events that 
 
7 
 
significantly impacted her financial status. Applicant provided documentation to show that 
she resolved a substantial portion of her debts through payments resulting in a zero 
balance, a payment plan for her Federal taxes, and disputed accounts. Other debts are 
inaccessible because of their charged-off status. She provided evidence that her 2015 
Federal taxes are being resolved since she entered into a payment arrangement with the 
IRS to have automatic monthly deductions from her bank account.  
 
Applicant has adequately addressed her debts since her last dismissed bankruptcy 
filing and the passing of her husband. She has worked with a military service credit 
counselor to prepare a budget and shows a positive cash-flow with a substantial cushion 
for savings. She is also working with a consumer credit service and counseling agency to 
address her debts. She highlighted the anxiety she has felt through this process because 
of past trauma and abuse. She acknowledged her responsibility for her past debts and 
resolved to continue her efforts to maintain a positive financial future. AG ¶ 20(a), (b), (c), 
(d), (e), and (g) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the 
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; 
and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s marital 
history, military service, and service to veterans. There is sufficient evidence to determine 
that Applicant’s financial issues are resolved or will be resolved within a reasonable 
period. I find that she acted responsibly under the circumstances, and given her continued 
employment since 2013 and other sources of income, she is likely to have continued 
success in maintaining a positive financial status going forward. She sought financial 
counseling and assistance with resolving debts, and she has a budget. Her current 
financial status no longer casts doubts on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
 
8 
 
judgment with regard to future financial decision-making. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.w: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
