 
1 
 
 
                                                                 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06936 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
   
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Russell W. Crumbley, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines G (alcohol 
consumption) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 31, 2011, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On October 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant. 
The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
  
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines G and E. The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
national security to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant provided an undated response to the SOR. On December 2, 2016, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On April 25, 2017, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On May 18, 2017, DOHA 
issued a notice of the hearing, setting the hearing on June 13, 2017. The hearing was 
held as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant did not offer any exhibits at the hearing. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and called two character witnesses. I held the record open 
until July 28, 2017, to afford Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. 
Post-hearing, Applicant timely submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 21, 
2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are 
effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs, as required.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the 
record, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old senior engineer employed by a defense contractor 
since September 2004. He seeks to retain his secret security clearance, which is a 
condition of his continued employment. Applicant has successfully held a clearance 
since 1982. (GE 1; Tr. 13-14) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1976. He was awarded a bachelor’s 
degree in electrical engineering in December 1983, and a master’s degree in electrical 
engineering in November 1983. (GE 4, Tr. 14-16) 
 
Applicant has been married and divorced three times. He has a total of five 
children. Of note, he raised two sons as a single parent from his second marriage. Both 
of those sons graduated from college and are successful engineers. All of his children 
are adults; however, at the time of his hearing, he was paying $1,000 a month in child 
support to the mother of his youngest child, an 18-year-old son. His youngest son has 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
 
 
been awarded a full academic scholarship to a prestigious university. Applicant is 
presently not married. (GE 1, Tr. 17-21, 23) 
 
Alcohol Consumption/Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s problems with alcohol stem from two separate alcohol-related arrests. 
The first arrest occurred in May 2014, and the second arrest occurred approximately 
five months later in September 2014. Both arrests were for driving under the influence 
(DUI). These DUI arrests occurred over a holiday weekend and his birthday weekend, 
respectively. His two sons, who Applicant had custody of and raised, had left home for 
college. Applicant was very involved in their lives, tutoring them and coaching them in 
basketball. He found a tremendous void in his life when they were gone and made the 
mistake of drinking and driving. (Tr. 32-36, 42-47) 
 
The DUI arrests occurred in two different cities in the same state. The first DUI 
charge was dismissed, and the second DUI was referred to trial. Applicant was 
convicted of the second DUI in September 2015 and has completed all sentencing 
requirements. His sentence included two years of unsupervised probation, which he 
completed in September 2017, after his hearing was held. Applicant was not required to 
attend any alcohol counseling or rehabilitation as a result of his DUI conviction. (Tr. 36-
42, 47-55) 
 
Post-hearing, Applicant submitted a favorable drug and alcohol assessment 
dated July 5, 2017. Consistent with Applicant’s testimony, his assessment revealed no 
current problems with alcohol affecting his personal or professional life nor did the 
evaluation identify any diagnosis of alcohol use disorder.  (Tr. 36; AE G)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant called two character witnesses to testify on his behalf.  
Applicant tutored the first witness’s daughter in math for five years and coached the 
second witness’s son in basketball for one year. Both witnesses are familiar with 
Applicant and described him as trustworthy and honorable, and attribute their children’s 
success, in large part, to his involvement with their children. (Tr. 55-69) 
 
 Applicant submitted three character references, who vouched for his 
trustworthiness and good character. They are familiar with Applicant’s alcohol-related 
arrests, know him well as a member of the community, and have no reservations in 
supporting him for a security clearance. (AE A – C) Applicant also submitted three 
recent performance evaluations that demonstrate consistent solid performance and 
discuss in detail his past and ongoing contributions to the defense industry. (AE D – F) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
 
4 
 
 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
 
5 
 
 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
  
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G (alcohol consumption), the Government’s concern is that 
excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline G through Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented. Applicant had two alcohol-related arrests in 2014. 
However, as noted, his first DUI charge was dismissed and he was tried and convicted 
only of his second DUI. 
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of one alcohol consumption 
disqualifying condition, AG ¶ 22(a) “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as 
driving while under the influence . . . .”     
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of two 
alcohol consumption mitigating conditions is appropriate with regard to Applicant’s 2014 
DUI offenses: 
AG ¶ 23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 AG ¶ 23(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
Applicant presented credible evidence of actions taken to overcome his 2014 
alcohol-related arrests, has established that he is not alcohol dependent, and during the 
infrequent times he consumes alcohol, he does so responsibly. His performance 
evaluations, witness testimony, and reference letters show Applicant’s work behavior 
has not been indicative of his having an alcohol problem. He is a valuable employee, 
who is reliable, dependable, and professional and is a respected member of the 
community. His sobriety and responsible use of alcohol is supported by his own credible 
testimony and evidence presented. At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged the 
 
6 
 
 
problems misuse of alcohol has caused him, demonstrated remorse, and a steadfast 
commitment to continue lifestyle changes consistent with responsible use of alcohol. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
        The conduct under alcohol consumption was cross-alleged under personal conduct 
without the addition of any additional facts or allegations. Given the fact that the SOR 
allegations were fully discussed and dealt with under alcohol consumption, it is 
unnecessary to discuss further under personal conduct  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The discussion in the 
Analysis section under Guidelines G and E is incorporated in this whole-person section. 
However further comments are warranted. 
 
I was particularly impressed with Applicant’s demeanor during his hearing and 
the apparent effect this process has had on him. Applicant has been willing to do 
whatever is necessary to recover from his alcohol-related arrests. The process has 
been costly for him, not only financially, but also personally and professionally. 
Applicant has dedicated the majority of his adult working life to the defense industry and 
has successfully held a security clearance since 1982. His witnesses and reference 
letters additionally provide insight regarding the role he has played as a father and 
mentor not only to his children, but to other children in the community. He demonstrated 
the correct attitude and commitment to responsible alcohol consumption.  
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth 
in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
 
7 
 
 
whole-person factors” and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
