 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 15-05840 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented insufficient information to establish that he is financially 
responsible and that his financial problems have been resolved or are under control. 
The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 14, 
2014. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 
9, 2016, alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 10, 2016, with some comments, but failed to 
admit or deny any of the SOR allegations. He requested a decision based on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. On September 17, 2016, the DOD Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) instructed Applicant to admit or deny the SOR allegations. 
He failed to do so. The DOD CAF nonetheless forwarded the case to DOHA for further 
processing. I considered all the SOR allegations denied. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
 
2 
 
 
January 5, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on January 16, 2017. He was allowed 
30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The 
case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included his 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator from 
April 14, 2015. (FORM, Item 3) Applicant was informed he could object to the summary 
of his interview, and it would not be admitted or considered, or that he could make 
corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. 
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be construed as a waiver and the proposed FORM evidence would be 
considered. Applicant did not respond to the FORM and waived any objections. I 
admitted the FORM’s proffered evidence and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant answered the SOR with a statement indicating that he would continue 
to pay and take care of his debts. He further stated that would never betray his country 
or give up his freedom to pay some debts. He failed to admit or deny any of the SOR 
allegations. I considered all the SOR allegations denied. After a thorough review of the 
record evidence, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 1979. He enlisted in the U.S. Army in 1981, and honorably served until 
his discharge in 1986. He married his first wife in 1982 and divorced in 1983. He 
married his second wife in 2006 and divorced in 2009. He has two adult children, ages 
26 and 32. As of his April 2015 interview, he was living with a cohabitant.  
 
Applicant’s employment history indicates that he has been employed since 1991, 
except for three periods of unemployment between December 2009 and January 2010; 
February 2012 and November 2012; and December 2012 and June 2013. A federal 
contractor hired Applicant in June 2013. Apparently, he has been working for his current 
employer since then. 
 
In his response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of his June 2014 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed financial problems resulting from his divorce and periods of unemployment, 
which included a mortgage in foreclosure and a delinquent debt. He claimed he had 
established payment plans or that was in the process of doing so. He averred he 
intended to contact his creditors to resolve the debts.  
 
A government background investigator interviewed Applicant in April 2015. 
During the interview, Applicant discussed the delinquent accounts he disclosed in his 
2014 SCA. The investigator confronted him with other delinquent accounts he failed to 
 
3 
 
 
disclose. Applicant stated he had too many delinquent accounts to list them all. He 
explained that his delinquent debts resulted from his divorce, his periods of 
unemployment, and a tenant abandoning his rental property without notice causing the 
foreclosure of the mortgage loan.  
 
Applicant told the investigator his financial status was not the best, but he had 
room to breathe, and was working on paying the debts. He stated he had paid some 
debts and had established payment plans with other creditors. He stated his intention to 
pay back his creditors, and to bring all his delinquent accounts current. He indicated no 
participation in debt counseling or financial courses to learn to remain current on his 
debts. 
 
The SOR alleges five delinquent accounts and one judgment, most of which are 
the same delinquent debts Applicant addressed during his April 2015 interview. All the 
SOR accounts are established by the record evidence. Applicant claimed he had paid 
some of the accounts, established payment plans for others, and that some debts he 
did not recognize.  
 
Applicant did not submit any documentary evidence in his response to the SOR, 
and he did not respond to the FORM. He did not provide documentation relating to his 
SOR debts such as: (1) proof of payments (checking account statements, photocopies 
of checks, or letters from creditors proving that he paid or made any payments to the 
creditors); (2) correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of 
contact;1 (3) copies of credible debt disputes sent to the creditors or credit reporting 
companies indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the debts and why he 
held such a belief; (4) evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans (settlement 
offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve the debts); or (5) other 
evidence of progress or resolution.  
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his 
financial problem is being resolved and will not recur in the future. Applicant presented 
little evidence about his current financial situation. It is not clear whether his income is 
sufficient to pay for his family’s living expenses and debts, and whether his financial 
problems are resolved or under control. 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant stated to the investigator that the property was 
sold after foreclosure for more than he owed, and that he had no further financial 
liability. I note that Applicant purchased the property in 2007 for $126,578. The balance 
                                            
1 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
4 
 
 
at foreclosure was $113,822, and the property was sold in auction for $122,168 in May 
2013. (Items 3 and 4) I find this allegation for Applicant. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
The case will be decided under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
 
5 
 
 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the file record. AG ¶ 19 
provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; ”(b) unwillingness to satisfy 
debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” The record established the disqualifying conditions, requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;2 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are supported by the 
facts in this case. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and recent. His evidence is 
insufficient to show that his financial problems occurred under circumstances unlikely to 
recur.  
 
 Applicant’s most recent divorce occurred in 2009, and he has been living with a 
cohabitant since 2012. He failed to explain how his 2009 divorce continues to affect his 
ability to pay his delinquent accounts. Applicant’s periods of unemployment likely 
contributed to or aggravated his financial situation. However, Applicant’s evidence is 
                                            
2 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
insufficient to establish those periods of unemployment were not due to Applicant’s 
fault, and that he was financially responsible under the circumstances.  
 
 Some of Applicant’s delinquent SOR accounts date from at least 2009-2010. He 
presented no evidence of payments made, or of any efforts to contact his creditors to 
resolve his financial problems. Applicant was made aware of the government’s security 
concerns about his finances when he submitted his 2014 SCA, during his 2015 
interview with a government investigator, via the 2016 SOR, and through the January 
2017 FORM. The FORM made it clear that Applicant needed documentation to support 
his claims of payments, disputes, and payment arrangements. He failed to document 
his claims.  
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish that circumstances beyond his 
control prevented him from paying the debts, and that he was financially responsible. 
The record is not clear about Applicant’s current financial situation and whether his 
income is sufficient to pay for his family’s living expenses and current debts. There is 
insufficient assurance that his financial problem is being resolved and will not recur in 
the future. Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish mitigation of financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
I considered that Applicant’s remaining five SOR debts total about $5,000. He did 
not present documentary evidence of efforts to pay or otherwise resolve the remaining 
SOR debts. The major SOR debt was resolved through foreclosure. Evidence of efforts 
to resolve the debt prior to foreclosure is missing. Without evidence to explain, mitigate, 
or rebut the financial concerns, Applicant’s behavior shows a lack of judgment, 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, unreliability, and untrustworthiness. 
Applicant presented insufficient information to establish that he is financially responsible 
and that his financial problems have been resolved or are under control. The financial 
considerations security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
