1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-07518 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant experienced financial difficulties due to circumstances largely beyond 
her control, but mitigated the Guideline F (Financial Considerations) concern by acting 
responsibly. Her omission of derogatory financial information on her security clearance 
application was unintentional. The Guideline E (Personal Conduct) concern is mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on February 19, 2015. 
On April 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines E and F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant submitted her Answer to the SOR through counsel on July 7, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to 
2 
 
proceed on October 6, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on January 24, 2017. On 
May 5, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that 
the hearing was scheduled for May 25, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through O were admitted without 
objection. I left the record open until June 15, 2017, to allow applicant to submit additional 
documentary evidence. She submitted AX P through X, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 5, 2017. 
 
This case was adjudicated under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The 
DOD implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. 
This decision will be decided based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017. The 
outcome of this case would have been the same if decided based on the former AG.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old service desk specialist currently employed by a defense 
contractor since November 2015. She has completed several college courses. She is the 
single parent of two children, ages nine and six. She is currently engaged to be married. 
She has held a clearance since about 2011. (GX 1; GX 2.)  
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$23,301. In her Answer, Applicant admits 10 of the debts, denies the other 4, and explains 
the status of each debt. Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges that Applicant intentionally 
falsified her e-QIP by failing to list her delinquent accounts as required. Applicant denies 
these allegations. Her admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. The delinquent 
debts are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) from November 2011, 
March 2015, and September 2016. (GX 4; GX 5; GX 6.)  
 
Applicant submitted her first e-QIP in October 2011, and listed three delinquent 
debts, all of which appear on the SOR. (SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1g, and 1.j.) When filling out the 
information on her 2015 e-QIP, Applicant remained aware of the delinquent accounts that 
she listed on her 2011 e-QIP, but did not know about the additional delinquent accounts 
on her 2015 CBR. Applicant testified that based on a discussion with the facility security 
officer (FSO), she believed that the derogatory financial information listed on her 2011 
would auto-populate on her 2015 e-QIP. She had limited time when filling out the e-QIP, 
and did not carefully review each page before submitting it. She did not intentionally omit 
the delinquent account information of which she was aware from her 2015 e-QIP. (GX 3; 
Tr. 33; Tr. 51-56.) 
 
At 18 years old, Applicant became a single parent in 2008, during her senior year 
of high school. She struggled financially, trying to support herself and her baby on low 
paying jobs. She encountered greater financial difficulties in 2010, when she was the 
victim of identity theft. She gave birth to her second child in 2011, and shortly thereafter 
was hired for her first defense contractor job. However, due to the identity theft, Applicant 
did not receive her 2011 income tax refunds for approximately six months after filing. 
3 
 
Applicant depended on the refund, and resorted to taking out loans in order to meet her 
living expenses for herself and children. (Tr. 57.) Her employer was not awarded another 
contract, and Applicant was unemployed from November 2014 until February 2015, which 
had an additional negative impact on her finances. (GX 1; AX B.)                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Applicant has paid in full SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, and 1.j through 1.n, and settled in full 
SOR ¶ 1.g. (AX D; AX G; AX L - P; AX T.) These accounts total $9,249. Applicant enrolled 
in an online university in 2008, and incurred the $2,725 student-loan account alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. She paid the account in full in September 2016. (AX G; Tr. 21-25.) Applicant 
re-enrolled in college in 2011, and completed one semester. She became pregnant with 
her second son, and withdrew from her courses prior to the start of the second semester. 
However, she was charged for her enrollment. She disputed the $2,010 collection debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h with the university, and it no longer appears on her CBRs. (GX 5; 
GX 6; AX C; Tr. 44-45.) Applicant is paying $55 a month on the $3,828 and $1,982 
student-loan accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d. (AX Q; AX S.)  
 
Applicant contacted the student-loan creditor for the $1,736 student-loan debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, but was the creditor unable to identify the account. She disputed 
this debt by letter and requested additional information about the account in January 
2017, but has not received any response from the creditor. (Tr. 26-27; AX W.) Applicant 
disputed $1,496 collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. She does not recognize the 
account, but thinks it may be the result of the 2010 identity theft. The 2015 CBR shows 
the debt as disputed, and it no longer appears on the recent CBRs. (Tr. 29-30; GX 5; GX 
6; AX C.) 
 
Applicant has been working overseas since about July 2015, largely due to her 
intent to resolve her delinquent accounts and gain financial stability. Applicant has not 
incurred any recent delinquent debt, and lives within her means. She and her fiancé 
cohabitate, and he contributes to the household finances. She has a checking account, 
savings account, and contributes to her 401(k). ((Tr. 18-19; Tr. 60-61; Tr. 34-35.) She has 
completed multiple information technology certifications to improve her professional 
credentials. She is currently enrolled in college courses. (Tr. 24; AX F; AX H.) She accepts 
responsibility for her past financial issues, and will repay the debts for which she remains 
responsible. (Tr. 26-27.) Applicant’s coworker for more than two years recommends 
Applicant for clearance, and views her as, “highly professional and trustworthy.” Another 
coworker of more than six years states that applicant properly handles sensitive 
unclassified information, and follows rules and regulations. (AX A.) She was candid, 
sincere, and credible while testifying. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
4 
 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 Applicant’s testimony, corroborated by the record evidence, establishes two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 However, a person can mitigate concerns about his ability to handle and safeguard 
classified information raised by his or her financial circumstances by establishing one or 
more of the mitigating conditions listed under the guideline. The relevant mitigating 
conditions in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
6 
 
 Applicant began experiencing financial difficulties as a young, single parent 
employed in low-paying jobs. She was the victim of identity theft and also experienced a 
period of unemployment. While she could again be unemployed, she now has gained 
work experience, as well as applicable certifications, and continues to pursue a higher 
education.  She acted responsibly and in good faith by repaying in full, settling or entering 
a repayment plans with 11 of the 14 SOR creditors, for debts totaling $11,190. She lives 
within her means and has not incurred any recent delinquent debt. 
 
 “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 
at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. 
ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require that a person make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
  
 The circumstances which led to Applicant’s indebtedness are unlikely to recur, and 
do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 
20(a) through 20(e) apply. Overall, she has addressed her debts in a responsible manner, 
and will continue to do so. Although her financial record is not perfect, she has 
implemented a reasonable plan to resolve her financial issues within her means. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has 
the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An 
7 
 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant explained that, based on a conversation with her FSO, she thought the 
delinquent accounts she listed on her 2011 e-QIP would auto-populate into her 2015 e-
QIP. Because she had limited time to complete the form, she did not carefully review the 
form before submitting it. I found her explanation to be credible and consistent with the 
record evidence, and her demeanor to be honest, forthcoming, and candid. There is no 
record evidence that her omission was intentional. The personal conduct concern is 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant is a single parent, who has worked diligently to improve her professional 
skills in order to increase her earning potential. She has made extensive progress on 
implementing her plan to resolve her delinquent debts. She is well-regarded by her 
coworkers, and has held a security clearance since 2011. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts and personal conduct. 
Accordingly, I conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
