 1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
)
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-08858 
) 
In the matter of: 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns. 
Statement of the Case 
On April 13, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to continue a security clearance. DOD issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated June 3, 2016, detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
  2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 3, 2016. She admitted four allegations of 
delinquent debt (SOR 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.i), denied three allegations of delinquent debt 
(SOR 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g), and was unable to provide a response for two debts (SOR 1.e 
and 1.h) because of lack of information on the debt or creditor. Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on October 6, 2016, and I was assigned the case of April 7, 
2017. DOD issued a notice of hearing on July 21, 2017, for a hearing on August 11, 
2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government’s five exhibits (GX 1-5) 
were admitted into the record without objection. Applicant testified. I received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 18, 2017.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all individuals who require 
initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a 
sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and are 
effective on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 43 years old and a 1996 college graduate. She has taken some courses 
leading to a master’s degree but is not now taking courses. She married in June 1997, 
divorced in March 2005, and her former husband passed away in 2010. She has one 
daughter from this marriage who is a college student living with and being supported by 
Applicant. Applicant is a program analysis for a defense contractor. She has been 
eligible for access to classified information since 1999. (T. 18-19, 47-48; GX 1, e-QIP, 
dated April 13, 2012) 
 
Department Counsel provided a detailed outline of the Applicant’s financial 
history. (Hearing Exhibit I). The SOR lists, and credit reports (GX 2, dated September 
28, 2016; GX 3, dated May 20, 2016; GX 4, dated March 18, 2015) confirm the following 
delinquent debts for Applicant; a credit card past due for $130 on a balance of $992 
(SOR 1.a); a personal loan in collection for $7,139 (SOR 1.b); a credit card in collection 
for $827 (SOR 1.c); a furniture account in collection for $442 (SOR 1.d); a medical 
account in collection for $470 (SOR 1.e); a student loan account past due for $1,192 on 
a balance of $17,476 (SOR 1.f); a furniture account in collection for $977 (SOR 1.g); a 
medical account in collection for $68 (SOR 1.h); and a credit card account charged off 
for $926 (SOR 1.i). Department Counsel agreed with Applicant that SOR 1.a and 1.i are 
duplicate accounts. Applicant also claims SOR 1.d and 1.g are duplicate accounts. The 
total amount of the delinquent debt is approximately $10,000. Most of the delinquent 
debt is in the personal loan at SOR 1.b. (Tr. 9-11) 
                                            
1 I considered Applicant’s case under both the September 1, 2006 AGs, and the June 8, 2017 
AGs. My decision would be the same under both AGs. 
  3 
 
Applicant was a program analyst for different defense contractors. She had 
temporary assignments from August 2001 to August 2009. She was unemployed from 
August 2009 until March 2010 when she received another temporary assignment with a 
defense contractor which lasted until September 2010. She was unemployed from 
September 2010 until November 2010. She was employed from November 2010 until 
the contract she was working on ended in April 2011. Applicant was unemployed from 
August 2011 until September 2013. Applicant had a temporary position with a defense 
contractor from September 2013 until March 2014. In March 2014, she started working 
with another defense contractor. She has been steadily employed with them until 
present. Applicant was unemployed for a total of 19 months from August 2009. Prior to 
April 2014 Applicant’s yearly salary had been $63,000. Applicant’s salary since August 
2016 is $65,000 annually. (Tr. 20-12, 37-41; GX 2, e-QIP, dated April 13, 2012) 
 
Applicant attributes her delinquent debt to her periods of unemployment because 
of her position as a contractor. She experienced contracts ending and being laid off. 
She worked with a temporary employment agency to find employment. She worked part 
time and at temporary position but still fell behind on paying her bills. She did what she 
could to make payment arrangements with creditors. She worked on the debts specified 
in the SOR to get accurate information so she could make payments. She did not live 
beyond her means. She was separated from her husband and he was not paying child 
support as required. She never forgot the debts that she had to pay or turned to 
bankruptcy or other options to resolve the debts. (Tr. 15-18) 
 
The debt at SOR 1.a (SOR 1.i is the duplicate debt) is a credit card to a clothing 
store where Applicant shopped for her and her daughter. She was unable to pay the full 
amount of her bill because of unemployment and the need to pay other debts. 
Department Counsel provided a payment history from the store that shows Applicant 
made payments on the store’s bill in the amount she was able to afford. (GX 5, Payment 
History, dated October 6, 2014) The store accepted the payments, but would not note 
the payments in her account. The payment history reveals that Applicant paid at least 
half of the debt before she stopped making payments since she was not receiving credit 
for the payments. (Tr. 22-24, 41-43) 
 
The debt at SOR 1.b is a personal loan for $5,000 Applicant received in 2008 to 
assist her in paying household expenses. The amount of the loan has increased 
because of interest and penalties. She initially made payments on the debt but she has 
not made any payments recently. She stopped the payments because of her 
unemployment. She does not know the amount of the payments that she made. (Tr. 24-
25, 43-44) 
 
The debt at SOR 1.c is for the purchase of a motorcycle for Applicant. Applicant 
provided Department Counsel with documents reflecting a settlement agreement. (GX 
3, credit report at 6) Applicant’s credit report reflects that the debt is paid as of June 23, 
2016. (Tr. 24-26, 44-45; GX 2, Credit Report, at 6) 
 
  4 
 
The debts at SOR 1.d and 1.g are to a finance company and are duplicate debts 
for a furniture company. Applicant claims that she paid the debt to the furniture 
company in August 2012. The finance company telephonically informed Applicant that 
their records indicate that the debt was paid as of August 2012. Applicant provided a 
document to Department Counsel that shows she requested that the furniture store and 
the finance company update her credit report to reflect the account is paid. (Tr. 27-31, 
44-45) 
 
Applicant attempted to research the two medical debts at SOR 1.e and 1.h. The 
information in the credit reports was not specific enough for Applicant to identify the 
creditor for the debts. Since she cannot identify the creditors, she has not been able to 
pay the debts. (Tr. 30-31, 44-45) 
 
The student loan debt at SOR 1.f has been in deferment. Since Applicant is not 
taking classes now, payment of the loans are not deferred as of August 2017. Applicant 
will start paying the $182 student loan payments in September 2017. Applicant is 
current with her mortgage, taxes, and other payments. (Tr. 32-33, 46)  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
  5 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) The 
financial security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might 
knowingly compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security 
clearance adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet her financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
Credit reports and Applicant’s admissions reveal that Applicant has delinquent 
consumer bills, credit cards, and personal loans. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
following security concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG 
¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts, and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
The available evidence shows an inability because of unemployment to resolve 
the delinquent debts which raises issues about Applicant’s ability to meet her financial 
obligations. Once the Government has established an adverse financial issue, the 
Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  6 
 
  
I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, and 
were incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. The debts are normal 
consumer debts, loans and credit card debts. However, Applicant presented sufficient 
credible information to establish that she incurred the debt because she had over 19 
months of unemployment in approximately a seven year period. While she did receive 
some unemployment compensation, it was not a similar amount to what she received in 
wages. Her then husband also did not pay the child support he was required to pay.  
 
Applicant established that she acted in good-faith towards her debts. Good faith 
means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence 
to duty and obligation. Applicant is not required to be debt-free. All that is required is 
that Applicant act responsibly given her circumstances. Applicant must establish that 
she has a reasonable plan to resolve financial problems, and that she has taken 
significant action to implement that plan. Applicant’s plan must show a systematic 
method of handling debts, and Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of 
debt payment. A meaningful track record of debt payment can be established by 
evidence of actual debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. Her 
plan does not require paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. A promise to 
pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely 
manner and acting in a financially responsible manner.  
Applicant has establish that two different debts are duplicates. I find that SOR 1.a 
and 1.i are duplicates. I find that SOR 1.d and 1.g are duplicates. Applicant established 
that she made significant payments on the debt at SOR 1.a but the creditor did not 
  7 
 
accept the payments. She also established that she paid the debts at SOR 1.c and 1.d. 
She attempted to pay two medical debts (SOR 1.e and 1.h) but the available information 
was not sufficient to identify the creditors. Her student loan at SOR 1.f was deferred so 
no payments were due. Her first payment of $182 was due in September 2017. She 
presented sufficient information to establish that she is current with both her mortgage 
payments and her taxes. Applicant presented no evidence that she received financial 
counseling, thus AG¶ 20(c) does not apply to these SOR debts. 
 
Applicant has shown sufficient action to resolve her delinquent debts. Applicant 
provided enough details and sufficient documentation to show proof of payments, 
correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact, copies of 
debt disputes, evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, or other evidence of 
progress or resolution. There is sufficient evidence to establish why Applicant was 
unable to make greater progress resolving her debts. There is sufficient assurance that 
her financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the 
future. She has shown a good-faith effort to resolve these debts. Her reasonable and 
responsible actions towards her finances is a strong indication that she will protect and 
safeguard classified or sensitive information. Under all these circumstances, Applicant 
mitigated financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant had 
extended periods of unemployment. I also considered that Applicant has been eligible 
for access to classified information for over 18 years and that there are no reports of 
any security violations.  
 
  8 
 
Applicant established that she took reasonable and responsible action to resolve 
her financial obligations. Applicant demonstrated appropriate management of her 
finances and showed a record of action to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me without questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. She has established her suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising from her financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
