 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05020 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Cathryn E. Young, Esq. 
 
 
December 15, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 17, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines J, K, and M.1 The 
SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, 
DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
On October 6, 2016, Applicant submitted a written reply to the SOR (RSOR), and 
requested that the case be decided after a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
case was assigned to this administrative judge on November 29, 2016. The Defense 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on that date, 
scheduling the hearing for January 12, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented six 
documents, which were also admitted without objection as Exhibits A through F. One 
additional witness testified on behalf of Applicant. The record was left open until 
January 26, 2017, for receipt of additional documentation. Documents were submitted 
and have been marked and entered into evidence without objection as Exhibit G. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on January 19, 2017. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant and the additional witness, 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is 50 years old. He is unmarried, but was previously married from 1987 
to 2008, and he has no children.  Applicant received an Associate of Arts degree in 
Electronic Engineering in 1987. Applicant is employed as a Computer Systems Analyst 
for a defense contractor for whom he has been employed since 2004, and he seeks a 
DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector. (Tr at 
34-39.) 
 
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that the information that is alleged in this SOR 
was revealed by Applicant in 2004, during an interview that was held after Applicant 
took a polygraph procedure. He testified that initially he did not reveal any information, 
but when he was confronted by the polygraph operator that there seemed to be 
inconsistencies, he “searched his mind for something that would be something that 
maybe I’ve done that’s wrong,” and he revealed some of this information. (Tr at 39-41.)  
 
The SOR lists one allegation 1.a. regarding Criminal Conduct, under Adjudicative 
Guideline J.:  
 
1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant has stolen thousands of dollar’s worth 
of computer equipment and software from his employer since 2001, including United 
States Government owned items. The stolen items include a computer, camera, mouse 
cables, Microsoft Windows XP, etc.  
 
Applicant admitted that in 2001, he took home a computer from a former 
employer that had been owned by the Federal Government. He stated that the 
computer he took was one that was not being used, and he believed that it was going to 
be sold off for a minimal amount of money. He believed that he could put it to better use 
than just having it sold as “scrap,” so he took it home, and he eventually gave it to a 
 
3 
 
friend. He averred that the computer had always been considered an unclassified 
computer, and in fact, it had never been used and it was still in an unopened box. The 
computer box also contained the camera, mouse and some of the other equipment 
described in the allegation. Applicant conceded that this was a terrible idea and a big 
mistake, and he would never do such a thing again. (Tr at 43-49, 102-104.)  
 
Applicant also admitted to taking home software. He stated that he took it home 
so he could put it on his home computer, and it would help him learn more about 
computers to help him do his job better. He testified that he never made extra copies of 
it or tried to sell it or profit from it in any way, and nothing on the software was classified 
or privileged. Applicant did concede that he put the software on some other people’s 
computers, but contended that it was done so that he could see how to fix it if there 
were other problems. Applicant averred that he has never taken any computers, 
software or any other Government or company owned equipment without permission 
since 2001, with the exception of one mouse that he took in 2004. He vowed that he 
never would he never take anything again. Finally, Applicant stated that he never was 
criminally charged for this conduct (Tr at 50-56, 112-118.)    
 
Guideline K – Handling Protected Information 
 
 The SOR lists four allegations, 2.a. through 2.d., regarding Criminal Conduct, 
under Adjudicative Guideline J.: 
 
 2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant abused his privileges as a System 
Administrator by accessing co-workers personal files, profiles and emails.  
 
 Applicant admitted this conduct occurred from approximately 2002 to 2004. He 
accessed information from his computer that was centrally stored. Applicant testified 
that he accessed personal information on individuals’ home directories. While he 
conceded that he should not have done that, he averred that he had never been 
instructed or trained not to go into someone’s home directory. He estimated that he 
accessed home directory information about 12 times. Finally he testified that though he 
has continued to have access to an individual’s information on the home directory, he 
has never done it since 2004, when he had his first polygraph examination, and became 
aware that it was not something he should do. He also averred that he would not do it in 
the future. (Tr at 56-64.)   
 
 2.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant abused his privileges as a System 
Administrator by deliberately viewing information including company pay scales, 
salaries, etc., on his employer’s computer network that he had no legitimate business 
reason or authorization to view.  
 
 Applicant also admitted this conduct occurred on one occasion during the period 
from approximately 2002 to 2004. He accessed information on his company’s public 
drive. The information that he saw was what his company was charging the 
Government for each company position. Applicant averred that he did not do anything 
 
4 
 
with this information. He also testified that he has never accessed this information since 
the one time, and he would never do it again. (Tr at 64-71.)   
 
 2.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant abused his privileges as a System 
Administrator by copying to a disk, and bringing it home to read without authorization, a 
one thousand page document, which contained proprietary information.  
 
 Applicant also admitted this conduct occurred on one occasion during the period 
from approximately 2002 to 2003. The document referred to in this allegation was a 
copy of the contract that the company by whom he was employed had with the 
Government. He had not been searching for it, but he just came across it in the regular 
course of his work. He testified that the document was not classified, and he did not 
recall it being marked as company confidential. He explained that his reason for wanting 
to review the document was to see what the contract showed about his company’s 
future regarding his work. He explained that the document had what he described as 
“1000’s of pages of legal contract,” so he never even tried to go through it. He thereafter 
shredded the disk containing the document. Applicant averred that he did not do 
anything with this information. He also testified that he has never accessed this 
information since the one time, and he would never do it again. (Tr at 71-76.)   
 
 2.d. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant failed to protect his computer terminal, 
and therefore his System Administrator privileges, from unauthorized access when he 
left his computer unattended and connected to the server on numerous occasions. 
 
 Applicant admitted this conduct occurred during the period from approximately 
2004 to 2011. He explained that he would log onto his computer with his regular 
account, and then he might have to access a remote server or computer, and there 
were times when he did not log out of his computer to lock the system. He discussed 
this during a polygraph interview in 2011, and since then he has been very conscious of 
this, and made sure to lock his computer every time when he leaves it. Applicant 
averred that he has never been cited for this behavior. (Tr at 76-80.)  
 
Guideline M – Use of Information Technology  
 
 The SOR lists three allegations, 3.a through 3.c., regarding Use of Information 
Technology, which will be reviewed below: 
 
 3.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant failed to adhere to Information 
Technology security protocol when he did not document all software and program 
uploads and/or installs to the United States Government computer systems.  
 
 Applicant admitted this conduct occurred during the period from approximately 
2004 to 2007. He explained that this was something he was doing as a function of his 
job. He would download information and after scanning it for viruses, he would add it to 
the system to make the system work more efficiently. Applicant contended that it was 
never documented to him that it was part of IT protocol that he had to identify any 
download that was added to the computer, and he believed that other IT individuals in 
 
5 
 
his company were also downloading information without necessarily documenting the 
information. Applicant testified that since he became aware of the requirement that 
information on a classified system must be documented before he it is downloaded, he 
has never downloaded information onto a classified system without documenting it. 
Finally he testified that for the last three years, he has not worked on a classified 
system. (Tr at 80-85.)  
 
 3.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant took United States Government and 
employer software and installed it on his home computer and other computers without 
authorization.  
 
 Applicant testified that this allegation was referring to SOR allegations 1.a. and 
2.c., which occurred in approximately 2001 to 2003, and both have been reviewed 
above. (Tr at 85-87.)  
 
 3.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant's conduct, set forth in subparagraphs 
2.a. through 2.d., above, raises concern under Guideline M. 
 
 Applicant testified that he started working on classified systems in 2004 and 
continued until 2011, after his last polygraph, when he was removed from classified 
information. (Tr at 101.) During that time the security for all computer systems has 
gotten more serious and more involved. He has also received a number of training 
courses to help him understand his duties and responsibilities with the systems. 
Applicant credibly testified that because of his training, his experience going through the 
polygraph exams, and his continued experience as a computer technician, in the future 
he would not commit any of the conduct that was alleged in the SOR. (Tr at 140-142.)  
 
Mitigation  
 
 As reviewed above, one additional witness testified on behalf of Applicant. The 
witness has known Applicant since 2003 or 2004 as a co-worker until 2013 when she 
retired. Within the last five years of her employment she shared a cubicle with Applicant.   
The witness testified that she considered Applicant to be trustworthy, reliable and 
displayed good judgment. (Tr at 19-32.)   
  
Applicant also submitted a number of documents in mitigation. They included but 
were not limited to:  four certificates of training that Applicant has received (Exhibit A); 
12 extremely positive character letters (Exhibit B); and Applicant’s positive performance 
evaluations from his present employer for 2012 to 2016. (Exhibit F.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
6 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(b) (evidence . . .  of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the individual 
was formally charged, prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Applicant did steal a computer and other items in the computer box in 2001 and a 
computer mouse in 2004. While the items may have been unused and headed to not be 
used in the future, they did not belong to Applicant and his taking of them was a criminal 
act. This offense gives rise to concerns about Applicant’s judgment and reliability, 
because of the nature of the criminal offenses. The aforementioned disqualifying 
condition has been established.  
 
 AG ¶ 32 describes conditions that could mitigate a security concern. The 
following is applicable and controlling under this guideline:  
 
(d)  there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.  
 
Because Applicant’s theft of the computer occurred in 2001, more than 15 years 
ago, I find that this Criminal Conduct mitigating condition is applicable under AG ¶ 32. 
Applicant’s criminal past does not continue to cast doubt on his trustworthiness and 
judgment. I, therefore, find Guideline J for Applicant. 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Handling Protected Information 
is set out in AG ¶ 33: 
 
Deliberate of negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information - which includes classified and other 
sensitive government information, and proprietary information - raises 
doubt about an individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or 
willingness and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious 
concern. 
 
 AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) collecting or storing protected information in any unauthorized location; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, . . . on any unauthorized equipment or 
medium; 
 
 
8 
 
(d) Inappropriate efforts to obtain . . . information outside one’s need to 
know;  
 
(f) viewing or downloading information . . .the individual’s need-to-know: 
and  
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
Applicant's history regarding protected information gives rise to concerns about 
Applicant’s judgment and reliability. The aforementioned disqualifying condition has 
been established.  
 
One mitigating condition under AG ¶ 32 is applicable:  
 
(a) So much time has elapsed since the behavior . . . that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
I considered several factors that have mitigated the Applicant's Handling 
Protected Information concerns. Most of Applicant's conduct that is alleged in the SOR 
occurred in the early 2000s more than 15 years ago, and there have been no violations 
since 2011, a period of more than five years. Not only did I consider Applicant's 
demeanor and perceived veracity in reaching my decision, I considered his overall 
employment history, the testimony of the character witness, and the very persuasive 
character letters written on his behalf.   
 
I find that Appellant has presented evidence to show that similar conduct is 
unlikely to recur. I, therefore, find Guideline K Handling Protected Information for 
Applicant. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information Technology 
is set out in AG ¶ 39:  
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations.  
 
 
9 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 40.  
 
  
(c) use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access 
to another system or to a compartmented area within the same system; 
 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified, sensitive, proprietary, 
or other protected information on or to any unauthorized information 
technology system; 
 
(e) unauthorized use of any information technology system; 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system when prohibited by 
rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations or when otherwise not 
authorized; and 
 
(g) negligence or lax security practices in handling information technology 
that persists despite counseling by management. 
 
Based on the allegations and the facts of this case concerning Applicant's past 
employment history, I find that AG ¶ 40 (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) are potentially applicable 
in this case. 
 
 AG ¶ 41 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
I find that AG ¶ 41(a) applies and is controlling since most of Applicant's conduct 
that is alleged in the SOR occurred in 2001, and there have been no violations for 
several years. I, therefore, find Guideline M Use of Information Technology for 
Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
10 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines J, K, and M in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline M:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
