 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06278 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Shirin Shokrollahi, Esq. 
 
 
December 14, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 17, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines G, J, and E.1 The 
SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, 
DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
On July 25, 2016, Applicant submitted a written reply to the SOR, and requested 
the case be decided after a hearing before an administrative judge. (RSOR.) The case 
was assigned to this administrative judge on October 4, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 13, 2016, 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
scheduling the hearing for November 1, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and presented eight 
documents, which were also admitted without objection as Exhibits A through H. The 
record was left open until November 15, 2016, for receipt of additional documentation. 
Documents were submitted and have been marked and entered into evidence without 
objection as Exhibits I through M.  
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is 38 years old. She has been married to her wife since 2012, and they 
have two children. She is currently in graduate school studying for a Master’s degree 
where she is majoring in Systems Engineering. She served in the United States Army 
from 1996 to 2004, when she received an Honorable discharge. Applicant has been 
employed by a defense contractor for 12 years as a Systems Engineer, and she seeks 
a DoD security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense sector. (Tr 
at 25-28.) 
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR lists two allegations (1.a. and 1.b.) regarding Alcohol Consumption, 
under Adjudicative Guideline G.:  
 
 1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant has consumed alcohol, at times to 
excess and to the point of intoxication, from about age 16 to at least July 2011.  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant admitted this allegation. She testified that from 1999 to 
2004 she drank quite frequently every Saturday and Sunday night.  (Tr at 30-31.)  
 
 1.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant's conduct alleged in subparagraphs 
2.a., 2.d., and 2.e., below, constitutes Alcohol Consumption concerns.  
 
 Applicant conceded that there were periods in her life when she consumed 
alcohol to excess, but in 2011, she made a decision to abstain from the consumption of 
alcohol and she did not consume alcohol until August 2016, when her probation ended. 
(See 2.e., below.) Since her probation ended she has drunk one glass of wine on three 
occasions; she never drinks more than one glass of wine or beer since she has a 
medical condition which is exacerbated if she consumes alcohol. She also has gotten 
 
3 
 
used to the services of Uber so she insists that she would never drink and drive again. 
Applicant also testified that because she and her wife have two children, drinking to 
excess is not conducive to a good family life, which is their goal (Tr at 66-79, 82.)  
 
 Applicant conceded that she drove after drinking many more times than the three 
times which resulted in her being stopped by police officers. When asked why Applicant 
began drinking again, considering the problems she had from consuming alcohol and 
driving, Applicant testified that she has never considered herself an alcoholic, and as 
long as she never consumes more than one drink at one occasion, she should have no 
further problems. Because of her illness, she affirmed that she would never be tempted 
to drink more than one drink. (Tr at 107-109.)   
 
 Finally, Applicant was shown pictures from Department Counsel taken from 
Facebook (Exhibit 5), which purportedly show Applicant consuming alcohol in 2012, a 
period when Applicant had testified she was not consuming alcohol. Applicant credibly 
testified that she was not drinking any alcohol in the picture, and even though she 
commented in Facebook on the alcoholic drinks that were in the picture, that information 
was based on what her wife told her about the alcohol, not her own consuming of 
alcoholic drinks. (Tr at 96-107.)  
  
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR lists six allegations, 2.a. through 2 f., regarding Criminal Conduct, 
under Adjudicative Guideline J.:  
 
 2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested on April 5, 2001, and 
charged with and charged with Driving Under the Influence (DUI) Financial 
Responsibility, and Speeding.  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant admitted this allegation. She testified that she had been 
drinking before she drove, but her blood alcohol was below the legal limit so the case 
was dismissed. (Tr at 34-35.)  
 
 2.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested on July 22, 2001, and 
charged with Tempmark (not further specified) License, and Violation of Promise to 
Appear. Applicant did not know what this arrest was for, and she could shed no light on 
why she was arrested for Tempmark, but she did confirm that this incident did not 
involve an arrest, but she did pay the fine for this incident. She also affirmed that this 
arrest did not involve alcohol. (Tr at 35-36.) During the hearing, Applicant and 
Department Counsel indicated that they did know what the Tempmark designation 
meant. (Tr at 86.)  
 
 2.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested on July 3, 2002, and 
charged with Speeding and Financial Responsibility. Applicant did not recall this event. 
She did not believe she was arrested, but she remembered getting some speeding 
tickets, and she thought this incident may have been a citation for speeding. (Tr at 36-
38.)   
 
4 
 
 
 2.d. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested on November 3, 2007, 
and charged with DUI – Blood Alcohol over .08 within 2 hours of driving, Failure to Stop 
for a Stop Sign, and not in possession of Driver’s License. Applicant plead guilty, was 
fined and sentenced to 10 days in jail, suspended upon completion of substance abuse 
screening and follow-up treatment. Applicant was ordered to pay for prison fund 
assessment, and 12 months ignition interlock device. 
 
 Applicant admitted this allegation during her testimony. She testified that she had 
gone with friends, and consumed three or four alcoholic drinks. As she was driving 
home, she went through a stop sign on a rolling stop and she was pulled over and 
arrested by the police.  She plead guilty and ultimately met all of the requirements of the 
guilty plea. (Tr at 38-43.)   
 
 2.e. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested on May 17, 2009, and 
charged with Aggravated Driving or Actual physical Control while Under the Influence of 
Intoxicating Liquor or drugs, a felony, DUI – Blood Alcohol over .08 within 2 hours of 
driving, Expired out of State Registration, Failure to Drive on the Right Side of Roadway 
and No Headlights. Applicant is currently on probation for this charge.  
 
 Applicant admitted this allegation during her testimony. She explained that there 
were number of unusual circumstances involved in this case, but ultimately she plead 
guilty to a DUI, and was sentenced to two weeks of jail time, under a work release 
program. She also had 18 months of probation, which ended in August 2016. (Tr at 43-
50.)  she also completed a Mother’s Against Drunk Driving course, paid fines and fees, 
and her license was suspended for one year. Applicant still has an interlock device, 
which is scheduled to be on her vehicle from July 2016 to July 2017. (Tr at 58-61.)  
 
 2.f. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested on July 31, 2009, and 
charged with Urinating in Public and Possession of a Suspended Driver’s License.  
 
 Applicant admitted this allegation during her testimony. She stated that she was 
out at a club with her friends and after she went back to a friend’s house, but the friend 
was not there. She had to urinate, and she ended up doing it behind a dumpster. She 
ultimately received a citation for urinating in public from a police officer who showed up 
at the scene. She had to do community service for the incident. (Tr at 61-65.)    
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because she engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement, lack 
of candor, dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 3.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant's conduct alleged in paragraph 2., 
above, constitutes Personal Conduct concerns. 
 
  
 
5 
 
Mitigation  
 
 Applicant submitted a number of documents in mitigation, which I have reviewed 
carefully. They include but are not limited to: Proof of attendance by Applicant of a 
Substance Abuse Program and a Mothers Against Drunk Driving panel (Exhibit A); a 
letter from Applicant's wife (Exhibit B); five very positive character letters submitted on 
Applicant’s behalf (Exhibit C); a DD Form 214 showing that Applicant received an 
Honorable Discharge (Exhibit D); copies of Applicant's current resume, and certificates 
and degrees she has earned (Exhibits E, F); a packet of Applicant's awards and 
recognitions (Exhibit G); and Applicant's Performance Evaluations (Exhibit H).  
 
 Applicant also submitted several post-hearing documents. They include: a 
reportable information form and a letter from the security manager of Applicant's 
employer confirming that Applicant reported her DUI arrests in 2007 and 2009 to her 
security officer (Exhibits I, J); a medical report in which Applicant was recommended not 
to consume alcohol among other things (Exhibit K); Applicant's order of discharge from 
her probation on June 30, 2016 (Exhibit L); and the dismissal of charges from 
Applicant's 2009 conviction (Exhibit M).       
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
6 
 
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
 Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment of the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. After reviewing Applicant's three alcohol related incidents, I find that the 
evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying condition (a) in this case.   
 
(a) alcohol related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, . . . or other incidents of concern, regardless of the 
frequency of the individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has 
been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23. Because of the evidence introduced 
about Applicant's current minimal alcohol consumption and the lack of evidence 
regarding criminal conduct relating to alcohol consumption for many years, I find that 
mitigating factor (a) is applicable and controlling in this case, and I find for Applicant 
under Guideline G.  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
7 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(b) (evidence . . .  of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the individual 
was formally charged, prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Because of the nature of the criminal offenses discussed above, the 
aforementioned disqualifying condition has been established.  
 
 AG ¶ 32 describes conditions that could mitigate a security concern. The 
following is applicable and controlling under this guideline:  
 
(d)  there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.  
 
Because Applicant’s last arrest and conviction occurred in 2009, more than eight 
years ago, she complied with her probation which has ended, and she has a very good 
employment record I find that this Criminal Conduct mitigating condition is applicable 
under AG ¶ 32. Applicant’s criminal past does not continue to cast doubt on her 
trustworthiness and judgment. I, therefore, find Guideline J for Applicant. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
8 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
Because of Applicant's history of alcohol abuse and criminal conduct I find that 
AG ¶ 16 (c) is potentially applicable as a disqualifying condition in this case:   
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 including: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Because so much time has passed since Applicant's last incident involving 
alcohol I find it is unlikely that such conduct will recur and it does not cast doubt on 
Applicant's current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. I find that AG ¶ 17 (c) 
is applicable and controlling as the mitigating factor in this case.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines G, J, and E in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence 
 
9 
 
including the significant factors cited under mitigation leaves me with no significant 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under 
the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.f:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
