1 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                        
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.15-07588 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For the Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Phillip Zuber, Esq.  
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based on a review of the case file, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant provided adequate information to mitigate the security concerns for foreign 
influence under Guideline B. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 22, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for her employment 
with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On May 7, 2016, DOD issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under foreign 
influence under Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 6, 2016. She admitted the four allegations 
under Guideline B, but denied that they were a security concern. Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on August 6, 2016. The case was assigned to me on March 
2 
 
21, 2017. DOD issued a notice of hearing on July 20, 2017, for a hearing on August 14, 
2017. I convened the case as scheduled. The Government offered two exhibits that I 
marked and admitted into the record without objection as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
and 2. Applicant testified and offered nine exhibits that I marked and admitted into the 
record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through I. I received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on August 21, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
concerning India, and provided relevant United States Department of State documents. 
(GX 2) I will take administrative notice of facts concerning India as noted in my Findings 
of Fact.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant is 51 years old. She has a private law practice as 
well as being counsel for a defense contractor. She is highly regarded by the president 
and chief executive officer of the defense contracting firm. The defense contractor is 
sponsoring her for eligibility for access to classified information. (Tr. 16-17, AX C, Letter, 
dated August 10, 2017) 
 
 Applicant was born in India. She graduated from high school in India in June 
1984. She receive a bachelor’s degree in India in April 1988. She came to the United 
States in August 1988 to complete her education. She had a full scholarship and was a 
graduate teaching assistant. She received a master’s degree in January 1991 and a 
doctorate in May 1995. She then attended law school, receiving her juris doctor degree 
in December 1999. She is admitted to the practice of law in her home state and two 
neighboring jurisdictions. She received a master’s degree in business administration in 
May 2002. (Tr. 19-25; GX 1, e-QIP, dated April 22, 2015; AX B, Juris Doctor Certificate; 
AX E, Master’s Degree; AX F, Doctorate: AX G, Master of Business Administration) 
 
 Applicant was married in the United States in November 1998 but the marriage 
was annulled in May 1999. Her former husband was born in India and is now a 
permanent resident alien in the United States. She has little contact with him. (Tr. 19-
20)  
 
 Applicant became a United States citizen in 2002. The only passport she has is a 
United States passport. Applicant is in a committed relationship with a United States 
citizen. They have one child. Applicant owns her house in the United States which has 
an equity value of approximately $145,000. She owns a rental property with an equity 
value of $70,000, a beach property with an equity value of $75,000, as well as a town 
house. She has a retirement account in the United States, with a balance of 
approximately $500,000. She has no property interests in India, and receives no 
financial or other benefits from sources in India. She has only voted in elections in the 
3 
 
United States. She traveled to India in 2004, 2006, and 2010. (Tr. 25-29; AX A, House 
Deed; AX D, Passport; AX H, Rental Property deed).  
 
 The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that her mother, father, brother, and one 
sister, are residents and citizens of India. (SOR 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d) Applicant also admits 
that her father was a doctor in the Indian army. (SOR 1.b) Applicant has a sister who is 
a resident and citizen of the United States. She is not a security concern.  
 
 Applicant’s mother is 75 years old. She retired from teaching in the local school 
system in 2002. She has never been employed by the Indian government. She and her 
father together own their apartment in India. Her mother has no financial interests in the 
United States. Her mother last traveled to the United States in 2002 when Applicant’s 
sister had her child. Applicant contacts her mother about once a week by telephone or 
internet. Applicant does not provide her mother with any financial support. (Tr. 30-32) 
 
 Applicant’s father is 82-years old and a retired doctor. Her father was a doctor in 
the Indian Army for 22 years, from 1962 until 1984. In 1984 after retiring from the Indian 
army, he established his own private medical practice. He fully retired from medical 
practice in 2015. Her father also traveled with her mother to the United States in 2002. 
She communicates with her father about once every few months since he is not as 
versed in electronic communications as her mother. She does not provide him any 
financial support. (Tr. 32-34) 
 
 Applicant’s brother is 46 years old and is a public relations officer in a 
pharmaceutical corporation in India. He never worked for the government or military in 
India. He is married and his wife works in information technology for a corporation in 
India. He has no financial interests in the United States. He last traveled to the United 
States in 2012. Applicant has regular electronic communications with her brother. They 
do not provide each other financial support. (Tr. 34-36) 
 
 Applicant’s sister in India is a twin of her brother. She works for a United Nations 
organization. Her husband is a college professor. She has no financial interests in the 
United States, and the sisters do not provide each other financial support. Her sister last 
traveled to the United States in 2007. Applicant and her sister are now estranged and 
they last communicated in 2010. (Tr. 36-39) 
 
 India is a multiparty, parliamentary democracy with a population of approximately 
1.2 billion people. The United States and India share common values including the rule 
of law, respect for diversity, and democratic government. The United States Department 
of State reported in 2012 that bilateral defense and counterterrorism cooperation 
between the United States and India had grown to reach unprecedented levels, In 2009, 
the United States and India launched the United States-India strategic dialogue which is 
a bilateral forum focused on strengthening cooperation between the two countries in 
several areas, including energy, climate change, trade, education, and counterterrorism. 
The United States supports a reformed United Nations Security Council that includes 
India as a permanent member. The United States is one of India’s largest trade and 
4 
 
investment partners. In January 2015, President Obama and Indian Prime Minister Modi 
lauded the close and growing ties between the United States and India.  
 
 The 2008 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage identified India, along with seven other countries, as being involved 
in criminal espionage of United States trade secrets. There were export control 
enforcement cases in 2008 against India or Indian businesses. There have been recent 
criminal cases in the United States concerning export enforcement, economic 
espionage, theft of trade secrets, and embargo-related criminal prosecutions involving 
both the government of India and private companies and individuals in India.  
 
 India and Pakistan have been locked in a tense rivalry since the partition of the 
subcontinent following independence from Great Britain in 1947. India continues to 
experience terrorist and insurgent activities that may affect U.S. citizens. Anti-Western 
terrorist groups, some on the United States Government’s list of foreign terrorist 
organizations, are active in India. India remains subject to violent terrorists attacks and 
continues to be one of the most persistently targeted countries by transnational and 
domestic terrorist groups.  
 
 According to the United States Department of State’s 2016 Human Rights 
Report, the most significant human rights problems in India were police and security 
forces abuses, including extra judicial killings, torture, rape, and widespread corruption 
at all level of government. The United States and India share a number of security 
perspectives, including, those on China, and the Asian balance of power, terrorism, 
Afghanistan, maritime issues, and weapons of mass destruction. India also has a long-
standing military supply relationships with Russia, and Russia remains India’s largest 
supplier of military systems and spare parts. India has remained reticent to discuss its 
nuclear security measures or allow inspections. India has also refused to accede to the 
nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty despite United States policy supporting its universality.1  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
1 GX 2, Request for Administrative Notice and Supporting Documents. 
5 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for security eligibility 
will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn 
only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the United 
States interest, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Adjudication under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not 
limited to, such consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of 
terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States. Even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with 
the United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
6 
 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government and its relationship with the United States are relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country 
has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent 
upon the government or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against 
the United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. 
 
 The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, that her mother, father, brother, and 
sister are citizens and residents of India. Applicant’s family members who are citizens 
and residents of India are a foreign influence security concern.  
 
 Four disqualifying conditions are relevant to the security concerns raised in the 
SOR under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive or classified information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, that could subject 
the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest.   
 
 The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) requires substantial evidence of 
a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying 
conditions is a relatively low standard. It denotes a risk greater than the normal risk 
inherent in having a family member or contacts living under a foreign government. The 
nature of Applicant’s contacts and relationships must be examined to determine 
whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion. The Government has established that Applicant’s family in India 
may be under a “heightened risk” of security concern because of the potential for 
criminal espionage targeted at the United States, terrorist activities and threats, targeted 
7 
 
intelligence activities, and human rights violations in India. An applicant with foreign 
family or friendship ties to a country that presents a heightened risk has a heavy burden 
of persuasion to show that neither she nor the family members are subject to influence 
by that country. The totality of an applicant’s family and friends ties to a foreign country 
as well as the tie to the country for each individual person must be considered.  
 
 Applicant raised facts to mitigate the security concerns arising from her family 
members in India. I have considered the following Foreign Influence Mitigating 
Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or infrequent 
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence 
or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they ae unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 In evaluating the potential conflict of interest because Applicant’s family members 
are citizens and residents of India, I considered that India is a strong ally of the United 
States with mutual defense and strategic interests; that India is a substantial trading 
partner of the United States; and that India cooperates with the United States on many 
military matters. A friendly relationship is not determinative, but it makes it less likely 
that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a United States citizen through 
relatives or associates in that country. Even friendly countries may engage in espionage 
against the United States’ economic, scientific, or technical interest. I have also 
considered the on-going situation in India with extensive terrorist activities and human 
rights issues. Even though India is not a hostile country and its interests are not inimical 
to the United States, it is reasonable to consider that the terrorist situation and groups in 
India could take an action that may jeopardize their friendly position with the United 
States. There are indications that elements in India could seek sensitive information 
from their citizens who have family in the United States.  
 
8 
 
 I have considered Applicant’s relationship with her mother, father, brother, and 
sister, who are citizens or residents of India. Applicant has been open and candid about 
her foreign relatives. There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate 
family member in a foreign country are not casual. Factors such as an applicant’s 
relatives’ obscurity or the failure of foreign authorities to contact them in the past do not 
provide a meaningful measure of whether an applicant’s family circumstances post a 
security concern.  
 
 Applicant’s contacts with her family members in India, except her sister, are close 
and frequent. Applicant has substantial contact with her mother and brother in India. 
She talks to them almost weekly. She talks to her father every few months. She has not 
communicated with her sister in over seven years. Applicant has not rebutted the 
presumption that the contacts and communications with most of her family members are 
not casual. The communications and contacts between Applicant and her family 
members, except her sister, are frequent and substantial. These family members could 
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. Because of the terrorist activity in 
India, Applicant may likely be placed in a position of having to choose between these 
family members and the U.S. interests. AG ¶ 8 (a) and (c) do not apply, except to her 
sister. 
 
 Applicant has strong ties to the United States. She came to the United States to 
study She has excelled in her education and has multiple degrees and professions. She 
became a U.S. citizen at the first opportunity. Her child is a U.S. native-born citizen. 
Applicant embraces the culture, values, history, and lifestyle of the United States. 
Applicant’s has substantial property and financial assets in the United States. She has 
firm ties to the United States and considers it home.  
 
 Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is unquestioned. She has immediate 
family members who are citizens and residents of the United States. Her immediate 
family, partner and child, are U. S. citizens and residents. Her sister and her family are 
citizens and residents of the United States. Applicant has established that it is unlikely 
that she could be placed in a position to choose between any sense of loyalty or 
obligation to her family members in India and her sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
United States. In balancing all of the factors mentioned and considered above, I am 
satisfied Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is such that she can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States interest. There is no risk to 
the national interest if Applicant has access to classified information. The mitigating 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 8(b) apply.  
 
 Applicant has met her heavy burden to show that her family members who are 
citizens and residents of India do not cause a security concern. I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns for foreign influence.  
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant, not single items in isolation, to 
reach a determination concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
Applicant has contact with family members and financial interests in India. 
However, Applicant established that she has such strong relationships and loyalties in 
and to the United States that she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. While access to classified information is not based on a 
finding of loyalty to the United States, Applicant established her deep and abiding 
commitment to the protection of United States interests. Applicant, her partner, and her 
child are residents of the United States and solely United States citizens. These facts 
leave me without questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for 
access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has met the 
heavy burden of mitigating potential security concerns arising from family members and 
financial interests in India. Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns and 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
10 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
