 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-03471 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, the AGs were 
updated and the AGs effective September 1, 2006 were cancelled.  This decision will be 
decided based on the new AGs effective on June 8, 2017.  If I were to consider this 
case under the AGs effective September 1, 2006, it would result in the same outcome.  
  
 On March 16, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 26, 
2017. The case was assigned to me on September 27, 2017. On that same date, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for October 4, 2017.  The hearing 
was held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered eight exhibits which 
were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 8.  Applicant testified and offered 11 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – K. The transcript (Tr.) was 
received on October 12, 2017. The record was held open until October 18, 2017, to 
allow Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted documents 
which were admitted without objection as AE L – Q. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance. He was born in Jamaica. He served six years on active 
duty with the Jamaican Army.  He move to the United States in April 2000. He became 
a U.S. citizen in December 2014. He has an associate’s degree from a technical 
institute. He married in 2001, but is separated from his wife. He has four children, ages 
28, 27, 19 and 15, and two stepchildren, ages 22 and 24. He was hired by his current 
employer in February 2015. He was laid off on April 26, 2017, pending the outcome of 
this security clearance investigation. (Tr. 21, 24, 27, 29-30. 52-59; Gov 1)    
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations:  
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that he filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2012, and his debts were discharged in August 2012. 
(SOR ¶ 1.x: Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 6; AE J at 138) After the bankruptcy, he incurred 25 
delinquent debts, an approximate total of $40,715. The delinquent debts include: a 
$6,999 charged-off student loan account (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 4 at 13; Gov 5 at 6; Gov 6 at 
7);  a $5,068 delinquent medical account  (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 5 at 2; Gov 6 at 2); a $4,331 
charged-off account owed to a credit union (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 4 at 4; Gov 5 at 2; Gov 6 at 
8); a $3,182 delinquent cell phone account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 5 at 
2);  and a $2,817 credit union account that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 4 at 4; Gov 
5 at 2; Gov 6 at 9). 
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $2,633 delinquent cell phone account  
placed for collection; (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 4 at 15; Gov 5 at 2; Gov 6 at 9); a $2,324 
charged-off jewelry store account (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 5 at 2; Gov 6 at 4); a $2,170 cell 
phone account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 5 at 2); a $1,729 past-due credit 
card account (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 5 at 2; Gov 6 at 5); a $1,568 past-due credit card account 
(SOR ¶ 1.j: Gov 5 at 2; Gov 6 at 4); a $1,132 collection account (SOR ¶ 1.k: Gov 5 at 2);  
a $912 charged-off account (SOR ¶ 1.l: Gov 5 at 3; Gov 6 at 8); a $795 cell phone 
account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.m: Gov 5 at 3); a $771 cable television account 
placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.n: Gov 5 at 3; Gov 6 at 2); and a $766 charged-off credit 
card account. (SOR ¶ 1.o: Gov 5 at 3; Gov 6 at 5).  
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $588 charged-off credit card account; 
(SOR ¶ 1.p: Gov 5 at 3; Gov 6 at 4); a $536 charged-off medical account (SOR ¶ 1.q: 
Gov 5 at 3); a $534 charged-off department store credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.r: Gov 5 
at 3; Gov 6 at 8); a $477 past-due medical account (SOR ¶ 1.s: Gov 5 at 3); a $285 
 
3 
 
 
charged-off big box store credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.t: Gov 5 at 3; Gov 6 at 7); a 
$276 catalog company collection account (SOR ¶ 1.u: Gov 5 at 3; Gov 6 at 3); a $225 
delinquent medical account (SOR ¶ 1.v: Gov 5 at 3); a $150 delinquent medical account 
(SOR ¶ 1.w: Gov 5 at 3); a $242 utility account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1y: Gov 4 at 
6); and a $205 account owed to a municipality placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 1.z: Gov 4 
at 16). 
 
Also alleged under Guideline F is a charge and conviction of issuing worthless 
checks in December 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.aa: Gov 3 at 2) and a September 1996 charge and 
conviction for shoplifting. SOR ¶ 1.bb: Gov 4 at 16). During the hearing, Applicant also 
admitted to filing for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 in 2004. (Tr. 71; Gov 8) The 2004 
bankruptcy was not alleged in the SOR as disqualifying conduct, though it may be 
considered to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances, 
to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation, or as part 
of a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct 26, 2016). 
Therefore, I will consider it accordingly.  
 
 Applicant admits most of the debts. He indicates that he attempted to enter into 
payment plans, but would no longer be able to afford the payments after being laid off in 
April 2017. In February 2017, he retained a law firm that assists with disputing debts 
alleged on credit reports, but is unable to make payments to the law firm because of his 
recent unemployment. (Tr. 59, 70, 83; AE D) Applicant has had several periods of 
unemployment. In September 2014, he was fired because his supervisor claimed that 
he did not complete a work assignment. His periods of unemployment include: February 
2005 to December 2006; November 2010 to June 2011; July 2011 to May 2012; and 
September 2014 to February 2015. (Gov 1, section 13A)  
 
At the close of the record, Applicant provided proof that he paid the $205 
municipal debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.z. (AE N) He provided documentation that he made a 
payment of $25 towards one of his debts. It is not clear that this debt is alleged in the 
SOR. (AE H) In July 2017, he made a $25 payment towards the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.q. (AE I). Applicant has been unable to make payments towards his debts because of 
his unemployment. Most of the debts remain unresolved. (Tr. 59-77, 83-84; AE J; AE K)   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct: 
 
 Under Personal Conduct, Applicant’s 2003 bad check conviction and his 1996 
shoplifting conviction were cross alleged by the Government. (SOR ¶ 2a: Gov 3 at 2; 
SOR ¶ 2b: Gov 3 at 2). The Government also alleged a June 2010 assault charge and 
conviction (SOR ¶ 2.c: AE F); an April 2009 charge and conviction of assault on a family 
member SOR ¶ 2.d: Gov 3 at 3; AE E); and a May 2003 charged of felonious assault 
and felony abuse and neglect of children. For this offense, Applicant pled guilty to a 
misdemeanor assault charge. The neglect charge was nolle prossed. (SOR ¶ 2.e: Gov 
3 at 2) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant is alleged to have falsified his answers to several questions on his e-
QIP application which was signed by him on March 9, 2015. In response to “Section 15 
– Military History. Foreign Military Service. Have you ever served as a civilian or military 
member in a foreign country’s military, intelligence, diplomatic, security forces, militia, 
other defense force, or government agency?” Applicant answered, “No”.  He did not list 
his military service in the Jamaican Army from 1989 to 1995. (Gov 1, section 15; Gov 2 
at 5; Tr. 21, 53) Applicant states that he did not list his service in the Jamaican Army 
due to oversight. It was the first time he completed an e-QIP form. He received no 
guidance on how to fill out the form and he felt pressure to complete the form as soon 
as possible. He did not intend to hide his foreign military service. (Tr. 80-82)  
 
 Applicant answered, “No” in response to the “Section 22 – Police Record 
(EVER) Other than those offenses already listed, have you EVER had the following 
happen to you . . . been charged with a felony offense?” He did not list his May 2003 
felony charge which was alleged in SOR ¶ 2.e. (Gov 1, section 22) Applicant claims he 
did not list this charge because he believed he did not have to list offenses that were 
more than seven years old. (Response to SOR)  
 
Applicant answered, “Yes” in response to the “Section 22 – Police Record. In the 
past seven (7) years have you been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshall or 
any type of law enforcement official? … In the past seven (7) years, have you been 
charged, convicted or sentenced of a crime in any court?” Applicant listed his June 2010 
assault conviction (SOR ¶ 2.c), but did not list his April 2009 charge for assault on a 
family member (SOR ¶ 2.d: Gov 1, section 22) Applicant stated in his response to the 
SOR that he did not list this charge because he believed the charges were dismissed 
and it would not be on his record. (Response to SOR).  
 
Whole-Person Factors:   
 
Applicant submitted five reference letters from his co-workers. He is described by 
his team lead as “a consummate professional in all aspects, and a highly valuable 
member of my team.” He has been “instrumental in several high-priority projects.” (AE A 
at 1) The Cyber Security Manager states that Applicant is a trusted and valued team 
member and it would be a loss to lose his services on the contract. (AE A at 2) Other 
co-workers have said similar favorable things about Applicant. (AE A at 3-4) Applicant’s 
pastor states it is a joy having Applicant as a member of his congregation. Applicant 
joined the church in May 2017. (AE A at 5). 
 
Applicant has earned several computer certifications. (AE B) In September 2017, 
he received an offer from another contractor contingent on the successful adjudication 
of his security clearance. (AE A at 5)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
 
5 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
 
6 
 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of financial problems. He incurred over $40,000 in 
debt after having his debts discharged in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2012. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 
19(b), and 19(c) apply.  
   
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. 
He has had a history of not meeting his financial obligations since at least 2004, when 
he first filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7. He continues to incur a large amount of 
delinquent debt even after having his debts discharged in a second bankruptcy in 2012.  
Applicant’s financial irresponsibility continues to raise questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, because Applicant encountered several periods of 
unemployment. However, I cannot conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances because of his lack of attention towards his delinquent debts while he 
was employed. Applicant did not attempt to resolve any of his debts until after the SOR 
was issued. Despite two bankruptcies, Applicant has not implemented any standards 
such as following a budget to prevent or minimize his financial problems. For this 
reason, AG ¶ 20(b) is given less weight.  
 
 AG & 20(d) does not apply. I cannot conclude that Applicant made a good-faith 
effort to resolve his delinquent debts.  He made attempts to enter in to payment plans 
with some of his creditors after the SOR was issued. Granted, his current 
unemployment prevents him from resolving his debts. However, he was employed full-
time between February 2015 and April 2017 and did not attempt to resolve his 
delinquent accounts.   
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
8 
 
 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security or adjudicative processes.  
 
 The following disqualifying conditions potentially apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information.  
 
 AG ¶ 16(a) applies with regard to Applicant’s omission of his six years of service 
in the Jamaican Army from 1989 to 1995 in response to Section 15 – Military History. 
Foreign Military Service. I find Applicant’s omission was material and intentional with 
regard to his foreign military service. The question was clear and does not really create 
any ambiguities for individual’s completing the security clearance application. SOR ¶ 1.f 
is found against Applicant. 
 
 I find for Applicant regarding the falsification allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h.  
With regards to SOR ¶ 1.g, Applicant does not have a legal background. He did not  
understand that he should have listed the May 2003 felony charge because he pled to a 
misdemeanor. In addition, he did not think he needed to list it because the other 
questions advise to list any offenses within the past seven years. The May 2003 arrest 
was more than seven years old. With regards to SOR ¶ 1.h, Applicant believed that he 
did not have to list his 2009 arrest for assault on a family member because the charge 
was dismissed. He misunderstood the question. The omission of the 2009 charge of 
assault on a family member was not intentional.  
 
 AG ¶ 16(c) applies with regard to Applicant’s December 2003 worthless checks 
charge, his September 1996 shoplifting charge, his June 2010 assault charge, his April 
2009 assault on a family member charge, and his May 2003 charge of felonious assault 
and felony abuse and neglect of children charge. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e)  Applicant’s 
misconduct and arrest history raises questions about his judgment, trustworthiness, 
reliability, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. This raises questions 
about Applicant’s ability to handle classified information.  
 
9 
 
 
 Under Guideline E, the following mitigating conditions potentially apply in 
Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
   
 With regard to Applicant’s deliberate omission of his foreign military service, I 
cannot conclude he made a prompt good-faith effort to correct the omission. AG ¶ 17(a) 
does not apply. SOR ¶ 1.f is found against Applicant.    
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) applies pertaining to SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e.  While Applicant has 
numerous arrests and convictions in his background, it has been seven years since his 
last arrest. His conduct has improved since that time.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
reference letters from his superiors and co-workers. I considered Applicant’s periods of 
unemployment. I also considered Applicant’s past bankruptcies in 2004 and 2012, and 
his current delinquent debts totaling over $40,000. I considered that Applicant took no 
action towards resolving these delinquent debts until after the SOR was issued, even 
 
10 
 
 
though he was employed full-time from February 2015 to April 2017. I considered 
Applicant’s deliberate omission of his foreign military service on his March 2015 e-QIP 
application. Applicant’s financial situation is unstable and it is unlikely to improve in the 
near future. Questions remain about Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability. Security 
concerns under financial considerations and personal conduct are not mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a -1.y, 1.aa – 1.bb:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.z:     For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.e, 2.g – 2.h:  For Applicant 
     
Subparagraph 2.f:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
