 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-01663 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
It has been over two years since Applicant’s driving while intoxicated (DWI) 
arrestd. There is no evidence of any subsequent alcohol-related incidents or issues of 
concern. He pleaded guilty and successfully participated in a substance abuse training 
program. He disclosed his misconduct to his supervisors and discussed the offense with 
a government investigator. He is remorseful about his DWI conviction, and promised not 
to repeat his behavior. He has learned his lesson from his past mistake. He mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines G (alcohol consumption) and J (criminal 
conduct). Eligibility to hold a position of trust is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire (Application) requesting eligibility 
for a position of trust (automatic data processing (ADP) position) on September 19, 
2015. The Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) listing trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines G and J on September 22, 
2016. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 22, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A copy of the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM), adducing the evidence supporting the trustworthiness 
concerns, was provided to him by letter dated November 25, 2016. Applicant received 
the FORM on February 14, 2017. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to 
the FORM and to provide material in explanation, extenuation, and mitigation. He did 
not respond to the FORM and submit no objections. The case was assigned to me on 
October 1, 2017. I admitted the FORM evidence and have considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the Guideline G allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a 
(driving while intoxicated (DWI) in October 2015), and the cross-allegation under 
Guideline J (SOR ¶ 2.a). His SOR admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school on an unspecified date, and received his bachelor’s degree in 2010. He 
married in June 2010 and separated in August 2015.  
 
Applicant’s employment history shows that he was employed part time between 
2006 and 2011, during and after he was in college. He has been employed full time 
since September 2011. His current employer, a federal contractor, hired Applicant in 
February 2012. This is his first application for a position of trust.  
 
In October 2015, Applicant was charged with DWI. He pleaded guilty, and the 
presiding judge suspended the imposition of the sentence. In February 2016, he was 
placed on unsupervised probation for a period of 24 months. Applicant was also 
required to attend a Victim’s Impact Panel and a Substance Abuse Traffic Offenders 
Program, and to pay a fine and court costs. He complied with all the terms of his 
sentence, except for the unsupervised probation. He is anticipated to remain on 
probation until February 2018. 
 
Concerning the DWI, Applicant explained that his wife had recently left him after 
a 13-year relationship. The night of the DWI was the first time he “had been out” after 
she moved out of the home. Applicant acknowledged that his explanation was not an 
excuse for his misconduct, but that he hoped it would explain his aberrational behavior. 
He implied that this was not his normal behavior. Applicant stated that he voluntarily 
disclosed his DWI to his employer and to a government investigator. Applicant believes 
that the end of his marriage created an unusual circumstance that led to his DWI, which 
will not repeat itself. He averred in his SOR answer that he has not been involved in any 
additional alcohol-related incidents after October 2015. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
In issuing the SOR, DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as 
amended (Regulation);1 and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG, and 
are applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. I decided 
this case under the current AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
The DOD considers ADP positions to be “sensitive positions.” For a person to be 
eligible for sensitive duties, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness must be 
such that assigning the person to a sensitive position is clearly consistent with the 
national security interests of the United States. AG ¶ 2.c. Applicants for ADP positions 
are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable 
access determination is made. (Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum for the 
Director, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, dated November 19, 2004) 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive 
information. The Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States to grant 
or continue his or her access to sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
                                            
1 ADP cases are adjudicated under the provisions of the Directive. (Deputy Under Secretary of 
Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, dated November 19, 
2004.) 
 
4 
 
 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the interests of national security” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of 
the Government. “any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Eligibility 
for a public trust position decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the Government has established for issuing access to sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 articulates the security concern relating to alcohol consumption:  
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness  
 
In October 2015, shortly after submitting his application, Applicant was charged 
with DWI. He pleaded guilty to DWI in February 2016. He complied with all the terms of 
his sentence, except for the 24 months unsupervised probation. He is anticipated to 
remain on probation until February 2018. AG ¶ 22 provides two disqualifying conditions 
that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder, and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
The record established the above disqualifying condition, requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
 
5 
 
 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment relapse, and is making satisfactory 
profess in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
All the above mitigating conditions apply. The DWI happened in October 2015. It 
has been over two years since Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident. There is no 
additional evidence of any alcohol-related incidents or issues of concern. Applicant 
pleaded guilty and successfully participated in counseling or a substance abuse training 
program. He disclosed his misconduct to his supervisors and discussed the offense with 
a government investigator. Applicant’s statements in his answer to the SOR indicate he 
was remorseful about his DWI conviction. He acknowledged the possible danger he 
could have caused to others with his misconduct, and promised not to repeat his 
behavior. It appears he has learned his lesson from his past mistake. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt about a 
person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The SOR cross-alleged the same facts and circumstances alleged under 
Guideline G under Guideline J - Applicant’s 2016 DWI conviction. He complied with all 
the terms of his sentence, except for the 24 months unsupervised probation. He is 
anticipated to remain on probation until February 2018. Applicant averred that he has 
not been involved in any alcohol-related misconduct since October 2015. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; 
and 
 
(c) the individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists two conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 AG ¶ 32(a) and (d) apply and mitigate the criminal misconduct security concerns. 
Applicant’s DWI occurred in October 2015. It has been two years since the offense and 
Applicant complied with the terms of his sentence, except for the 24-months 
unsupervised probation, which expires in February 2018. There is no evidence of any 
additional questionable behavior. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant presented some evidence showing that he is 
on the right track to establish his successful rehabilitation. He pleaded guilty to the 
offense; noted that his wife leaving him may have prompted his aberrational behavior; 
and wisely acknowledged that she leaving him was not an excuse for his criminal 
behavior.  
 
 
7 
 
 
This was Applicant’s first offense, and there is no evidence of additional 
misconduct or alcohol-related incidents. The sentence as a whole, including the extent 
of the substance abuse training Applicant was required to attend, indicates the presiding 
judge considered his misconduct serious, but not egregious. Applicant’s statements in 
his answer to the SOR indicate he was remorseful about his DWI conviction. He 
acknowledged the possible danger he could have caused to others, and promised not to 
repeat his behavior. It appears he has learned his lesson from his past mistake.  
 
I specifically considered that Applicant will be on probation until February 2018. 
His probation should be over about two and one-half months after the date of my 
decision. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s 2015 DWI no 
longer creates a doubt about his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and his 
willingness and ability to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines G 
and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant started working for a federal contractor in 2012, and this is his first 
trustworthiness application. He is now fully aware that for him to be eligible for a position 
of trust, he will be required to demonstrate his trustworthiness, character, honesty, and 
good judgment. Any future criminal behavior will destroy the trust placed upon him by 
the Government and show that he is unreliable, untrustworthy, and lacks judgment. The 
alcohol consumption and criminal conduct trustworthiness concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is in the 
interest of national security to grant eligibility for a position of trust to Applicant. Eligibility 
for a position of trust is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
