 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03899 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline C, foreign preference, 
and the concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, were either not established or 
were mitigated. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 9, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines B and C. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AGs implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered 
this case under the previous AGs implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same 
using either set of AGs.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 6, 2017, and submitted a supplemental 
answer by email on August 11, 2017. He also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. On June 12, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On July 14, 
2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for August 15, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. The 
Government’s exhibit list was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) II. Applicant testified, 
presented the testimony of one witness, but offered no substantive exhibits. His written 
opening statement and closing argument were marked as HE I and III. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) on August 22, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answers to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations, with detailed 
explanations. Those admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He was born in France. He was educated in France, 
including receiving his Ph.D. He moved to the United States and became a U.S. citizen 
in March 1996. He is married with two children. His children were born in the United 
States and are dual U.S.-French citizens due to Applicant’s French birth.2 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant consulted for a foreign satellite agency from 
December 2015 to the present; that on five occasions between 2011 and 2015, 
Applicant traveled to France to work with the French military; that he exercised French 
citizenship by applying for a French passport in 2011, voting in French elections on two 
occasions in May 2012 and June 2012; that between 2009 and July 2015, on multiple 
occasions, he used his French passport, in lieu of his U.S. passport, to enter the United 
Kingdom, France, Spain, Italy, Greece, Germany, and Turkey. 
  
 Applicant has worked as a scientist for his current employer, a government 
contractor, since September 2012. Since 1996, Applicant has also worked as a scientist 
for an educational corporation, which is a consortium of more than 100 North American 
universities. This corporation is affiliated with the U.S. National Science Foundation. 
Applicant’s work is in the field of meteorology. In 2015, he contracted with an 
international satellite agency to assist in managing weather satellites for several NATO 
countries. All the information involved in his work was in the public domain and 
unclassified. The weather information collected by these satellites is dispersed to 
operational meteorological centers, including the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA). His contract lasted 18 months and has ended. He has no intent 
to engage in future contracts with this entity.3 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 6, 31-32; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 37-38, 44-45; Answer, Supplemental Answer. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In his work for the educational corporation, his employer secured a five-year 
contract with the French Navy and Army to perform atmospheric research in 
approximately 2011. This contact was approved by the Department of State. All 
information associated with this work was in the public domain and unclassified. During 
the term of this contract, Applicant was required to travel to France on a number of 
occasions. The contract ended earlier this year and Applicant no longer performs those 
duties. It was during this time frame when Applicant used his French passport when 
entering or exiting European countries, however, he always used his U.S. passport to 
enter or depart the United States. In the future, he will only use his U.S. passport.4 
 
 The co-owner (Mr. X) of the defense contractor that Applicant works for testified 
for him. Mr. X has known Applicant for 10 years. Mr. X holds a security clearance and is 
also the company’s facilities security officer (FSO). He described the company’s mission 
as performing atmospheric research for the DOD. He was aware that Applicant also 
worked for the educational corporation described above, while he also worked for Mr. 
X’s company. He never had a concern about Applicant facing a conflict of interest over 
any proprietary data. Mr. X opines that Applicant is trustworthy to access classified 
information. Because the company is small (just 13 employees), the need arose for 
Applicant to obtain a security clearance in 2015. In December 2016, Applicant turned 
over his French passport and national ID to Mr. X. Applicant investigated the possibility 
of renouncing his French citizenship, but found it was very difficult, if not impossible, to 
do. He considers himself a U.S. citizen only.5  
 
 The Government did not present any evidence concerning France, through 
administrative notice or otherwise. Applicant offered evidence that France has been a 
U.S. ally since 1778. I find, based upon the record evidence, that France does not 
create a heightened risk of foreign coercion.6 
 
 Applicant presented two statements attached to his first answer from U.S. 
Government employees who have worked with Applicant in the past. He has worked 
with representatives from both the U.S. Army and Air Force. He is supported in his effort 
to gain a security clearance.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 39-41, 51; Answer, Supplemental Answer. 
 
5 Tr. at 19-28; Answer. 
 
6 Supplemental Answer. 
 
7 Answer (see pp. 6-7). 
 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” as 
follows:  
 
5 
 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant is 
vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member or friend is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States, 
or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. There is no evidence in the 
record of any of these conditions regarding France.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”8 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) do not apply because Applicant’s connection with the foreign 
satellite agency was based on information in the public domain and was shared with US 
agencies. He no longer consults with this foreign agency and does not intend to do so in 
the future. Likewise, his connection with the French military ended and he has no 
intentions of renewing it in the future.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
Even though I find that Applicant’s actions are not disqualifying under AG ¶ 7, out 
of an abundance of caution, I will also analyze whether mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
8 apply. Applicant is no longer affiliated with the foreign groups that prompted the 
concern under this guideline and therefore it is unlikely that Applicant would be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of these foreign groups and 
those of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) applies. 
 
Applicant has met his burden to establish his “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He is has been a U.S. citizen since 1996. He 
owns a home, has substantial assets here, and has raised his family here. He has 
worked for U.S.-based organizations including the Army and the Air Force. The 
evidence supports that Applicant has longstanding ties to the United States and would 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
  AG ¶ 9 explains the security concern about “foreign preference” as follows:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
 
7 
 
 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
 AG ¶ 10 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
 (c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; and 
 
 (d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
 (1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, 
position, or political office in a foreign government or military organization; 
and 
 
 (2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in any way that conflicts with U.S. 
national security interests. 
 
 In analyzing the Guideline C allegations in this case, it is important to note that 
the SOR was issued under an earlier version of the adjudicative guidelines (as cited on 
page 1 of this decision). Under the prior version, an Applicant’s “possession of a current 
foreign passport” was a disqualifying condition. Similarly, Applicant’s renewal of his 
French passport, and his use of that passport for international travel, were also 
disqualifying, since both actions occurred after he became a U.S. citizen in 1996.  
 
 Under the new AGs, however, an applicant’s renewal, use and possession of a 
foreign passport is not disqualifying, as long as: a) it is properly disclosed to appropriate 
security officials; and b) an applicant uses his or her U.S. passport when entering or 
exiting the United States. There is no allegation (or evidence) that Applicant ever failed 
to disclose his French passport to proper U.S. security authorities at any time, and he 
disclosed it on GE 1.  
 
 Before Applicant sought a security clearance, he used his French passport to 
enter and depart the countries of the United Kingdom, Italy, France, Spain, Greece, 
Germany, and Turkey between 2009 and 2015. However, he always used his U.S. 
passport to enter and depart the United States. AG ¶ 10(c) does not apply. Applicant 
renewed his French passport in 2011 and voted in a French presidential and legislative 
election in 2012. AG ¶ 10(d) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including:  
 
 
8 
 
 
 (a) the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national security 
interests; 
 
 (c) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the foreign 
citizenship that is in conflict with U.S. national security interests; and 
 
 (f) the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, entity, or 
association that poses a low national security risk. 
 
 Applicant surrendered his foreign passport to his security officer shortly after he 
began the clearance application process. He has no intention of using the French 
passport in the future and he has no intention of voting in future French elections. He 
believes it is impossible to renounce his French citizenship, but he considers himself a 
U.S. citizen only. France poses a low national security risk. All the above mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The factors tending to support 
granting Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing towards 
denying his clearance. I considered that he no longer is affiliated with any foreign entity, 
that he surrendered his French passport to his FSO, and the strong ties he has to this 
country, thereby demonstrating his longstanding loyalty to the United States and that 
there are no foreign preference concerns. Therefore, he provided sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign influence, and 
Guideline C, foreign preference, were either not established or were mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs     1.a: - 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph       2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
