 
1                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 16-02899 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s use of an information technology system from another government 
agency (AGA)-1 after she began her AGA-2 employment was authorized.1  She used the 
AGA-1 information technology system to benefit AGA-1. Use of information technology, 
handling protected information, and personal conduct concerns are mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On April 14, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1. On November 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 
2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
                                            
1 The identities of AGA-1, her employer from 2008-2010, and AGA-2, her employer in 2010 after 
she left employment with AGA-1, are in the record. Tr. 61-62; AE A at 3. Both employers are non-DOD 
federal entities with sophisticated security systems. 
 
2                                         
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines M (use of 
information technology), K (handling protected information), and E (personal conduct). 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2. 
 
On December 15, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR and requested 
a hearing. HE 3. On February 8, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On 
August 15, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On September 21, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing 
for October 25, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits; Applicant offered 
seven exhibits; there were no objections to any exhibits, except to parts of GE 3;2 and all 
proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. Tr. 13-29; GE 1-3; AE A-G. On November 
2, 2017, DOHA received a copy of the hearing transcript.  
 
                                            
2 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided a heavily redacted summary of an 
adjudication record from AGA-1. GE 3 at 11-17. Applicant objected to admissibility as a due process 
violation because it was incomplete and unfair. Tr. 15-18; GE 3 at 11-17. AGA-1 generated the document 
in 2011, and Applicant contended that she is prejudiced because she may be unable to remember the 
information summarized in the AGA-1 document. Tr. 25. Department Counsel responded that the source 
for the documents was Applicant, and she cited ISCR Case No. 10-08390 (App. Bd. Mar. 30, 2012) and 
ISCR Case No. 11-07509 (App. Bd. June 25, 2013), which discuss admissibility of redacted information 
and correspondence from AGA-1. In ISCR Case No. 10-08390, the cover letter conveying the 
documentation from AGA to DOHA states that: 
 
(1) the document was redacted “to delete classified information, extraneous and 
administrative data and other information excludable pursuant to applicable law or 
regulation;” (2) the exhibit is a true copy of the original maintained during the regular course 
of AGA business; (3) it was the regular course of business for AGA personnel with 
knowledge of the matters at hand to record or transmit to be recorded information to be 
included in the record; and (4) the record was made at or near the time of the matters at 
hand. The letter goes on to say that AGA would permit the Judge to examine unredacted 
copies to allow admission into the record of the redacted ones. 
 
Id. at 3. The Appeal Board found the cover letter to be decisive in establishing the admissibility of the 
documents AGA provided. In ISCR Case No. 11-07509 (App. Bd. June 25, 2013) the Appeal Board 
admitted evidence from AGA that explained AGA’s revocation of access to classified information stating 
“[o]fficial records or evidence compiled in the regular course of business are routinely admitted in DOHA 
hearings. Directive ¶ E3.1.20. See ISCR Case No. 04-12678 at 3-4 (App. Bd. May 7, 2007). As with public 
records admitted under Federal Rule of Evidence 803(8), official records are presumed to be reliable by 
virtue of the agency’s duty of accuracy and the high probability that it has satisfied that duty. See, e.g., 
United States v. Carter, 591 F.3d 656, 659 (D.C. Cir. 2010).” Id. at 5 n. 3. I overruled Applicant’s objection, 
and the redactions go to the weight of the evidence. Tr. 26.  
 
 Applicant made a policy objection to the admissibility of the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) summary of Applicant’s interview. Tr. 26-27. In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant 
reviewed the OPM summary and made several corrections and clarifications. She otherwise admitted the 
accuracy of the OPM summary. I overruled Applicant’s objection. Tr. 27. 
 
3                                         
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. 
Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new 
AGs.3 
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
 Applicant’s SOR alleges in SOR ¶ 1.a, “You intentionally accessed a government 
Information Technology system and viewed protected information without authorization 
from approximately 2008 through 2010.” SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 3.a cross-allege SOR ¶ 1.a. In 
Applicant’s SOR response, she denied the allegations in the SOR. HE 3. Additional 
findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old systems manager with expertise in “technical leadership, 
project management, systems integration, business process analysis and re-engineering, 
and business development.” Tr. 71, 91; AE A at 1. She has 32 years of experience, mostly 
as a U.S. Government contractor. GE 1; GE 3 at 11. In 1983, Applicant received a 
bachelor’s degree in business administration. Tr. 71, 92. In 1987, Applicant married, and 
her daughter is 23. Tr. 91; GE 1. Her husband is retired from his employment from AGA-
1. Tr. 91. Applicant’s employment from 2008-2010 involved AGA-1 and AGA-2. She has 
not served in the military. Tr. 92. Applicant has held a security clearance since 1994. Tr. 
72, 88.   
 
Use of Information Technology, Handling Protected Information, and Personal 
Conduct  
 
Applicant’s AGA-1 adjudication states: 
 
In SEP 2010, subject reported she printed information [   ] that was not 
related to her assigned work. Subject accessed [    ] classified [    ] 
information she did not have a need to know on two five occasions. Subject 
checked [     ] for famous people because she was curious [     ]. Subject 
said she should not have returned to [AGA-1] space or accessed their 
system since [    ] not [AGA-1] work. Subject knew what she did was wrong 
but did it out of curiosity.5  
                                            
3 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
4 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
5 The quoted information is from an adjudication summary from AGA-1. GE 3 at 11-12. Applicant 
received the summary in response to her request for information from AGA-1. Tr. 96-97. The brackets are 
 
4                                         
 
 
On February 17, 2011, AGA-1 officials revoked Applicant’s access to classified 
information based on Guidelines K and M. GE 3 at 15-16.  
 
Applicant’s May 14, 2015, OPM PSI indicates during an AGA-1 pre-polygraph 
interview, she disclosed that she looked up information on an AGA-1 database to prepare 
for briefings.6 Her reviews of the AGA-1 database were part of her employment 
responsibilities. In 2010, she reviewed AGA-1 material while working on an AGA-2 
contract. She believed AGA-1 interpreted her uses of AGA-1’s database as being for 
“curiosity,” and alleged her uses of AGA-1’s database were not related to her AGA-1 
duties. Based on Guidelines K and M, AGA-1 revoked her security clearance. She said 
AGA-1’s allegations were “baseless.”  
 
Applicant denied that she intentionally violated AGA-1’s database access rules. Tr. 
75. AGA-1’s polygrapher did not understand Applicant’s job responsibilities. Tr. 76. She 
said she told the polygrapher she accessed information about people who are infamous 
for their terrorism activities. Tr. 76-77. She accessed the information on high-profile 
terrorists because it was her responsibility to do so. Tr. 77. She did not access information 
about movie stars or political people. Tr. 93. 
 
When Applicant was working for AGA-2, AGA-1 had extended her AGA-1 badge 
and clearances until AGA-2 had clearance approval. Tr. 78. AGA-1 had a sensitive 
compartmented information facility (SCIF) in the same location as her AGA-2 office. Tr. 
78. AGA-1 and AGA-2 knew Applicant was continuing to access AGA-1’s database. Tr. 
78. She received communications from AGA-1 and AGA-2 during the same day. Tr. 79. 
She planned to do AGA-1 work when she was using AGA-1 space and AGA-2 work when 
she was using AGA-2 space. Tr. 80. She was unsure whether she had ever accessed the 
database on behalf of AGA-1 from her AGA-2 workspace. Tr. 85. 
 
AGA-1 and AGA-2 use the same database. Tr. 93. The only way to access the 
database is to utilize AGA-1 provided equipment, network connection, and SCIF. Tr. 93. 
Applicant insisted that she was allowed to access the database on behalf of AGA-1 while 
she was working in an AGA-2 workspace. Tr. 85. Her AGA-1 and AGA-2 supervisors had 
agreed that she could work on behalf of AGA-1 and AGA-2 at the same time. Tr. 86. 
 
Applicant told the polygrapher that she printed some personal items such as 
Mapquest directions or a recipe using an unclassified government computer and printer. 
Tr. 81-85. She wanted to be thorough and completely candid with the polygrapher. Tr. 82.   
 
When Applicant submitted an appeal to the AGA-1’s decision to revoke her 
security clearance, she did not seek advice from counsel or submit any supporting 
statements. Tr. 82. Her appeal consisted of an interview by an AGA-1 adjudicator. Tr. 88-
89. She did not file a written appeal or make a written statement for her appeal. Tr. 94. 
Applicant promised to comply with all security regulations and requirements. Tr. 83.  
                                            
in the original. There are no quotation marks indicating verbatim collection of Applicant’s words in the 
summary.     
6 The information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s May 14, 2015 Office of Personnel 
Management personal subject interview. GE 3 at 20. 
 
5                                         
 
Applicant’s Supervisor on the AGA-1 Contract     
 
Applicant’s supervisor from 2007-2010 said Applicant was responsible for 
collecting information about non-United States residents for counter-terrorism purposes. 
Tr. 48-52. As part of her duties, Applicant had access to AGA-1’s database. Tr. 53. 
Applicant was authorized to review any information in the database. Tr. 56. When a high-
profile case implicating counter-terrorism would surface in the media, Applicant was 
supposed to check AGA-1’s database for information on the case. Tr. 57. Applicant was 
responsible for assembling the information she collected and sending it to senior U.S. 
officials and other agencies. Tr. 57. Applicant was supposed to show initiative and be 
proactive about searching for and gathering information to address current issues, and 
officials in AGA-1’s security may not have understood the scope of her responsibilities. 
Tr. 68. Applicant never accessed information when she did not have authorization or a 
need to know based on her duties and responsibilities. Tr. 58. AGA-1 security officials 
never consulted with Applicant’s supervisor about the scope of Applicant’s duties or 
otherwise. Tr. 69.  
 
In 2010, Applicant’s support responsibilities moved away from AGA-1 to AGA-2. 
Tr. 60. AGA-1 and AGA-2 shared the same database. Tr. 60-61. AGA-1 “wanted to 
continue to leverage her expertise on an ad hoc basis, until [the contractor] found the right 
replacement for her within that position because it was a pretty key position.” Tr. 61. 
Applicant was supporting two different customers, AGA-1 and AGA-2. Tr. 61-62. AGA-1 
authorized her continued access to the AGA-1 database; otherwise her access would 
have been removed. Tr. 62, 110. AGA-1 limited access to areas in which users had a 
need to know for their professional duties. Tr. 66-67. AGA-1 continued to hold Applicant’s 
clearance. Tr. 111. Applicant was authorized to perform work for AGA-1 while using AGA-
2 workspace. Tr. 109. For example, if Applicant received an email from AGA-1 while she 
was working in an AGA-2 workspace, she could reply to the email using AGA-2 
workspace and computer systems because such collaboration is authorized. Tr. 109. 
Applicant worked on the same program for both AGA-1 and AGA-2. Tr. 109. The only 
time Applicant ever violated a security rule was on one occasion she self-reported herself 
for bringing her cell phone into a restricted area. Tr. 62, 87.   
 
Applicant had limited access to unclassified computers in her work environment. 
Tr. 59-60. Employees were authorized to send and receive personal emails with 
attachments, subject to limitations relating to excessive use of paper or employee time. 
Tr. 59-60. Access to content such as pornography was prohibited. Tr. 59.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant has never received any disciplinary actions from her employer. Tr. 83-
84. She has continued to receive security training to the present. Tr. 90. A coworker who 
has worked with Applicant since 2008 described her as careful about safeguarding 
classified information, diligent, professional, responsible, trustworthy, reliable, and 
honest. Tr. 32-45. Applicant’s former supervisor described her as exceptionally careful 
about compliance with security rules. Tr. 63-64. She received excellent performance 
appraisals. Tr. 64. She is a valuable asset to national security. Tr. 70. She is trustworthy, 
honest, responsible, and reliable. Tr. 65, 69-70. Two former supervisors cited Applicant’s 
 
6                                         
 
trustworthiness, integrity, and protection of classified information. AE F; AE G. Their 
statements support reinstatement of her security clearance. Tr. 32-66; AE F; AE G.  
 
 In 2004, an important government official wrote two letters lauding Applicant’s skill, 
professionalism, leadership, competence, and “herculean effort requiring tremendous 
attention to detail” for her work on the terrorism database. AE E; AE F. Her “tremendous 
work ethnic, technical skill set, common sense, and excellent communications skills” 
made “a difference in the war on terrorism.” AE E. In 2005, Applicant received a citation 
from her director. AE B. In 2010 and 2011, she received citations from AGA-1. AE C; AE 
D.   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
 
7                                         
 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Use of Information Technology 
 
AG ¶ 39 articulates the security concern for use of information technology: 
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, mobile, 
or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, manipulate, 
protect, or move information. This includes any component, whether 
integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, software, or 
firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations. 
 
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying including: 
 
(a) unauthorized entry into any information technology system; 
 
(b) unauthorized modification, destruction, or manipulation of, or denial of 
access to, an information technology system or any data in such a system; 
 
(c) use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access 
to another system or to a compartmented area within the same system; 
 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified, sensitive, proprietary, or 
other protected information on or to any unauthorized information 
technology system; 
 
(e) unauthorized use of any information technology system; 
 
8                                         
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system when prohibited by 
rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations or when otherwise not 
authorized; 
 
(g) negligence or lax security practices in handling information technology 
that persists despite counseling by management; and 
 
(h) any misuse of information technology, whether deliberate or negligent, 
that results in damage to the national security. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges, “You intentionally accessed a government Information 
Technology system and viewed protected information without authorization from 
approximately 2008 through 2010.” I find the statements of Applicant and her supervisor 
to be credible. Applicant’s access to the AGA-1 database and specific files within that 
database from 2008 through 2010, concerning high-profile foreign terrorists was 
authorized. The information she accessed was pursuant to her duties and not based on 
personal curiosity. She needed to know the information she obtained from AGA-1’s 
database to respond to AGA-1’s requests. She has met her burden, and she has refuted 
the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. The allegation made under the use of information technology 
guideline is not substantiated.   
 
Handling Protected Information 
 
AG ¶ 33 describes the security concern for handling protected information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other sensitive 
government information, and proprietary information-raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
AG ¶ 34 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying 
including: 
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of protected information to 
unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, personal or business 
contacts, the media, or persons present at seminars, meetings, or 
conferences; 
 
(b) collecting or storing protected information in any unauthorized location; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling protected information, including images, on any unauthorized 
equipment or medium; 
 
(d) inappropriate efforts to obtain or view protected information outside 
one’s need to know; 
 
9                                         
 
(e) copying or modifying protected information in an unauthorized manner 
designed to conceal or remove classification or other document control 
markings; 
 
(f) viewing or downloading information from a secure system when the 
information is beyond the individual’s need-to-know; 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or sensitive 
information; 
 
(h) negligence or lax security practices that persist despite counseling by 
management; and 
 
(i) failure to comply with rules or regulations that results in damage to the 
national security, regardless of whether it was deliberate or negligent. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a cross-alleges under the handling protected information guideline the 
same conduct alleged under the use of information technology guideline. As indicated in 
the previous section, Applicant’s conduct with AGA-1’s database was authorized. She 
needed to know about high-profile terrorists as part of her duties. She has refuted the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 34. Handling protected information security concerns are 
unsubstantiated.   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
 
10                                         
 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior . . . ; (3) a pattern of . . . rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or 
group. Such conduct includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
could affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
SOR ¶ 3.a cross-alleges under the personal conduct guideline the same conduct 
alleged under the use of information technology guideline. As indicated in the use of 
information technology section, Applicant’s conduct with AGA-1’s database was 
authorized. She needed to know about high-profile terrorists as part of her duties. She 
has refuted the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 16. Personal conduct security concerns 
are unsubstantiated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines M (use 
of information technology), K (handling protected information), and E (personal conduct) 
are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old systems manager with expertise in “technical leadership, 
project management, systems integration, business process analysis and re-engineering, 
and business development.” GE 3 at 1. She has 32 years of experience, mostly as a U.S. 
Government contractor. In 1983, Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in business 
administration.    
 
 
11                                         
 
The general sense of the statements of a coworker and three former supervisors 
is that Applicant is careful about safeguarding classified information, diligent, 
professional, responsible, trustworthy, reliable, and honest. Their statements support 
reinstatement of her security clearance. In 2004, an important government official wrote 
two letters lauding Applicant’s skill, professionalism, leadership, competence, and 
“herculean effort requiring tremendous attention to detail” for her work on the terrorism 
database. AE E; AE F. Her “tremendous work ethnic, technical skill set, common sense, 
and excellent communications skills” made “a difference in the war on terrorism.” AE E. 
In 2005, Applicant received a citation from her director. In 2010 and 2011, she received 
citations from AGA-1.    
 
Applicant and her supervisor’s statements about Applicant’s authorization for 
continued access to the AGA-1 database and specific files within that database 
concerning high-profile foreign terrorists were credible. The information she accessed 
was pursuant to her duties and not based on personal curiosity. She needed to know the 
information she obtained from AGA-1’s database to respond to AGA-1’s requests. When 
AGA-1 revoked Applicant’s security clearance in 2011, it was based on incomplete or 
incorrect information. The AGA-1 adjudicator did not understand Applicant’s dual roles 
with AGA-1 and AGA-2. There is no evidence that AGA-1 checked with Applicant’s 
supervisor or AGA-1’s information technology or security officer about whether she was 
authorized continued access to AGA-1’s database after becoming employed in support 
of AGA-2. AGA-1 has the reputation of being punctilious about access to their computers, 
databases, systems, and records. AGA-1 authorized Applicant’s access to those entities 
and did not revoke them even though AGA-1 was aware she had moved to her 
employment in support of AGA-2. Applicant did not act inappropriately, and the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, and 3.a are unsubstantiated.    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the 
AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Use of information 
technology, handling protected information, and personal conduct security concerns are 
refuted or unsubstantiated.   
 
  
 
12                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
