 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03546 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 28, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for 
decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 20, 2017, and April 4, 2017, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
July 25, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on August 21, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 21, 
2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant testified and did not 
offer any exhibits. There were no objections to GE 1 through 7 and all were admitted into 
evidence. Hearing Exhibit I is a demonstrative chart. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on October 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g. He denied the remaining 
SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He earned two bachelor’s degrees in 2004 and later 
attended graduate school, taking courses for his master’s degree. He has never been 
married. He has two children ages seven and eight years old. He has worked for his 
current employer since 2006. For a five month-period during this time, he worked for a 
different employer. He has no periods of unemployment since graduating from college.2  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial issues to a period when he was cohabitating with 
his children’s mother. He purchased a house in 2008. In 2010, water pipes burst under 
the home and his water bill increased. During this time, his child was born. He moved his 
family from the house into an apartment. He fell behind on mortgage payments and his 
car loan. His car was repossessed (SOR ¶ 1.e-$3,821). His house was foreclosed in 
October 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.g).3  
 
 Applicant disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($696). This debt is for a cell phone plan. 
Applicant purchased phones through the plan that were to be paid over two years. After 
one year, he changed cell phone providers. The provider no longer carried the plan he 
originally had. He believed the plan allowed him to return the phones within the two years 
and be reimbursed. He claimed he returned the cell phones and indicated the provider 
was to provide him with a $696 credit. The original provider sold the debt to a collection 
agency and it has been subsequently resold. Applicant stated in his answer that he filed 
a complaint with Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). The debt was verified 
by CFPB. He stated in his answer that he was currently in the process of suing both 
companies. Applicant testified he returned the phones, so he continues to dispute the 
debt with the original collection agency and its successors. It remains unresolved in a 
collection status on his credit reports.4 
                                                          
2 Tr. 19-25; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 26-29, 50. 
 
4 Tr. 53-57; GE 3, 4; Answer to SOR at pages 13, 17, 21, 120, 139, 166.  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he moved from his apartment in 2014. In his SOR answer 
he stated he moved out in July 2011. He received a notice that he owed additional money 
(SOR ¶ 1.b-$217). He disputed this debt with the property manager and the collection 
agency. He stated in his answer that he filed a complaint with the CFCB and was suing 
the debt collector for violations. CFCB verified the debt, but Applicant does not believe 
the amount owed is accurate. The creditor offered to settle the debt for $108. Applicant 
testified that he is not sure why the debt remains because he had a security deposit with 
the apartment. He testified he is still disputing the debt. He then admitted the debt. He 
has not paid the debt or the settlement, but testified that he is able to pay it. He stated he 
could arrange to pay it. He provided no additional evidence regarding the resolution of 
the debt. It remains in collection status on his credit reports.5  
 
 Applicant admitted the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e regarding his repossessed 
vehicle. He testified that the debt was sold to a collection agency. In his answer to the 
SOR, he stated that he never received notice from the original creditor that would have 
likely been sent to his previous address. In 2014, he received notice from a debt collector. 
He stated the debt collector sent him false documents with his name forged. He filed a 
complaint with the CFCB and his state’s attorney general’s office. He stated in his answer 
that he is currently suing the debt collector. At his hearing, he testified he has not made 
any attempts to make any payments to the original creditor. He is disputing he owes the 
collection agency. He never made any payments after his vehicle was repossessed. He 
does not want to pay the incorrect collection agency. He does not have the means to pay 
this debt. He further testified that he does not dispute owing the debt, but disputes the 
authenticity of the collection agency.  
 
Documents provided as part of Applicant’s answer to the SOR include the 
investigation of the debt by CPFB, which state that the collection agency sent Applicant 
a notice in June 2014 after it purchased the debt and made 15 attempts to contact him. 
The collection agency sent a validation letter in June 2014, and there was no response 
from Applicant. In February 2015, Applicant sent the collection agency a demand letter 
indicating it had five days to provide documentation regarding his account. If it failed to 
comply it should remit $1,000 to Applicant for “willful violation of 15”.6 The collection 
agency immediately sent Applicant a Dispute Validation letter that provided him with 
information if he suspected he was the victim of fraud or identity theft. The letter was 
returned. The collection agency attempted again to provide Applicant with the information 
he requested. No additional information was provided by Applicant to show he has 
resolved the debt. It remains in collection status on his credit reports.7  
 
 Applicant disputes the debt for cable service alleged in SOR ¶1.f ($144). He 
testified that he had service with this creditor for 48 hours and then switched services. He 
                                                          
5 Tr. 57-67; GE 4; Answer to SOR at pages 28-32, 121, 139. 
 
6 Tr. 67-72; GE 3, 6; Answer to SOR at pages 42-47, 121, 139. It is unknown what “willful violation of 15” 
means. 
  
7 Tr. 67-72; GE 3, 6; Answer to SOR at pages 42-47, 121,139. 
 
4 
 
 
believed he had 30 days to cancel service, and he returned the cable equipment. In 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated he canceled service within 24 hours. The 
charges are for equipment, which he stated he returned. It is no longer on his most current 
credit reports. This debt is resolved.8 
 
 Applicant’s college was funded by his father, as part of an agreement for 
delinquent child support. Applicant also acquired student loans for college. These student 
loans are listed as individual accounts in Applicant’s credit reports. At some point in time 
after Applicant’s deferments on his student loans expired prior to around 2010, they 
became delinquent and later were garnished. He was concerned because he did not 
recognize the entities that were garnishing his pay, so he filed a report of identity theft. 
Eventually, one creditor ceased the garnishment, and he was reimbursed the amount 
taken. Other amounts garnished were applied to his student loans. The garnishment 
stopped in 2015. There was additional confusion because apparently Applicant’s father 
also obtained student loans that may have been held jointly. His father was unable to 
make the payments. Applicant also paid some student loans that were resolved in 2009.9  
 
 Due to unforeseen financial problems in 2010, Applicant was unable to pay his 
student loans alleged in the SOR. He testified that he contacted the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c and 1.d in about 2011, but has not contacted them since then and since the 
garnishment ceased in 2015. He has not done anything to resolve these delinquent 
student loans. He separated from his children’s mother in February 2016. Due to his child 
support payments, he stated it is difficult to pay his bills. He explained he is unable to 
make payments. These debts are unresolved. Applicant has not participated in financial 
counseling and does not have a budget.10  
 
 Applicant denied he intentionally failed to disclose on his September 2015 security 
clearance application (SCA) that in the past seven years he had any possessions or 
property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed or that he had defaulted on 
any type of loan or had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency or had any account 
or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed. He also 
denied he intentionally failed to disclose that his wages were garnished.  
 
 Applicant testified that he did not intentionally omit anything on his 2015 SCA. He 
was not sure why he selected the wrong answers on his 2015 SCA, but insisted it was 
not intentional. He testified he disclosed the information when a government investigator 
questioned him in April 2016, subsequent to the submission of his 2015 SCA.11  
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 72-74; GE 3; Answer to SOR at page 121. 
 
9 Tr. 30-47; GE 3, 6. 
 
10 Tr. 37-47. 
 
11 Tr. 75-97. 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant testified that his failure to disclose information was due to an oversight 
and because he had disputes with various creditors.12  
 
 In Applicant’s July 2010 SCA, under Section 26, which asked about his finances, 
he responded “yes” to the following inquiries: Have you had bills or debts turned over to 
a collection agency; Have you had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or 
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; Have you been 180 days delinquent on any debt; 
Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt; and Are you currently delinquent 
on any Federal debt. He disclosed an $800 credit card debt, stating the creditor did not 
honor a settlement agreement, so the debt may be listed as not paid. He disclosed 
$80,000 of student loans from various creditors. He stated “Due to economic hardships 
going on in the world right now I am unable to make these payments.”13 In addition, he 
disclosed a cell phone bill for $2,300 and a debt to the Internal Revenue Service for taxes 
incurred when he withdrew money from a 401k pension plan. He stated he was arranging 
a payment plan with the IRS.14  
 
 Applicant testified that the foreclosure on his house occurred after he completed 
the July 2010 SCA. It was not disclosed on his 2015 SCA. Applicant disclosed on his 
2010 SCA that he had delinquent student loans. The loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d were 
delinquent when he completed his 2015 SCA. Other student loans were garnished from 
approximately 2010 to 2015. He was aware he had not contacted the creditors in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c or 1.d since 2011, and testified he was unable to pay these loans. These were not 
disclosed on his 2015 SCA. He testified that he has financial problems, but did not know 
who the debt collectors were at the time and did not know who to pay. He further testified 
that he was confused about how debt collectors worked. He stated he knows he owes 
debts and he discussed it with the investigators. He was not going to pay any creditor 
until he found out whom he owed. He stated he was upfront with the investigator about 
his financial problems.15  
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he explained that in 2010 he disclosed to the 
government investigator that his home was foreclosed, his car repossessed, and his 
wages were garnished. He then explained in his SOR answer that he told the investigator 
in 2015 that he answered the SCA questions incorrectly because he “may have 
mistakenly answered those 2 questions wrong based on the wording of those 
questions.”16 He explained:   
 
                                                          
12 Tr. 77-97. 
 
13 GE 5 at 57. 
 
14 Tr. 49. The debts disclosed on Applicant’s 2010 SCA or any other derogatory information will not be 
considered for disqualifying purposes, but may be considered when making a credibility determination, in 
the application of mitigation, and in a whole-person analysis. 
 
15 Tr. 29. 
16 Answer to SOR.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Other than previously listed, have any of the following happened to you. 
This could be interpreted to mean what I previously have disclosed to the 
agent in 2010 where I informed him that I had been garnished for student 
loans, had my car repossessed, and I was having my home foreclosed on 
all, at around the same time.17 
 
 Applicant acknowledged in his answer that the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b were listed on his current credit reports as in a collection status. He stated, “I will 
have those debt collectors removed from my credit reports in the near future due to 
violations of Public Law 95-109, 95th Congress and Public Law 93-579.” He also indicated 
he had claims filed against these creditors with CFPB.18  
 
 I find Applicant did disclose on his 2010 SCA that he had a vehicle repossessed, 
which may be why he did not include it on his 2015 SCA. Because his home had not yet 
been foreclosed when he completed the 2010 application, it was not disclosed at that 
time. It was also not disclosed on his 2015 SCA, which he had a responsibility to include. 
Applicant may have been confused about the wording of the questions because he had 
previously disclosed some information on his 2010 SCA. However, there was new 
information that he failed to disclose, such as his wages being garnished from 2010 to 
2015, his remaining delinquent student loans owed, and the delinquent debt remaining 
on his repossessed vehicle. Applicant was aware of the collection status of the other 
debts. The fact that he was filing claims with the CFPB or was disputing certain debts did 
not absolve him of disclosing his financial problems. His 2015 SCA was void of any new 
derogatory information he was required to disclose. Applicant had several financial 
problems, but failed to disclose any of them in his 2015 SCA, as was required. I did not 
find his testimony or explanations credible. I find Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
financial information as was required.19  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
                                                          
17 Answer to SOR. 
 
18 Tr. 77-97. 
 
19 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that he told the 2010 investigator about his financial 
problems. I was not privy to any document to corroborate his statements.  
 
7 
 
 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
 
8 
 
 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems since 2010 when his house was foreclosed. 
He has delinquent debts, which began in at least 2010. Applicant is unwilling or unable to 
satisfy his debts. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent. He testified he is unable to pay his student loans. 
Insufficient evidence was provided to conclude at this time that future financial problems 
are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a period in 2010 when he had 
damage to his house and moved. His house was foreclosed, he was unable to make his 
car payments and the vehicle was repossessed. He also had issues with a wrongful 
garnishment. He and his cohabitant separated in 2016, and he now pays child support. 
These are conditions that were beyond Applicant’s control. For the full application of AG 
¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
testified that he is unable to pay the delinquent loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. He has not 
contacted the creditor since 2011. He does not dispute he owes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e, 
but does not have the means to pay it. I am unable to find Applicant has acted responsibly. 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant has not participated in financial counseling. He does not have a budget. 
He is unable or unwilling to pay the debts he admits he owes. There are not clear 
indications that his financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There 
is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
  
 Applicant continues to dispute some debts that were subsequently verified. He 
indicated he was suing some of the creditors and collection agencies. He provided 
evidence in his answer that he has filed claims to verify some debts. The debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e are substantiated and verified. Applicant admitted he is unable to pay 
them. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was verified and remains in a collection status. Applicant 
continues to dispute it. I do not believe the amount owed is significant to rise to a level of 
creating a security concern. It is resolved in his favor. Applicant disputed the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.b, indicating his security deposit should have covered the debt, but he never followed 
up with the creditor on this matter. It also is an insignificant amount and is resolved in his 
favor. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to these debts and to SOR ¶ 1.f as it is no longer on Applicant’s 
credit report.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
10 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant’s house was foreclosed in October 2010, he had delinquent student 
loans, a repossessed vehicle, other delinquent debts and his wages were garnished. He 
did not disclose any of this information on his 2015 SCA. His explanations that he made 
an innocent mistake due to confusion because he had previously disclosed some of it to 
an investigator during his interview in 2010 was not credible. He did not disclose any 
derogatory financial information in his 2015 SCA. I find that Applicant’s omissions on his 
SCA were deliberate. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
17: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant made a good-faith effort to correct the omission 
before he was confronted with the facts by the investigator. I find AG ¶ 17(a) does not 
apply. His deliberate failure to disclose his financial problems is not minor and casts doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. There 
is insufficient evidence to raise AG ¶ 17(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
11 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 37 years old. He is single and has two children. He has been steadily 
employed since 2006. He disclosed financial problems on his 2010 SCA. In 2010, there 
were matters that affected his finances that were beyond his control. He indicated he is 
unable to pay his student loans and vehicle repossession debt that were alleged. 
Applicant does not have a plan for resolving his debts or a reliable financial track record. 
His deliberate failure to disclose any financial problems in his 2015 SCA is a serious 
concern. Although there is some mitigation, it is insufficient to overcome the security 
concerns raised by his finances and his personal conduct. The record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph   1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.c:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
