                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
)
 )     ISCR Case No.16-01329
 )
` )
Applicant for Security Clearance                   )    
Appearances
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq. Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
On October 29, 2016, The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. Revised Adjudicative
Guidelines were issued on December 10, 2016, and became effective on June 8,
2017.1
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on July 20, 2017. The hearing was scheduled for October 26, 2017, but
In this case, the SOR was issued under Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department      1
on September 1, 2006. Revised Adjudicative Guidelines became effective June 8, 2017. My decision and
formal findings under the revised Guideline F would not be different under the 2006 Guidelines.
1
was rescheduled and held on November 16, 2017. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-5 were
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant
Exhibits (AX) A-D. I kept the record open until November 30, 2017, and Applicant
presented more documentation, which was marked AX E, and entered into the record.
The transcript was received on December 1, 2017. Based on a review of the pleadings,
testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.g-j and
1.m-q. He admitted the other allegations. At the hearing, the Government withdrew the
SOR allegation under Guideline E at ¶ 2.a. He provided explanations with his
responses.  
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is married and
has two children. He graduated from high school in 2001, and obtained an associate’s
degree in 2010. He has been with his current employer since 2015. He completed his
security clearance application (SCA) in February 2015. He has not  previously held a
security clearance. (GX 1)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges that Applicant has 17 delinquent debts, which total
approximately $48,000. The delinquent debts include student loans, collection
accounts, and medical accounts.
Applicant’s answer provided reasons for the delinquent accounts. He
acknowledged that his money management was poor. He also stated that he had some
short unemployment in 2011 and that did not help. (Tr. 40) He stated that his student
loans were in deferment and he did not know that he had to make payments. (Tr. 31)
He claims that he accepted responsibility and consolidated them. He believes the total
amount is $41,000. (Tr. 32) He presented a document from 2015 that showed a
payment was made for $75.00. (AX D) 
Applicant disclosed on his security clearance application that he had a debt
consolidation plan with accounts totaling $4,000. He provided an exhibit (AX A) with a
company that listed five older accounts (2013). It was not clear from the documentation
that various payments of $120.75 made in 2015 addressed the entire debt. The sheet
attached to the exhibit showed a beginning balance of $1,633 and debt remaining in the
amount of $1,261. It was also not clear from Applicant’s testimony which accounts were
represented or whether the ones listed in the plan are the same accounts listed in the
SOR.  He stated that the debts in SOR except for the student loans are addressed.
As to the student loans listed as SOR allegations 1.a-1.f and 1.k, totaling about
$41,000, Applicant did not submit any information on a deferment status. He provided
the  August 2015 default notice on the student loans, and attached a bank statement
that showed one $75 payment. He was given time to provide a post-hearing submission
2
regarding the student loans, but he did not provide any information. At the hearing, he
stated that he was in the process of trying to resolve them. (Tr. 32)
As to SOR 1.g, a medical account in collection for $1,071, Applicant provided a
letter verifying that a payment was made for the full amount in April 2017, and the
account was closed. (AX C) He believes the medical account for $82 in SOR 1.o is
included in this account. (Tr. 61)
The debt alleged in SOR 1.h was settled for $500, and was paid on April 15,
2017. (AX E)
As to SOR allegations  1.i, 1.n, and 1.p, for a communications account, he paid
$260.86 to settle the accounts. (AX E)  
The SOR allegation 1.j for a mobile account in the amount of $495, was settled
for $405.66 in November 2017. (AX E)
As to SOR 1.q the charged-off account for the vehicle repossession, Applicant
provided documentation that the account was satisfied in 2015 as a settled charge off
for $1,071, and the rest of the debt was cancelled. (AX B)
Applicant obtained the services of Lexington Law at some point and presented
information from his bank sheet that he paid them $119.95 monthly for a period of time.
It is not clear which accounts the firm was trying to resolve. (AX E) He noted on his
security clearance application that his wages had been garnished for something to do
with an apartment complex for $3,700. (GX 1)
Applicant’s current salary is about $70,000. He did not present a budget or state
that he had financial counseling. He is working with another government agency. He
stated that he had an application and investigation already and is waiting to hear about
a security clearance with them. He was not sure if the same financial issues had been
the subject of the investigation. He had not received a security clearance affirmation at
the time of his post-hearing submissions.
 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
3
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2( d)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance2
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An
individual who is financially over-extended is at a greater risk of having to
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including
espionage.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability to satisfy debts;
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
The Government produced credible evidence to establish the delinquent debts
and the student loan accounts.  Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise
disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
5
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved
or is under control;
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant has had ongoing financial problems.  He disclosed garnishments on his
SCA. Applicant has recently paid smaller debts and settled some accounts. He appears
to have done so after the issuance of the SOR. He did have a consolidation plan for
older accounts, but it is not clear what the balance is for those accounts. He has not
presented sufficient information to mitigate security concerns. MC AG ¶¶ 20 (a), (b), (c),
and (d) do not apply. He has not  met his burden to alleviate the security concerns under
the financial considerations guideline.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶2(d).
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
 
Applicant is 34 years old.  He is married and has two children. He has no criminal
record. He is working two jobs. He has a history of delinquent debts. He reported some
unemployment, but was not proactive with resolving debts or student loans. He did not
provide documentation about his student deferments after the hearing. He has not 
provided sufficient evidence that he has acted responsibly in rectifying his financial
situation.   
6
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and
evaluating all the record evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude that
Applicant has not  carried his burden. It is clearly not consistent with the national interest
to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.g-1.j:  For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.k-1.m:  Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.n-1.q:  For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  Withdrawn
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
7
