 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ADP Case No: 16-03508  
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. National 
security eligibility for a position of trust is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
On December 12, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
(AG) effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
 
                                                 
1I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 5, 2017 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me on April 27, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
May 15, 2017, setting the hearing for June 28, 2017. Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence.2 Applicant testified and called two 
witnesses. She offered Exhibits (AE) A through V into evidence. All exhibits were admitted 
without objection.3 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 7, 2017. The record 
remained open until August 8, 2017, for submission of additional exhibits. Applicant timely 
submitted AE X that included 8 pages. The exhibit was admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. She has a high school diploma. She completed a nurse’s 
aide certification program. She has been married 12 years. She and her husband have 
an eight-year-old son. In March 2016, she began her current position with a defense 
contractor. Prior to this position, she worked for a state university medical center for nine 
years. She has been a leader for a Boy Scouts troop for two years. Applicant’s supervisor 
is aware of this proceeding and the underlying security concerns. (Tr. 16-19.) 
 
 Applicant attributed some of her financial problems to being young and unaware 
of issues related to credit and financial matters. She also said her son was sick in 2010, 
resulting in medical bills that she was unable to pay. In spring 2012, her father-in-law was 
diagnosed with a serious illness, causing her mother-in-law to stop working to care for 
him. Subsequently, Applicant and her husband began helping them financially. They also 
assumed the loan payments on a truck that her father-in-law had purchased because 
Applicant’s car needed major repairs. She stopped making payments on her automobile 
loan, and the creditor repossessed it in 2013. (Tr. 20-21; GE 2.) She attempted to 
negotiate the return of the car with the creditor, but was unable to afford the large payment 
requested. (AE A.) 
 
 In the summer of 2016, Applicant paid a credit repair company $1,600 to repair her 
credit. She and her husband wanted to improve their credit score so they could purchase 
a home. (AE B.) She has not participated in credit counseling. (Tr. 52.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from February 2016 and June 2017, the 
SOR alleged 13 delinquent debts that totaled $25,188 and became delinquent between 
2010 and 2013. (GE 3, GE 4.) The status of each debt is as follows:   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: Applicant contacted the creditor to negotiate a payment plan of this 
$9,839 delinquent automobile car loan. In June 2017, she agreed to make monthly 
payments of $40 on this debt. (Tr. 37-40, 52; AE R; AE X at 7.) 
                                                 
2Applicant made one correction to GE 2, which is her Personal Subject Interview. (Tr. 12-13.) 
3Department Counsel offered Hearing Exhibit 1 as demonstrative evidence. It is a summary of the SOR- 
alleged debts. Applicant had no objection to this exhibit. (Tr. 19.)   
 
 
3 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: The retail debt $368 was disputed by the credit repair company and it 
was deleted from Applicant’s credit report. (AE D.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: This $11,808 is a duplicate of the automobile loan alleged in ¶ 1.a. (Tr. 
37-39; AE G.) 
   
 SOR ¶ 1.d: After negotiating a settlement for $528, Applicant resolved this $1,107 
debt owed to a retailor. (Tr. 35; AE F.) 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.e: Applicant started making monthly payments of $25 on the $685 medical 
bill. It is being resolved. (Tr. 32-33, 40; AE E.)  
     
 In October 2016, the following eight medical debts alleged in the SOR were deleted 
from Applicant’s credit history after the credit repair company disputed them: ¶ 1.f ($255); 
¶ 1.g ($255); ¶ 1.h ($246); ¶ 1.i ($220); ¶ 1.j ($159); ¶ 1.k ($112); ¶ 1.l ($95); and ¶ 1.m 
($39). These debts totaled $1,381. Applicant acknowledged they were her son’s medical 
debts that she did not pay. (Tr. 35, 41; AE C, AE D.) 
 
 Post-hearing, Applicant submitted documentation that she arranged payment 
plans for the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, SOR ¶ 1.j, SOR ¶ 1.k, and SOR ¶ 1.l. They are 
being resolved. She submitted proof that she paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m. The creditor for 
SOR ¶ 1.h told her that it would no longer accept payments on the debt. (AE X.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a budget. Her net family monthly income is $5,300. After 
paying expenses, she and her husband have between $1,200 and $2,700 remaining at 
the end of the month depending on if they work overtime. (Tr. 50; AE H.) Applicant stated 
that their truck is paid and they are current on all other bills, including a car payment and 
a mortgage payment for a house they recently purchased. (Tr. 46, 51; AE M, AE N, AE 
P.) 
 
 Applicant’s husband testified. He is aware of the household finances and the effect 
that supporting his parents had on their finances. He felt it was his responsibility to help 
his parents during their difficulties. (Tr. 58-59.) Applicant’s mother-in-law testified. She 
explained the stressful period she went through when her husband learned that he had a 
rare disease and became seriously ill. At the same time, her mother was dying. As a 
consequence, she understood the financial burden she placed on her son and daughter-
in-law and relied on their financial assistance. (Tr. 61-63.) 
 
 A volunteer and committee chair for a Boy Scout’s troop wrote a letter of reference 
for Applicant. She has known Applicant for two years. She praised Applicant’s skill and 
diligence in organizing and implementing a large fundraiser. The treasurer for the 
committee stated that Applicant is honest and trustworthy. She praised Applicant for her 
dedication and hard work. A former co-worker at the university hospital where Applicant 
previously worked complimented Applicant on her capabilities and leadership skills. (AE 
I, AE J, AE K.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in determining an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.”  
 
 A person applying for a position of trust seeks to enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national security 
eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant 
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.  
  
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. Three may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b)  unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debts between 2010 and 2013, which she was 
unable or unwilling to timely resolve until recently. These facts establish prima facie 
support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate those concerns. 
  
 AG ¶ 20 describes five conditions that could mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The 12 SOR-alleged debts were accumulated between 2010 and 2013. In the past 
four years, Applicant has not accumulated additional delinquent debts. The evidence 
establishes mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), as the circumstances that contributed to her 
financial delinquencies are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on her current 
trustworthiness. 
 
Some of Applicant’s financial delinquencies were caused by financial immaturity, 
which was a circumstance within her control, as was her decision to help her in-laws 
during her father-in-law’s illness. Her son’s medical debts were beyond her control. 
Applicant did not provide information that she attempted to responsibly manage the debts 
before they became delinquent, which is required to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(b).  
 
Applicant did not submit evidence that she participated in financial or credit 
counseling; however, there are clear indications that her financial delinquencies are 
coming under control. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant initiated a good-faith effort 
to resolve the alleged debts, albeit some of her efforts occurred after receiving the SOR. 
She paid two debts; started making  payments on another debt in June 2017; attempted 
to establish a payment plan with one creditor; and recently established a payment plan 
for four other debts. Applicant’s budget can accommodate payments on the outstanding 
delinquent debts that total less than $12,000. AG ¶ 20(d) applies.  
 
Applicant hired a credit repair company to investigate delinquent debts. 
Subsequently, nine debts were disputed and removed from her credit report. However, 
there is insufficient evidence to find mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e), as she acknowledged 
that most of the debts belonged to her.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality 
 
 
7 
 
 
of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent and 
articulate woman, who has successfully worked for her employer since March 2016 and 
at a previous position for nine years. Volunteers, who have worked with her in supporting 
the Boy Scouts, speak highly of her honesty and capabilities. She acknowledged her 
financial delinquencies and has been working to resolve them, including some which had 
been deleted from her credit history, and the largest debt, an automobile repossession. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial 
cases, stating:  
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and every 
debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrates 
that he has ‘. . . established a plan to resolve his financial problems and 
taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge can reasonably 
consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2 (a) 
(‘Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a 
determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.4 
                                                 
4ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant provided sufficient evidence to demonstrate a plan to implement and 
resolve outstanding delinquent debts within the scope of the term defined in the above 
case. The likelihood that financial problems will recur or Applicant will stop making 
payments on the plans she has initiated is minimal based on her efforts to-date and 
knowledge that similar problems could jeopardize her employment. The potential for 
pressure, coercion, or duress is eliminated by the resolution of many of Applicant’s 
formerly outstanding debts and efforts to resolve the largest debt for $9,800. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and 
suitability for a public trust position. She met her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.m:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a position of trust. National security 
eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
