KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST:  Applicant argues that the Judge was biased.  Bias involves partiality for or against a
party, predisposition to decide a case or issue without regard to the merits, or other indicia of a
lack of impartiality.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and unbiased. A
party seeking to overcome that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.  We have
examined the record, paying particular attention to the hearing transcript.  We find nothing to
suggest that the Judge lacked impartiality or that he entered the hearing with an inflexible
predisposition against Applicant.  He did not impede Applicant’s presentation of her evidence,
and his questioning appears to have been directed toward clarifying the record.  Applicant has
not rebutted the presumption that the Judge was unbiased.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-03451.a1
DATE: 12/26/2017
DATE: December 26, 2017
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-03451 
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 22, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On September 18, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Robert Robinson Gales denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased against her;
whether the Judge’s findings of fact were based upon substantial evidence; and whether the Judge’s
adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is a “substance abuser” who has primarily used marijuana.  The SOR alleged
recent marijuana use while Applicant held a clearance, although during an earlier part of her life she
engaged in more extensive marijuana use as well as limited instances of ingesting mushrooms and
LSD.  The Judge stated that he was considering the non-alleged drug abuse in evaluating Applicant’s
case for mitigation and rehabilitation, her credibility, and the whole-person concept.  During
Applicant’s earlier period of drug use, she lost an internship after a drug test yielded a positive result
for marijuana. 
Applicant’s more recent misconduct began after she was granted a security clearance.  Her
employer had provided annual training, in which Applicant was made aware that marijuana use was
prohibited.  In her security clearance application (SCA), Applicant stated that it is possible that she
could use marijuana in the future if it became available while she was on vacation, etc.  In her
clearance interview she stated that she had no specific intent for future use but that it would be
possible for it to happen again.  In her SOR answer, Applicant reversed her position on future use,
stating that she will not use marijuana again.  
Applicant enjoys excellent performance ratings at her job.  She received an award for her
effort in advancing inclusive values and diversity.  She has also received an award for her
contribution to her employer’s mission.  She enjoys an excellent reputation for honesty, integrity,
and her work ethic.  She is active in fund-raising activities, such as the crusade against cancer.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted evidence that Applicant’s more recent drug abuse has been relatively
infrequent.  However, he stated that Applicant has presented no unusual circumstances underlying
her misconduct and cited to her having used marijuana after having been placed on notice that it was
inconsistent with holding a clearance.  He stated that she has not dissociated from all of her drug-
using friends.  He also found her two years of abstinence to be relatively short when compared with
her period of drug abuse while holding a clearance.  
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s candor in admitting her drug abuse
and her evidence of good work performance and community service.  However, he cited to her entire
history of drug abuse, noting her lost internship due to a failed drug test.  He also found her
“vacillating future intention regarding marijuana abuse” to be “disturbing.”  Decision at 8.  He stated
that she unequivocally foreswore marijuana use only upon realization that she could lose her
clearance.  He found that Applicant’s security-significant conduct casts doubt upon her reliability,
trustworthiness, and good judgment.
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge was biased against her.  She states that “he was very short
with me, his tone was annoyed, and he repeatedly cut me off.”  Appeal Brief at 7.  She cites in
3
particular to a colloquy toward the end of the hearing regarding whether Applicant had waived her
opening statement.  She argues that the Judge’s words and tone of voice were designed to “throw
me off.”  Id.  Bias involves partiality for or against a party, predisposition to decide a case or issue
without regard to the merits, or other indicia of a lack of impartiality.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-
09545 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 21, 2015).  There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and
unbiased, and a party seeking to overcome that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-10122 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 22, 2016).
We have examined the entire record and Decision, paying particular attention to the
transcript of the hearing.  We find nothing therein to suggest that the Judge lacked impartiality or
that he entered the hearing with an inflexible predisposition against Applicant.  He did not impede
Applicant’s presentation of her evidence, and his questioning appears to have been directed toward
clarifying the record.  In the particular instance that Applicant has cited, the Judge may have
conveyed a certain testiness, but this appears to have been the result of confusion over whether
Applicant had waived her opening statement.  After this exchange, the Judge permitted Applicant
to testify at length about her various professional accomplishments, her community service
activities, and her personal circumstances, and he made detailed findings about this evidence, which
he addressed in his analysis.  Tr. at 39-48.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge
was unbiased.
Applicant challenges the Judge’s findings of fact, citing to numerous comments in the
Decision that she believes are in error.  One of them is his finding that she had not submitted a
written promise to refrain from drug use in the future.  She contends that she made such a promise
in her written answer to the SOR and that she repeated it in her clearance interview and during the
hearing.  
We conclude that the challenged reference is to Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 26(b)(3) (“a
signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and substance misuse,
acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security
eligibility”).  The record contains no signed statement that satisfies all of the requirements of this
mitigating condition.  The Judge did note Applicant’s SOR answer wherein she stated that she would
not use drugs in the future, as well as her similar promises during the hearing.  It was within his
discretion to assign those recent statements less weight than contravening evidence, such as her SCA
comment that she might indeed use marijuana in the future.  After considering the entirety of
Applicant’s arguments on appeal, we conclude that the Judge’s material finding are based upon
“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in
light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  Applicant has cited
to no harmful error in the Judge’s findings.  
Applicant argues that she has mitigated the concerns arising from her drug use.  She cites
to record evidence that she contends is favorable to her, such as her statements of intent not to use
drugs in the future, her good character references, etc, which she argues that the Judge did not
consider.  However, the Judge’s detailed findings included the evidence she has addressed on appeal. 
4
Applicant’s brief is not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-08711 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 24, 2017).  
On the question of mitigation, the Judge’s findings and record evidence that Applicant has
used marijuana extensively in the past; that she lost an internship due to a failed urinalysis; that she
was advised by her employer that drug use was prohibited; that her recent drug use occurred after
she had been granted a clearance; and that she stated in her SCA that she might use marijuana again
support his adverse decision.  The purpose of a clearance adjudication is to evaluate an applicant’s
judgment and reliability.  An applicant who has demonstrated an unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations regarding illegal drugs may be similarly unwilling to follow rules governing the
protection of classified information.1  Given Applicant’s continued marijuana use after having been
placed on notice that it was prohibited, the Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant had not
demonstrated sufficient reliability and good judgment to justify a favorable decision.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-03450 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015) (The applicant’s use of drugs after being placed
on notice that such conduct was inconsistent with holding a clearance is a substantial reason to doubt
the applicant’s reliability).  Though the Judge cited to Applicant’s recent abstinence and to other
favorable matters, there is no reason to believe that his overall weighing of the evidence was
erroneous.   
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
1See, e.g., Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 24: “The illegal use of controlled substances . . . raises questions about
a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.”  
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.     
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                    
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
 
6
