1 
 
 
+
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
  REDACTED  )   ISCR Case No. 16-03171 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Thomas Albin, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant consumed alcohol at times to excess despite four alcohol-related incidents 
in ten years. He has abstained from alcohol since approximately March 2017, has never 
been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder, and has only one conviction for drunk driving on 
his record. The alcohol consumption security concerns are not yet fully mitigated. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On December 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing a security 
concern under Guideline G, alcohol consumption, and explaining why it was unable to find 
it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security clearance 
eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
 
2 
 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 21, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On March 2, 2017, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to 
determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. On April 19, 2017, I scheduled a hearing for May 23, 
2017. On May 22, 2017, I had to continue the hearing because of medical reasons. On 
June 28, 2017, I rescheduled the hearing for July 31, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending final a hearing, the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require national 
security eligibility or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. On May 18, 2017, I provided 
Applicant’s counsel with a copy of the updated Directive incorporating the new AG which 
supersede the adjudicative guidelines implemented in September 2006 and are effective 
for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. I advised him that I would be 
adjudicating his client’s security clearance eligibility under the new AG,1 and that I would 
consider a request to leave the record open after his hearing for additional information if 
necessary in light of this change in the AG. 
 
I convened the hearing as rescheduled on July 23, 2017. Three Government 
exhibits (GEs 1-3) and five Applicant exhibits (AEs A-E) were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on August 7, 
2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline G that Applicant was arrested in December 2005 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) and in April 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.b) for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI); 
that he was arrested in January 2013 after driving his vehicle into a tree while he was 
intoxicated but convicted of a lesser charge of reckless driving (SOR ¶ 1.c); that he was 
convicted in March 2016 of illegally operating a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol 
in November 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.d); and that Applicant indicated during his August 2016 
interview with an authorized investigator that he consumes alcohol to intoxication monthly 
(SOR ¶ 1.e). When he answered the SOR, Applicant admitted the arrests and convictions 
as alleged, but he denied SOR 1.e and explained that he had told the investigator that “if 
[intoxication] occurred it would be no more than once a month.” After considering the 
pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old carpenter with some community college credits but no 
degree. He has never been married, has no children, and has not served in the U.S. 
military. (GE 1: Tr. 41.) Applicant was employed by a defense contractor from mid-August 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
2015 until December 2016. After the SOR was issued, he was walked off the job. He is 
subject to recall if his security clearance is adjudicated favorably. Applicant had been a 
self-employed licensed and insured home-improvement contractor from March 2014 to 
August 2015. He collected unemployment for a few months after he was laid off by the 
defense contractor before renewing his insurance for his contracting business. He intends 
to return to work for the defense contractor if he is granted his clearance. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 35-
39.) He has had enough work to support himself and his dog but it has not been easy. (Tr. 
43.) 
 
 During his senior year of high school, Applicant was stopped by the police in 
December 2005 and charged with misdemeanor operating a motor vehicle under the 
influence of alcohol (OUI).2  The charge was dropped after he completed a court-ordered 
pretrial alcohol education course. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 17-18.) When he was interviewed in August 
2016 for his background investigation, Applicant explained that he was by himself when he 
was pulled over, and that he failed a field sobriety test. (GE 2.) At his hearing in July 2017, 
Applicant testified discrepantly that he consumed two beers at a party with friends in 
December 2005 and was driving some of his intoxicated friends to their homes when he 
was stopped by the police. He told the police that he had consumed two beers, and after 
he passed field sobriety tests, he was arrested “for his honesty” in admitting that he had 
consumed two beers. Applicant recalls paying a fine and completing the alcohol education 
class. (Tr. 28-29.) The evidence does not conclusively establish that Applicant was legally 
intoxicated. 
 
In April 2010, Applicant was stopped at a sobriety checkpoint. He failed a field 
sobriety test and was arrested for OUI. Applicant admits that he had been drinking alcohol 
before approaching the checkpoint, but the drunk-driving charge were dropped because his 
second breathalyzer registered his blood-alcohol level under the legal limit. (GEs 1-2.) 
 
Applicant continued to consume alcohol despite expressed concerns from his 
parents about his drinking. (Tr. 60-61.) In January 2013, Applicant was driving home from a 
drinking establishment when he crashed his car into a tree. Applicant admits that he had 
been intoxicated, although he now recalls that he had only “a couple of drinks.” He had 
been driving at a reckless speed. He sustained traumatic injuries and was in a coma for 
four weeks after the accident. He was arrested in June 2013, and in September 2013, he 
pleaded guilty to a charge of reckless driving, for which he was ordered to pay a fine of 
$200 and fees of $145. (GEs 1-2; AEs A, C; Tr. 18-28, 58.) Applicant was not charged with 
OUI because he was unable to consent to a blood alcohol test. (Tr. 27-28.) 
 
Applicant was out of work for six to eight months and lived with his parents for about 
two years as he recovered. (Tr. 23-24.) He abstained from alcohol for almost a year after 
                                                 
2 Applicant was alleged to have been arrested in the same state for illegal operation of a motor vehicle under 
the influence of alcohol (OUI) and for driving under the influence (DUI). With the repeal of the previous statute 
§ 14-227, which made punishable driving while intoxicated, drunk driving has been punishable since 1963 
under § 14-227(a), operation while under the influence of liquor or drug or while having an elevated blood 
alcohol content, which since 2002 is .08 % (from .10%) or higher. For commercial vehicle drivers, the elevated 
blood content is .04% or higher. The correct designation for the charge is OUI.   
4 
 
his accident, but he believed at the time that alcohol had little to do with his “freak 
accident.” He resumed drinking a couple of times a week when socializing with friends or 
family. (Tr. 26-27.)  
 
On April 29, 2015, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in application for a security clearance 
needed to work for a defense contractor. He disclosed his arrest record, which included the 
alcohol-related offenses and a 2006 possession of marijuana charge. (GE 1.) He started 
his defense-contractor employment in mid-August 2015. (Tr. 36.) 
 
Applicant was stopped by the police for passing a vehicle on the right and speeding 
in November 2015. Applicant had consumed “a couple of beers while shooting pool” at a 
local bar, and he failed a field sobriety test. A breathalyzer showed his blood-alcohol level 
to be .09%, just over the legal limit. Applicant was charged with OUI, failure to comply with 
rules regarding passing on the right, and for traveling unreasonably fast. Applicant reported 
his arrest to his supervisor within the week. He pleaded guilty to OUI, and he was 
sentenced on March 1, 2016, to serve six months in jail (execution suspended) and one 
year of probation, and to pay $583 in fines and fees. After three or four months, he no 
longer had to report to a probation officer. As conditions of his probation, Applicant was 
required to abide by the law, avoid drinking alcohol if driving, and complete 100 hours of 
community service. He satisfied his community service at a nonprofit visual arts and 
performance center. Applicant’s driver’s license was administratively suspended for 30 to 
45 days. He was then required to have an interlock device installed on his truck. (GEs 2-3; 
AE B; Tr. 32-34, 46, 51, 56, 58.)  
 
On August 3, 2016, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant provided details about his arrests and 
did not deny criminal record information that was obtained in the course of his background 
investigation. Applicant denied any intention of committing any illegal activity in the future 
or any intention of driving after drinking alcohol. He explained that he now takes a taxi if he 
uses alcohol. Regarding his alcohol consumption, Applicant indicated that he drinks a few 
beers on the weekends at home, at bars, or at restaurants. The agent reports that 
Applicant expressed his belief that he would become intoxicated if he drank six beers in 
four hours’ time, which he does once a month. Applicant expressed an intention to 
continue to use alcohol with the same frequency and in the same quantity. He denied that 
he had a problem with alcohol or that his use of alcohol had an adverse impact on his 
health, reputation, judgment, reliability, financial responsibility, or ability to hold a 
confidence. (GE 2.) Applicant admitted at his hearing that he continued to drink after the 
interview “maybe a couple of beers every couple of nights. Typically at home.” (Tr. 44.) He 
testified that if he drank to intoxication, “it occurred about once a month at most.” (Tr. 50.) 
 
In approximately March 2017, Applicant and a friend went out to have a beer to 
thank the friend for assistance on a job. Applicant drank a beer while his friend became 
intoxicated. Shortly after Applicant brought his friend home, his friend’s girlfriend called him 
and asked him to return. Applicant found his friend heavily intoxicated. Applicant contacted 
a Veterans Affairs (VA) facility because his friend is a former Marine. At the VA’s 
5 
 
suggestion, Applicant had his friend admitted to a detoxification facility. The incident 
caused Applicant to think about the problems alcohol had caused him, so he decided to 
stop drinking shortly thereafter. (Tr. 54-55.) Abstinent for five months as of his hearing, 
Applicant did not drink alcohol at Easter dinner in April 2017, even though his uncles 
offered to pay the bar tab for everyone. (Tr. 44-45.) 
 
Applicant denies ever being diagnosed as having an alcohol dependency problem 
by a medical professional. (Tr. 44.) Applicant attended one Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meeting while he was on probation for the November 2015 offense. In April 2017, thinking 
that AA might be helpful, he went to another meeting of the same AA group. He found it as 
depressing as previously. Shortly thereafter, he attended a meeting in another town to see 
if his experience would be different, but he did not find a good reason to continue with AA. 
He did not find it beneficial to hear stories “about people’s worst moments in life over and 
over.” (Tr. 62-63.) Applicant has not had any alcohol treatment since 2006, when he 
attended an outpatient program for substance abuse following an arrest for possession of 
marijuana. (Tr. 48.) He denies any issue with not drinking. He does not intend to drink any 
alcohol in the future, whether or not he returns to work for the defense contractor. On a 
couple of occasions while grilling at his home, he has had urges to drink but he has not 
consumed any alcohol, even though he still has a bottle of scotch in his home that he was 
given as a present. Applicant has not purchased any alcohol since he stopped drinking. He 
has lived alone for the past two years, but he has had a girlfriend since January 2017. He 
also has daily contact with his parents and sister. His family and girlfriend are supportive of 
him not drinking. (Tr. 39-46, 59-60.) 
  
 During his defense-contractor employment, Applicant was often loaned out to 
different teams because of his qualifications and experience. (Tr. 53.) A supervisor familiar 
with Applicant’s work attests favorably to Applicant’s work ethic, dependability, and 
punctuality. Applicant worked efficiently and was able to stay focused when on the job. He 
was a good mentor to newer employees. The supervisor hopes that Applicant can again be 
part of his team. (AE D.) 
 
 Applicant continues to volunteer at the local nonprofit visual arts and performance 
center. He helps with repairs and necessary maintenance of the facility, and assists with 
staffing of events and cleanup afterwards. The director of the center considers Applicant to 
be a “huge asset” to the organization. (AE E; Tr. 56-57.)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
6 
 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern for alcohol consumption is articulated in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant was convicted of OUI in March 2016 for an offense committed in 
November 2015. Although he pleaded guilty to reckless driving for the incident in January 
2013, he admits that he was intoxicated when he crashed his vehicle. These incidents 
implicate disqualifying condition AG ¶ 22(a), which provides: 
 
7 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of an individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder. 
 
There is limited or conflicting evidence of alcohol-related impairment with regard to the 
December 2015 and April 2010 incidents. Applicant was ordered to attend a pretrial 
education program for the December 2015 OUI charge, but he claims that he had only 
consumed two beers. Even so, his underage drinking in 2005 raises security concerns. 
Regarding the April 2010 OUI charge, he was arrested after he failed a field sobriety test, 
but a second breathalyzer showed his blood-alcohol level to be under the legal limit. 
 
 Concerning AG ¶ 22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder,” there is some evidence that Applicant was drinking to intoxication on occasion, 
no more than once a month, as of August 2016. However, the reported quantity of six 
beers over four hours would not qualify as binge drinking.3 Applicant may well have 
minimized his consumption somewhat when he claims he had only two beers before his 
November 2015 OUI, but there is no evidence to contradict his assertion that his blood-
alcohol level was just over the legal limit. Likewise, although he admitted drinking to 
intoxication before his January 2013 accident, the evidence does not establish that he 
engaged in binge drinking. His parents expressed concern about his drinking between 
2005 and 2013, but it has not been shown that he engaged in habitual consumption to 
impairment. There is no evidence of a qualifying medical diagnosis of alcohol use disorder 
that would warrant consideration of AG ¶¶ 22(d), 22(e), or 22(f), which pertain where there 
is such a diagnosis, failure to follow treatment advice after a diagnosis, or alcohol 
consumption against medical advice after being diagnosed. Nor is there any indication that 
Applicant failed to comply with any court order, including with the terms of his probation for 
his November 2015 OUI, so AG ¶ 22(g) does not apply. 
 
 Regarding mitigation, Applicant engaged in a pattern of maladaptive alcohol use that 
persisted after he completed an alcohol education course, after his parents expressed 
concerns about his drinking, and after he sustained life-threatening injuries in an alcohol-
related accident. His November 2015 OUI is too recent to favorably consider AG ¶ 23(a) 
given his history of alcohol-related arrests. AG ¶ 23(a) provides: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
                                                 
3 Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Directive, the generally accepted definition of binge 
drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours. This definition of binge 
drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) National Advisory 
Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, NIAAA Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 
No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/ winter2004/NewsletterNumber3.pdf.      
8 
 
Applicant moderated his drinking somewhat after his November 2015 OUI in that he no 
longer operated a vehicle after drinking alcohol. However, as of August 2016, he was still 
consuming alcohol to intoxication on occasion. Applicant was still in denial of the negative 
impacts alcohol had in his life even after he lost his defense-contractor employment 
because of his alcohol-related arrests. 
 
 Consideration of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted, however, because of Applicant’s 
abstinence since March 2017 with an intention to maintain his abstinence in the future. AG 
¶ 20(b) provides: 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations. 
 
 Applicant’s experience of observing his friend’s extreme intoxication and taking his 
friend to a detoxification program triggered some introspection about his own drinking and 
a recognition of alcohol’s negative consequences in his own life. His response to stop 
drinking is a significant action, which, if maintained, will preclude a recurrence of 
maladaptive alcohol use. However, his abstinence is recent and brief when compared to 
the decade over which he at times abused alcohol. He attended only three AA meetings 
because he found them depressing. AA is not for everyone, but Applicant would have a 
stronger case for full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) had he obtained recent alcohol 
counseling or a favorable substance-use assessment by a qualified medical provider. I 
have no reason to doubt Applicant’s assertion that he has the support of his girlfriend and 
his family in his efforts to maintain sobriety. His youth was likely a contributing factor in his 
abusive drinking and his failure to acknowledge the problem alcohol has caused him. Yet, 
some concerns persist that he may have minimized his alcohol use at his hearing. He 
claimed that he passed all the field sobriety tests administered to him in December 2005 
and was arrested for being honest in volunteering that he had consumed two beers. He 
had told an OPM investigator that he had failed field sobriety tests. Concerning his drinking 
as of August 2016, the OPM investigator reported that Applicant expressed his belief that 
he would become intoxicated if drank six beers in four hours, which he does once a month. 
Applicant asserts that he told the investigator that if this occurred, it would be no more than 
once a month, which suggests that he may not have consumed alcohol to intoxication as 
reported. Applicant presented positive evidence in mitigation, but it is not enough to fully 
mitigate the alcohol consumption security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept  
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).4 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(a), 
                                                 
4 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows:  
  
9 
 
Applicant did not allow his alcohol consumption or the adverse legal consequences of his 
drinking to adversely affect his work. A supervisor familiar with Applicant’s work for the 
defense contractor would welcome Applicant back on his team. The nonprofit organization 
for which Applicant served his community service continues to benefit from Applicant’s 
assistance. It shows a level of commitment and responsibility that augurs favorably for 
Applicant’s growing maturity and continued sobriety. 
 
The Appeal Board has repeatedly held that the government need not wait until an 
applicant mishandles or fails to safeguard classified information before denying or revoking 
security clearance eligibility. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-09918 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009, 
citing Adams v. Laird, 420 F.2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969)). It is well settled that once a 
concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong 
presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). At some future date, Applicant may be able to show 
reform for a sufficiently sustained period to safely conclude that his maladaptive use of 
alcohol is safely in the past. For the reasons discussed, it would be premature to grant 
Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. 
   
Formal Finding 
 
Formal finding for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, is: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                             
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
