 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-00062 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not submit sufficient information to overcome the security concerns 
raised by his financial problems. His request for eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On December 12, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew his eligibility for access to classified 
information as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the 
completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could 
not determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
 
2 
 
On June 9, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). At the 
time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new set of AGs, effective for all security 
clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my decision 
in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.2 
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On November 4, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support of 
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on November 16, 2016, and had 30 days from 
the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.4 Applicant timely responded to 
the FORM. He submitted additional information, but did not object to the admissibility of 
any of the information presented in the FORM. The record closed on December 16, 
2016. I received the case on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes $82,141 for ten 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.j). Applicant admitted all of the SOR 
allegations and provided explanations and additional documents. In his e-QIP, Applicant 
disclosed some of his past-due debts. A credit report obtained during a prior 
background investigation, as well as two credit reports obtained during his current 
reinvestigation, document all of the debts alleged in the SOR. Further, Applicant 
discussed the debts listed in the SOR during an October 8, 2015, personal subject 
interview (PSI) conducted by a government investigator. SOR 1.a – 1.j are established 
as facts. (FORM, Items 1 – 7) In addition, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor for whom he has 
worked in an information technology (IT) position since January 2011. He has worked 
overseas since 2012. Aside from a period of unemployment between July 2010 and 
January 2011, Applicant has worked in the IT field without interruption since 2001. 
(FORM, Items 3 and 4) 
 
 Applicant was married from February 1994 until divorcing in November 2005. He 
has an 18-year-old child from that marriage. Applicant remarried in January 2006. He 
attributes his financial problems to his unemployment in 2010, the costs of his 2005 
                                                 
2 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
3 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on seven enclosed 
exhibits (Items 1 – 7). 
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
divorce, including legal fees, extra housing costs, and alimony and child support 
obligations. He also claimed that his ex-wife is responsible for a portion of the debt left 
from their marriage; however, he has not presented information to show which debts are 
her responsibility. (FORM, Items 2 and 4) 
 
 In response to the SOR and FORM, Applicant provided credit report information 
showing an improved credit score and a reduced number of accounts. He did not 
provide a full credit report with details of why or when some of his debts were removed 
from his credit history. He further claimed that his finances are sound; however, he did 
not provide any detailed information, such as a monthly budget or payment records, to 
support that claim. (FORM, Item 2; Response to FORM) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d) of 
the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
                                                 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 
 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8 
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information.9 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.10 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s delinquent debts reasonably 
raised the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Available information requires application of the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 
19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(b) (unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the 
ability to do so); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). Applicant did 
not provide information sufficient to support application any of the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20. At most, his discussion of his unemployment and divorce raises the 
potential applicability of AG ¶ 20(b): 
                                                 
7 Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 Directive, E3.1.15. 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
10 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by 
predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. 
 
For this mitigating condition to apply, Applicant must also establish that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. He did not do so. As reflected in a 2010 credit 
report, Applicant’s financial problems are at least seven years old. He did not establish 
that he has actually paid any of his debts; that his ex-wife is responsible for debts that 
arose during their marriage; or that he has taken any verifiable action to improve his 
finances. Applicant’s reliance on the mere absence of delinquent accounts in more 
recent credit reports is flawed. To be persuasive, information showing action to address 
the debts must also be provided. Further, there is no indication here that Applicant 
sought financial counseling, or that he had a verifiable basis to dispute any of his debts. 
Finally, he did not provide any information about his current finances; for example, there 
is no budget, no record of payments or negotiations with creditors, and no bank 
statements on which I can base any assessment of the risk associated with Applicant’s 
financial health in the future. The security concerns raised by the adverse information 
about Applicant’s finances are not mitigated. 
  
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Doubts about his suitability 
remain because of Applicant’s longstanding financial problems and the fact that he has 
not supported his claims that those problems have been or will be resolved. Because 
protection of the interests of national security is the principal focus of these 
adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved against the granting of access to 
classified information.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
