                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
       -------------------------------------                  )      ISCR  Case No.  16-03365       
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial problems. Eligibility for access
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On December 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated
substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that
were in effect for the issuance of the SOR would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 10, 2017, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on April 7, 2017. He did not object to any of the exhibit items in the
FORM or provide supplemental information.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated (a) delinquent federal tax
debts totaling $19,000 for tax years 2012 and 2013; (b) a state tax lien in March 2012 for
$7,138; and (c) over $22,000 in delinquent consumer debts. Allegedly, these debts
remain outstanding.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the alleged debts in the SOR
with explanations. He claimed to be making monthly payments to the creditor covered by
SOR ¶ 1.a and expects to reduce the taxes owed to the Federal Government to $10,000
after filing his 2016 federal tax return. He claimed he paid the creditor covered by SOR  
¶¶ 1.f and 1.b/1.g (duplicate accounts). He claimed he settled the debt owed to creditor
1.d and is making payments to creditor 1.e (reduced in the amount owed on the state tax
lien to $1,000). And he claimed he will contact the creditor covered by SOR ¶ 1.h and pay
the amount due. Applicant attached no supporting documentation to his response. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 37-year-old senior consultant for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in May 2015. (Items 3-4) His wife is a citizen of South Korea and
a homemaker who currently lives apart from him. He has no children from this marriage.
(Items 3-4) He attended college classes between August 2004 and July 2008, but earned
no degree or diploma. (Item 3) He reported no military service.
Applicant has worked for his current employer since September 2008. (Items 3-4)
Since November 2012, he has been living and working overseas. (Items 3-4) He reported
unemployment between August 2004 and June 2008 while taking classes as a full-time
2
college student. (Items 3-4) Between August 2004 and June 2005, he worked for other
employers in various job specialties. (Items 3-4)
Applicant’s finances
Between October 2012 and August 2015, Applicant got behind with many of his
debts and let them fall into delinquent status. (Items 3 and 6) His accumulated
delinquencies included his federal and state tax obligations. Altogether, Applicant accrued 
delinquent tax debts for tax years 2012 and 2013 in the aggregate amount of $19,000.
(Items 3-4) During this period, he also became delinquent with his state tax obligations for
2012 in the amount of $7,138 and incurred a state tax lien in March 2014 for this amount.
(Items 3-4)  Applicant attributed his federal and state tax delinquencies (SOR debts ¶¶
1.a and 1.e)  to his employer’s inserting too many tax deductions in his W-2. (Items 3-4) 
While Applicant assured he has paid down his federal and state tax debts, he
provided no documentation to corroborate his claims. Garnishment proceedings initiated
in 2014 are responsible for some reductions in Applicant’s SOR ¶¶ 1a and 1.e tax debts.
(Items 3-4) 
Beginning in 2015, Applicant made voluntary payment arrangements with both the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and his state taxing authority to pay down the taxes owed
to both tax authorities. To what extent he followed through with voluntary payments to the
IRS and state tax authority is unclear. (Items 4-6) Without more furnished information, no
favorable inferences can be drawn of Applicant’s personal progress in addressing his
delinquent federal and state taxes for tax years 2012-2013 (federal taxes) and 2014
(state taxes).
Besides Applicant’s delinquent tax debts, he accumulated a number of delinquent
consumer debts exceeding $22,000. (Items 1-6) He provided no evidence to document
any initiated payment efforts. 
Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling, budgeting, or character
references. Nor did he provide any evidence of performance evaluations and community
contributions to back whole-person assessments.
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
3
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  An individual who
is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal
acts or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
4
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accrual of (a) delinquent federal
taxes for tax years 2012-2013 exceeding $19,000, (b) a 2014 state tax lien for $7,138
covering  taxes owed for tax year 2012, and (c) delinquent consumer accounts
exceeding $22,000. Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent federal and state taxes and
delinquent consumer debts warrant the application of four of the disqualifying conditions
(DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”; 19 (b), “unwillingness to
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations”; and 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as
required.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his accumulation of delinquent
federal and state taxes and consumer debts negate the need for any independent proof
(see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s delinquent tax
and consumer debts are fully documented in his credit reports and create some
judgment issues. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in persons cleared to access classified
information. While the principal concern of a security clearance holder’s demonstrated
financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust
concerns are implicit in cases involving debt delinquencies.  
5
Historically, the timing of paying or otherwise resolving owed federal taxes to the
federal government in DOHA proceedings is critical to an assessment of an applicant’s
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following rules and guidelines
necessary for those seeking access to classified information or to holding a sensitive
position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR Case No.
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015)
To what extent Applicant has reduced the amount owing the Federal
Government on the delinquent federal taxes he accrued for tax years 2012-2013
remains unclear. For he provided no documentary evidence of his voluntarily paying or
otherwise resolving the reported tax delinquencies for tax years 2012-2013. The only
identifiable reduction in his federal tax delinquencies are the monies recovered from
Applicant through involuntary garnishment mounted by the IRS. Proof of voluntary
repayment initiatives taken by Applicant to address his state tax and consumer debts
are also lacking in the record. Without substantiating evidence of his paying or
otherwise resolving his owed federal and state taxes and consumer debts covered in
the SOR, no favorable conclusions are warranted that he has addressed his delinquent
debts sufficiently to be credited with substantial payment efforts.
Applicant provided no documented evidence of extenuating circumstances,
good-faith payments or payment plans, financial counseling, or reasonable disputes
with any of the listed SOR debts. Based on the evidence provided, none of the
mitigating conditions pertaining to evidenced good-faith payment initiatives, extenuating
circumstances, financial counseling, reasonable basis to dispute a past-due debt, or
payment arrangements made with the cognizable tax authority to file or pay the amount
owed  apply to Applicant’s situation.
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)
(internal citations omitted). In Applicant’s case, his lack of demonstrated responsible
efforts in addressing his SOR-listed tax and consumer obligations preclude favorable
findings and conclusions with respect to his security clearance application. See ISCR
Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005). 
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. He has shown insufficient 
progress to date in addressing his delinquent federal and state tax debts and consumer
accounts covered in the SOR. His actions to date reflect a lack of financial responsibility
and judgment and raise unresolved questions about his trustworthiness, reliability, and
ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More documented information
about his inability to pay or otherwise resolve his delinquent federal and state taxes and
consumer debts and demonstrate financial progress is needed to mitigate financial
concerns under the financial guideline and consideration of the whole-person to mitigate
security concerns. 
6
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s federal and state tax and consumer debt accruals that he has failed to pay
or resolve to date, Applicant has failed to demonstrate enough probative efforts to
mitigate financial concerns. Conclusions are warranted that his finances are
insufficiently stabilized at this time to meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a
security clearance.    
Unfavorable conclusions are entered with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h of the SOR. Eligibility to hold a security clearance under
the facts and circumstances of this case is not consistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:                Against Applicant            
   
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
8
  
9
