 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )       ISCR Case: 16-01679  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
December 7, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred approximately $10,000 in delinquent debts, the majority of 
which she has not repaid or otherwise resolved. Applicant did not show that her financial 
difficulties are under control. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon 
a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 5, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On June 8, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 7, 2016, and requested that her case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). (Item 
2.) On September 15, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items,1 
was mailed to Applicant, and received by her on October 12, 2016. The FORM notified 
Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not 
submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not file any objection to its 
contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond the 30-day period she 
was afforded. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2017. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions2 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility, and eligibility to hold a security clearance. My 
decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued 
pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 In the FORM Department Counsel proposed to amend the SOR in several ways. 
Department Counsel indicates that the authority for her proposed amendments is ¶ 
E3.1.13 of the Directive. That paragraph does not deal with amendments to the SOR. 
Amendments to the SOR are governed by ¶ E3.1.17 of the Directive, which states:  
 
The SOR may be amended at the hearing by the Administrative Judge on 
his or her own motion, or upon motion by Department Counsel or the 
applicant, so as to render it in conformity with the evidence admitted or for 
                                                 
1 Department Counsel submitted eight Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 4 is inadmissible. It 
will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of 
Applicant conducted by an interviewers from the Office of Personnel Management on March 14, 2016. 
Applicant did not adopt the summary as her own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating 
witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
2 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
other good cause. When such amendments are made, the Administrative 
Judge may grant either party’s request for such additional time as the 
Administrative Judge may deem appropriate for further preparation or for 
other good cause. (Emphasis supplied.)  
 
 Even though not specifically covered, I shall consider the proposed amendments 
pursuant to ¶ E3.1.10 of the Directive, which states, “The Administrative Judge may rule 
on questions on procedure, discovery, and evidence and shall conduct all proceedings in 
a fair, timely, and orderly manner.” As a general matter, it is noted that Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. 
 
 First, Department Counsel proposed to amend the allegation in subparagraph 1.h 
by changing the amount owed by the Applicant from $175 to $293. This proposed 
amendment would be more appropriate as a proposed finding of fact. As further described 
below, I find use of a FORM to amend the SOR in this way is not appropriate. This motion 
is denied. 
 
 Second, Department Counsel withdrew subparagraphs 1.k through 1.p. Such an 
action is appropriate under ¶ E3.1.6 of the Directive. That motion is granted. 
 
 Third, Department Counsel proposed to amend the SOR by adding new 
subparagraphs 1.aa through 1.pp. As stated, Applicant chose not to respond to the FORM 
in general, or to the proposed amendments in particular. Concerning the contents of the 
FORM, ¶ E3.1.7 of the Directive states, “Department Counsel shall provide applicant with 
a copy of all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.” 
Proposed substantial amendments to the SOR are not contained within this ambit. In 
addition, the proposed amendments in the FORM did not give the Applicant an 
opportunity to request a hearing, additional time for preparation of exhibits, nor did it 
inform her that failure to respond to the proposed amendments might result in her case 
being closed, as provided for under ¶¶ E3.1.4, E3.1.5, and E3.1.17. Department Counsel 
could have served on Applicant a properly formatted amended SOR, or withdrawn the 
original SOR and issued a new one. The motion to amend the SOR by adding allegations 
1.aa through 1.pp is denied as I deem it inappropriate under ¶ E3.1.10 of the Directive. 
  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and divorced from her third husband. Applicant received 
a bachelor’s degree in 2007. She has been working for her present employer since July 
2015. She was unemployed between August 2014 and July 2015 (Item 3.)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because she is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
  
 In her Answer, Applicant admitted all the original SOR allegations except 1.e, 1.r, 
1.t, 1.u, and 1.v, with explanations. Those admissions are findings of fact. (Item 2.) As 
stated, Department Counsel withdrew allegations 1.k through 1.p. All of the alleged debts 
are documented in one or both of the credit bureau reports in the record dated October 
27, 2015; and September 13, 2016 (Items 5 and 6); or confirmed by admissions in 
Applicant’s e-QIP (Item 3 at Section 26).  
 
 Applicant stated in her Answer that her divorce left her with substantial debt to 
repay. She had to take care of a daughter with a chronic health condition, and was also 
unemployed for a time. Applicant also stated that that she had established payment 
arrangements with some of the creditors, as further described below. 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted owing $1,238 to a creditor for a past-due department store 
debt. Applicant stated in her Answer that she was in a payment arrangement with this 
creditor. No other information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing $1,060 for a past-due bill. Applicant further stated in 
her Answer that she was in a payment arrangement with this creditor. No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted owing a credit union $969 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in her Answer that she was in a payment arrangement with this creditor. 
No other information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $687 for a past-due bill. Applicant stated 
in her Answer that she was in a payment arrangement with this creditor. No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.e. Applicant denied owing a creditor $659 for a past-due account. Applicant also 
stated in her Answer that she was in a payment arrangement with this creditor. The most 
recent credit report in the record (Item 6) confirms the existence of this debt, and does 
not show a payment arrangement or settlement. No other information was provided. This 
debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $549 for a past-due account. Applicant 
stated in her Answer that she was in a payment arrangement with this creditor. No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 1.g. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $450 for a past-due account. Applicant 
stated in her Answer that she was in a payment arrangement with this creditor. No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.h. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $175 for a past-due account. Applicant 
stated in her Answer that she was in a payment arrangement with this creditor. No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.i. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $240 for a past-due account. Applicant 
stated in her Answer that she was in a payment arrangement with this creditor. No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.j. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $224 for a past-due account. Applicant 
stated in her Answer that she had paid this debt in full. The most recent credit report in 
the record (Item 6) supports this statement, by saying the account is “paid charge off.” 
This debt is resolved. 
 
 1.k through 1.p. Withdrawn by Department Counsel.  
 
 1.q. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $1,885 for a past-due account. Applicant 
stated in her Answer that she was in a payment arrangement with this creditor. No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.r. Applicant denied owing a creditor $1,812 for a past-due mobile telephone bill. 
This debt is reflected on Item 6, which also states that Applicant is disputing the account 
information. Given the state of the record, the Government has not sufficiently shown that 
Applicant is currently delinquent on this bill. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.s.  Applicant admitted owing a creditor $1,082 for a past-due account. Applicant 
stated in her Answer that she was in a payment arrangement with this creditor. No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.t. Applicant denied owing a creditor $1,081 for a past-due bill. This debt is 
reflected on Item 6, which also states that Applicant is disputing the account information 
after resolution. Given the state of the record, the Government has not sufficiently shown 
that Applicant is currently delinquent on this bill. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.u. Applicant denied owing a creditor $712 for a past-due bill. This debt is reflected 
on Item 6, which also states that Applicant is disputing the account information after 
resolution. Given the state of the record, the Government has not sufficiently shown that 
Applicant is currently delinquent on this bill. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.v. Applicant denied owing a creditor $628 for a past-due student loan. She further 
states that she has a payment arrangement for this account. This debt is reflected on Item 
5, which also states that Applicant is disputing the account. Given the state of the record, 
 
 
6 
 
 
the Government has not sufficiently shown that Applicant is currently delinquent on this 
bill. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.w. Applicant admitted owing $505 to a creditor for a past-due account. She 
further stated in her Answer that this was a duplicate of the creditor in allegation 1.p, 
which was withdrawn. Applicant further stated that she had a payment arrangement with 
this creditor. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.x. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $343 for a past-due account. She further 
stated in her Answer that this debt had been paid in full. Item 5 shows this debt to be 
disputed by Applicant. This debt does not appear on Item 6. Given the state of the record, 
the Government has not sufficiently shown that Applicant is currently delinquent on this 
bill. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.y. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $296 for a past-due account. She further 
stated that she had a payment arrangement with this creditor. No further information was 
provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.z. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $131 for a past-due utility bill. She further 
stated that she had paid this debt in full. The two credit reports in the record do not show 
this debt as being paid. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 Applicant did not submit any documentation that she has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. She did not submit any information concerning her 
current income, expenses, or ability to pay her past-due debts and be financially secure 
going forward. She provided no evidence concerning the quality of her job performance. 
She submitted no character reference letters or other evidence tending to establish good 
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate her credibility, 
demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her case decided without a 
hearing. 
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
 
 
7 
 
 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
 
 
8 
 
 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to pay debts regardless of ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has been continuously employed since 2015. She has a considerable 
number of past-due debts that she cannot, or will not, resolve. These facts establish prima 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant continues to owe past-due commercial debt in the amount of 
approximately $10,000. She offered no reasonable basis to conclude that such problems 
will not recur. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant claimed that some of her debt problems were caused by her divorce, a 
move, and taking care of her daughter. However, Applicant provided no information as to 
how she has been responsibly handling her debt since 2015. Mitigation was not 
established under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
No evidence of financial counseling from a legitimate and credible source or 
budget information establishing solvency going forward was provided. Further, there are 
no clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Applicant stated 
in her Answer that she had paid some debts in full, and had payment arrangements for 
others. However, she elected not to respond to the FORM and provided no documentary 
evidence to support payments to any of the alleged creditors. As stated, the 
Government’s credit reports state that the debt in allegation 1.j was paid. Accordingly, 
Applicant failed to establish mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions 
of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Applicant indicated in her Answer that she disputed some of the debts, which is in 
accordance with AG ¶ 20(e). The disputes were documented in the credit reports in the 
record. The Government did not provide sufficient evidence to support several of the 
allegations that were disputed, and they are found for Applicant. 
 
Applicant did not sufficiently mitigate all of her delinquent debt issues. As stated 
above, SOR allegations 1.j, 1.r, 1.t, 1.u, 1.v, and 1.x are found for Applicant. With those 
exceptions, Guideline F is found against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant continues to owe 
about $10,000 in bad debts, and did not show any plan for resolving that substantial 
indebtedness. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. 
Overall, the evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and 
suitability for a security clearance. She failed to meet her burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k through 1.p:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.q:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.t. through 1.v:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.w:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.x:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.y through 1.z:   Against Applicant 
    
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
