1 
 
 
+
 
                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
  REDACTED  )   ISCR Case No. 16-03272 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Thomas Albin, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant consumed alcohol at times to excess. He was arrested for driving under 
the influence (DUI) in 1973 and for domestic assault and DUI in July 2014. He resumed 
drinking after alcohol-treatment programs in 1999, 2014, and 2015. Applicant has not 
consumed any alcohol since September 2016, and he is more committed to Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) than in the past. However, it is too soon to conclude that he will not again 
abuse alcohol. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On December 4, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing a security 
concern under Guideline G, alcohol consumption, and explaining why it was unable to find 
it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security clearance 
eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
 
2 
 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 20, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On March 2, 2017, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to 
determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. On April 19, 2017, I scheduled a hearing for May 23, 
2017. On May 22, 2017, I had to continue the hearing because of medical reasons. On 
June 28, 2017, I rescheduled the hearing for July 31, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a hearing, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require national security eligibility 
or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. On May 18, 2017, I provided Applicant’s counsel 
with a copy of the updated Directive incorporating the new AG which supersede the 
adjudicative guidelines implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any 
adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. I advised him that I would be adjudicating his 
client’s security clearance eligibility under the new AG,1 and that I would consider a request 
to leave the record open after the hearing for additional information if necessary in light of 
this change in the AG. 
 
I convened the hearing as rescheduled on July 23, 2017. Three Government 
exhibits (GEs 1-3) and five Applicant exhibits (AEs A-E) were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant, his spouse, and two of his co-workers testified, as reflected in 
a transcript (Tr.) received on August 7, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline G that Applicant consumed alcohol at times to 
excess and intoxication from 1999 to at least 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he was arrested for 
DUI in 1973 (SOR ¶ 1.b), and for domestic assault, disorderly conduct, and DUI in 2014 
(SOR ¶ 1.c); 2 and that he continues to consume alcohol despite his history of alcohol 
abuse (SOR ¶ 1.d). Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, but he denied 
SOR ¶ 1.d. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
 
2 Applicant was alleged to have been arrested in the same state for driving under the influence (DUI) in 1973 
and for DUI in 2014. With the repeal of the previous statute § 14-227, which made punishable driving while 
intoxicated, drunk driving has been punishable since 1963 under § 14-227(a), operation while under the 
influence of liquor or drug or while having an elevated blood alcohol content, which since 2002 is .08 % (from 
.10%) or higher. For commercial vehicle drivers, the elevated blood content is .04% or higher. The correct 
designation for the charge is OUI.  
3 
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old maintenance electrician. He has been married to his 
spouse since 1981, and they have three adult children and four grandchildren. (GEs 1-2; 
Tr. 42, 93-94.) 
 
 Applicant was arrested for DUI in April 1973, when he was a senior in high school. It 
was “senior skip day.” After drinking with other students, he crashed his car into a tree. He 
was required to attend an alcohol education course, and he lost his driving privileges for six 
months. (GE 1; Tr. 49, 51.) 
 
 Applicant was first hired by his defense-contractor employer in 1974. He was laid off 
in 1975 but recalled in 1976. In 1980, he resigned and moved away. After two years 
working in the housing industry, he returned to his present area. He has been consistently 
employed by the defense contractor since September 1982. Applicant seeks to retain the 
DOD secret clearance that he has held since October 2000. He held a DOD confidential 
clearance from October 1993 until it was upgraded in 2000. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 40-41.)  
 
 Applicant has a history of abusive drinking, including up to six beers and a couple of 
shots of liquor per day. After his father died from cirrhosis of the liver, Applicant recognized 
that he had problems with alcohol at times. At the referral of his work employee assistance 
program (EAP), Applicant voluntarily admitted himself to a 30-day inpatient alcohol-
treatment program in February 1999. (GE 1; Tr. 42-44, 67-68.) 
 
   Applicant successfully completed the alcohol-treatment program in March 1999, 
and he maintained abstinence for the next ten years with the assistance of AA. He began 
taking antidepressant medication in approximately 2005, although he did not always take it 
at the same time each day and missed some doses. (Tr. 78, 82.) Applicant stopped 
attending AA with any regularity after the death of his sponsor in 2008, and, without that 
support, he drank alcohol from time to time to intoxication starting around August 2009 to 
cope with the stress of his mother’s recent death and his in-laws moving into his home. (Tr. 
43-46, 83-84, 96.) By July 2014, he was consuming six beers and two or three shots of 
liquor per day. (GE 3; Tr. 68.) 
 
 In July 2014, Applicant was arrested for DUI, 3rd degree assault, and disorderly 
conduct involving violence or threat after consuming alcohol to the point of blackout. (GEs 
2-3; AEs A-B.) Applicant stopped at a liquor store after work, and he had already 
consumed a couple of shots of liquor and two beers when a friend showed up and shared 
a pint of whisky with him. When Applicant arrived home, he grabbed and pushed his wife 
during an altercation. His spouse attested to incurring bruises on her arms and breasts. (Tr. 
99.) She called the police from a neighbor’s home. Applicant left to get something to eat, 
and he was stopped by the police. Applicant was jailed overnight. The police issued a 
restraining order against him for 30 days prohibiting him from contacting his spouse. (GE 3; 
(Tr. 46-47, 52-54. 98-99.) Applicant’s spouse testified that the incident was “traumatic” for 
her but “totally out of [Applicant’s] character.” (Tr. 97, 105.)  
 
 Before his arraignment, Applicant began attending an evening intensive outpatient 
alcohol-treatment program in July 2014. Applicant was allowed to continue in the program 
4 
 
to satisfy a court order for 30 days of alcohol education, and he attended for about nine 
weeks to sometime in September 2014. He was also required to complete domestic-
violence classes. The charges were dismissed on September 2, 2015, after he completed 
the alcohol and domestic-violence programs.3 (GEs 2-3; AEs A-C; Tr. 47-48, 104.) 
 
 After his discharge from the outpatient alcohol program, Applicant attended AA 
sporadically, and he resumed drinking alcohol in October 2014 or November 2014. (GE 3; 
Tr. 85.) He “drank just enough to get the edge off.” He continued to attend AA meetings “on 
and off,” but was unable to stop drinking. (GE 3; Tr. 56, 72.) In February 2015, Applicant 
began counseling with a licensed alcohol and drug counselor (LADC). (GE 3; AE D.) At the 
referral of the LADC, Applicant voluntarily attended an inpatient alcohol-treatment program 
from mid-April 2015 to mid-May 2015. (Tr. 74.) Applicant was abstinent for approximately 
six weeks after his discharge from that program before resuming drinking when he had 
“issues.” (Tr. 62.)  As of a July 10, 2015 interview with an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator, Applicant was consuming up to six beers and two or three shots of 
liquor over the course of a week. He was drinking to intoxication one to three times per 
month. (GE 3; Tr. 69, 72.) He drank in the afternoons after work but not around his wife. 
(Tr. 69-70.) During his interview, he expressed his belief that he had a problem with 
alcohol, but he was in counseling with the LADC, attending AA meetings, and hoping to 
eliminate alcohol gradually from his life. (GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant had last consumed alcohol on September 18, 2016. He was preparing an 
old truck for entry in a show and “felt really good about [himself] and so [he] thought [he] 
would—[he] would have a drink.” He had recently started taking Antabuse and became ill 
from drinking. He felt guilty about drinking and considered it a “wake-up call.” (Tr. 58-60.) 
Applicant’s spouse has not observed any indications that would lead her to believe that he 
has consumed alcohol since September 18, 2016. (Tr. 108.) 
 
 Applicant was still attending individual counseling and group therapy with the LADC 
as of late July 2017. The LADC attests that Applicant has been compliant with his 
treatment in that he has continued to attend both individual and group therapy and takes 
his condition seriously. In the LADC’s opinion, Applicant is stable and fit to maintain his 
defense-contractor position. (AE D.) Applicant was also taking an antidepressant 
medication and Antabuse. In approximately late June 2017, Applicant’s spouse began 
monitoring his Antabuse use as a reminder for him to take it, although she and Applicant 
testified discrepantly about her involvement in his medication management. (Tr. 80-81, 
109-110.) Applicant testified that she gives the Antabuse to him, that he takes it, and that 
she watches him take it. Applicant indicated that there were times when he had not taken 
his Antabuse and so his prescribing clinician suggested that it might make both Applicant 
and his spouse happy if he took it in front of his spouse. (Tr. 80-82.) Applicant’s spouse 
                                                 
3 The clinical records of his intensive outpatient program were not submitted in evidence. A general description 
of the program (AE C) indicates that clinicians formulate an individualized treatment plan on the first evening 
and while most people are in the program for approximately four weeks, more time in the program may be 
required. At a minimum, Applicant was required to attend nine hours of treatment per week, two 12-step 
meetings (either AA or NA), and submit to a urine screen once a week. Abstinence from alcohol and illegal 
drugs was expected.  
5 
 
testified that she asks Applicant if he takes his Antabuse every day and that she tries to 
remind him about taking it. He then shows her that he is taking his pill. She added that she 
has him take care of his own treatment. (Tr. 110-111.)  
 
 Applicant has attended AA three times a week or more often since September 2016. 
He obtained a new sponsor in 2015, and his sponsor has 34 years of sobriety. (Tr. 90.) 
Applicant has only been working on his recovery with his sponsor for the past year. (Tr. 85-
86.) As of July 2017, Applicant was in contact with his sponsor daily. Applicant has been 
active in AA by helping at meetings and associating more with other AA attendees. (Tr. 87, 
90.) Applicant intends to continue his counseling and AA attendance. (AE D; Tr. 56-61.) He 
knows alcohol can be problematic for him and that it is not a good thing. (Tr. 61.) As to 
whether he considers himself to be an alcoholic, Applicant testified, “Yes. I guess so.” (Tr. 
62.) He does not know for certain but surmises that he probably has been medically 
diagnosed as an alcoholic. (Tr. 63.) Applicant no longer associates with the same friends 
with whom he drank in the past. (Tr. 64.) 
 
 Applicant’s sons were still living at home with him and his spouse as of late July 
2017. Applicant’s spouse has asked their sons not to have any alcohol in the house, and 
she believes they have complied with her request. (Tr. 115-116.) Applicant and his spouse 
had a social gathering at their home around July 4, 2017, with invitees bringing whatever 
they wanted to drink. Applicant’s spouse had two alcohol drinks. To her knowledge, 
Applicant did not consume any alcohol. (Tr. 116.) 
 
 Applicant’s direct supervisor for the past 17 years attests to Applicant being a hard 
worker and an asset to their department. Applicant has had no issues at work related to 
alcohol, and he has never acted improperly at work. (AE E.) Applicant’s department 
manager has been familiar with Applicant’s work for the past ten years. He likewise attests 
to Applicant’s dependability and dedication. Applicant’s work has been of high quality with 
no alcohol issues. He would like to see Applicant continue in his position until he retires. 
(Tr. 19-23.) Applicant’s union president described Applicant as an outstanding electrician, 
who acquired a state contractor’s license on his own. He has not seen any evidence of 
Applicant being impaired by alcohol at work. (Tr. 29-32.)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
6 
 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern for alcohol consumption is articulated in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant was required to complete an alcohol-education program after drinking 
alcohol to intoxication as a senior in high school in 1973. It qualifies as an alcohol-related 
incident of the type contemplated within disqualifying condition AG ¶ 22(a), which provides: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of an individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder. 
 
7 
 
Even so, it appears to be an isolated incident of poor judgment attributable to his youth and 
immaturity. 
 
 Of primary concern are Applicant’s maladaptive use of alcohol around the late 
1990s, which led him to obtain alcohol-rehabilitation treatment in 1999, and his serious 
relapse in 2009 after ten years of abstinence. Applicant turned to drinking to cope with 
stressful family situations. By July 2014, he was consuming six beers and two or three 
shots of liquor per day. After consuming alcohol to the point of blackout on July 15, 2014, 
he grabbed and struck his spouse and then drove a vehicle while impaired by alcohol. DUI 
and domestic violence charges were dismissed in September 2015 after he completed an 
intensive outpatient alcohol program and domestic-violence counseling. However, the 
incident establishes AG ¶ 22(a). Furthermore, Applicant’s excessive drinking in 2014 
culminating in the July 2014 blackout with OUI and domestic violence triggers AG ¶ 22(c), 
“habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use disorder.”4 He relapsed in October 
2014 or November 2014 after completing an intensive outpatient treatment program in 
September 2014. He drank while taking Antabuse in September 2016 after completing 
another treatment program in May 2015. 
 
 Applicant appears to be a highly functioning alcoholic, who has not allowed his 
alcohol consumption to adversely affect his work. Yet, his anecdotal testimony that he was 
probably diagnosed as an alcoholic falls short of establishing AG ¶ 22(d), “diagnosis by a 
duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, 
psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social worker) of alcohol use disorder,” or AG ¶ 22(f), 
“alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment recommendations after a 
diagnosis of alcohol use disorder.” Nonetheless, Applicant’s continued drinking after 
multiple treatment programs shows that he had a problem with alcohol. 
  
 Applicant was still drinking to intoxication as of July 2015. His drinking in 
contraindication to his Antabuse medication, while in ongoing counseling with an LADC, is 
recent evidence of maladaptive alcohol use that precludes favorable consideration of 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 23(a), which provides: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
 Applicant cites his September 2016 consumption of alcohol, which precluded him 
from taking part in the car show, as a “wake-up call” for him. The unrebutted evidence is 
that he stopped drinking alcohol and began attending AA meetings at least three days per 
                                                 
4 Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Directive, the generally accepted definition of binge 
drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours. This definition of binge 
drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) National Advisory 
Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, NIAAA Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 
No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/ winter2004/NewsletterNumber3.pdf.      
8 
 
week. He has become more involved in AA and contacts his sponsor on a daily basis. 
Applicant’s ongoing individual and group counseling with the LADC and his commitment to 
AA are positive actions taken to overcome his acknowledged alcohol abuse. However, AG 
¶ 23(b) also requires a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence. It provides: 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations. 
 
 As of his hearing, Applicant had only nine months of abstinence from alcohol. His 
abstinence is recent and brief when compared to the years over which he at times abused 
alcohol. The salient issue is whether his present counseling and commitment to AA are 
enough to guarantee that he will not again become complacent about his alcohol problem 
and resume maladaptive drinking. Applicant’s treating LADC opined in May 2017 that 
Applicant is “stable and fit to maintain [his] position.” Applicant presented nothing from his 
AA sponsor, who could possibly shed some light on the level of Applicant’s commitment to 
AA over the past year. He would have had a stronger case in mitigation had he a favorable 
substance-use assessment by a qualified medical provider. Applicant has a history of not 
always taking his medication on time, and he and his spouse testified discrepantly about 
her involvement in monitoring his Antabuse medication. Applicant is credited with seeking 
treatment when he felt his drinking was excessive, but it is too soon to conclude whether 
his recovery will be sustained. 
 
Whole-Person Concept  
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).5 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(a), 
Applicant did not allow his alcohol consumption or the adverse legal consequences of his 
drinking to adversely affect his work. His department manager, his direct supervisor, and 
his union president all testified about Applicant’s dedication and the high quality of his 
work. 
 
At the same time, the Appeal Board has repeatedly held that the Government need 
not wait until an applicant mishandles or fails to safeguard classified information before 
                                                 
5 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows:  
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
9 
 
denying or revoking security clearance eligibility. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-09918 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 29, 2009, citing Adams v. Laird, 420 F.2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969)). It is well 
settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See 
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). At some future date, Applicant 
may be able to show reform for a sufficiently sustained period to safely conclude that his 
maladaptive use of alcohol is safely in the past. For the reasons discussed, it is premature 
to continue Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. 
   
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
