 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02205 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG).1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 7, 2016, and he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on April 27, 2017, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on June 21, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A though D, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 29, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations and those admissions are 
incorporated into these findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He began working 
at his present job in early 2015. He served in either the Army or National Guard for 16 
years and was honorably discharged in 2015. He has a high school diploma and is 
working towards a bachelor’s degree. He was married in 1998 and divorced in 2000. He 
remarried in 2002, but has been separated from his spouse since early 2015. He has 
two children, who live with their mother, and for whom he pays an unspecified amount 
of child support (Applicant stated he paid half his pay).2  
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling approximately $22,654. The debts 
were listed in credit reports from May 2008, January 2015, June 2016, December 2016, 
and June 2017 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.f). It also alleged Applicant engaged in misconduct 
while in the Army in 2005 and 2013, and that he deliberately failed to list any defaulted 
loans, defaulted credit card accounts, debts turned over to a collection agency, and 
debts over 120 days delinquent within the past seven years on his security clearance 
application (SCA) (SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.b).3  
 
 Applicant‘s separation from the Army in 2015, his separation from his wife, and 
his gambling habit contributed to his financial problems. During his hearing, he admitted 
having a significant gambling habit for over 10 years. Some of his delinquent accounts 
are directly linked to his gambling. He estimated his losses in the thousands of dollars. 
He admitted gambling as recently as two weeks before his hearing where he lost $200. 
He has participated in Gambler’s Anonymous (GA), periodically, for two years. 4  
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that he established payment plans for 
two of the SOR debts. For SOR ¶ 1.b (unsecured loan for $3,641), Applicant is making 
$295 monthly payments. This debt is being resolved. For SOR ¶ 1.e (bank debt 
$1,100), Applicant presented documentation showing that he reached a settlement with 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 6, 24, 26-28; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 2-6, 10. 
 
4 Tr. at 27-30, 42-43. 
 
 
3 
 
the creditor where he would make six monthly payments of approximately $166 to pay 
the debt. The first payment was scheduled for July 2017, after his hearing date. This 
debt is being resolved. Applicant asserted that SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.f represented the 
same debt. I find that the two SOR debts derive from the same underlying obligation 
and I will only consider SOR ¶ 1.c in my formal findings. I find for Applicant concerning 
SOR ¶ 1.f because of duplication.5 
 
 Applicant admitted that he has done nothing to resolve the remaining SOR debts 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d). He also admitted incurring new delinquent debt of over 
$12,000 since the issuance of the SOR.6 He is using an online financial assistance 
program to help him with his finances, however, he did not present any budget 
information about his current financial status.7 
 
 Applicant admitted that he falsified his SCA in January 2015, by failing to list his 
delinquent financial accounts as he was required to do. He knew about the 
delinquencies at the time, but chose to omit them from his SCA. He was afraid that if he 
admitted his financial problems, he would not be hired for the position. Applicant 
admitted the three separate disciplinary incidents listed in the SOR, which occurred 
when he was in the Army. He is no longer in the Army, so there is no chance of 
recurrence.8    
  
 Applicant presented the testimony and a statement from his company’s vice 
president. The witness described Applicant as an excellent employee who is a major 
contributor to the company’s overall success regarding their DOD contracts. The 
witness admitted he was concerned about Applicant’s gambling, and he was unaware 
Applicant had lied on his SCA. He recommended Applicant for a security clearance.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 31-35, 47; AE A (pp. 3 (reverse page), 39 (reverse page), 51). 
 
6 Since this recent debt was not alleged in the SOR, I will not consider it for disqualifying 
purposes, but I will consider it in the application of mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors. Tr. 
48-49; GE 10. 
 
7 Tr. at 35-36, 48-49. 
 
8 Tr. at 38, 51-52; Answer. 
 
9 Tr. at 55-57, 59; AE D. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
5 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find all the 
above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple and, although he set up two payment 
plans, he has also incurred new delinquent debt, which shows that recurrence of his 
financial problems is likely. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
6 
 
Applicant’s discharge from the military and separation from his wife are 
circumstances beyond his control. However, his uncontrolled gambling is not beyond his 
control. While he acted responsibly by setting up two payment plans, he failed to 
address his remaining debts in any manner. He also has incurred new delinquent debt. 
Overall, the record evidence does not support that Applicant acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
  
 Applicant received financial counseling through an online program. Given the 
unpaid status of three of the debts, Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. 
Other than setting up payment plans for SOR debts ¶¶1.b and 1.e, evidence of good-
faith efforts to pay or resolve the remaining debts is lacking. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) 
partially apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
 Applicant admitted the he intentionally omitted information about his delinquent 
debts when he completed his SCA. He did so because he was afraid he would not be 
hired if he revealed the information. I conclude that he intentionally withheld this 
information when he completed his SCA. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant admitted engaging in conducted resulting in three disciplinary actions 
while in the Army in 2005 and 2013. AG ¶ 16(c) applies to SOR ¶ 2.b.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Honestly completing an SCA is the initial crucial step in gaining access to 
classified information. The Government expects, and must rely on, the honesty of 
applicants during this process. Therefore, providing false information at this stage is not 
a minor offense. Such deliberate action casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply to SOR ¶ 2.a. Because 
sufficient time has passed, and because Applicant is no longer in the Army, his 
disciplinary actions from the Army are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) applies to SOR ¶ 2.b. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
 
8 
 
I considered Applicant’s federal contractor service, his military service, and the 
circumstances surrounding his indebtedness. However, I also considered that he has 
made insufficient efforts to resolve his debts. He also deliberately failed to list his debts 
on his SCA. He has not established a meaningful track record of debt management, 
which causes me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or the personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a, 1.c, 1.d: Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.b, 1.e, 1.f: For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph:   2.a:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
