1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 16-01557 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
        Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
             Statement of the Case 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
June 22, 2015.1 On June 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AGs) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
On December 10, 2016, Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, which revised and replaced the 2006 AGs and 
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 
 
 
became effective for all decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied the newly revised AGs to this decision.2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 31, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on November 7, 2017, scheduling the hearing for December 
6, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 4 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A – F. I agreed to leave the record open until December 20, 
2017, for supplemental documentation. Post-hearing, AE G was admitted without 
objection. It is a December 19, 2017 character reference letter from a retired state 
supreme court judge.  
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $2,200, a federal tax lien of 
$81,359 and failure to file federal income tax returns (returns), as required, in tax years 
(TY) 2010 and 2011. Applicant admitted she failed to file the 2010 and 2011 returns 
timely, but they have since been filed. She also admitted to the federal tax lien alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.b, but that has since been resolved.4 She denied the other alleged 
delinquent debts in her Answer to the SOR, with explanations.  
           .    
  Applicant is almost 42 years old. She obtained her juris doctorate degree in 
2001, and she has been employed continuously as a solo practitioner, or in a small 
general practice firm. She also has a focus on child welfare and does extensive pro 
bono work involving juveniles. (Tr. 44-46) She needs a security clearance due to her 
involvement with federal and international agencies in child-trafficking cases. She is 
married since 2000 and has two children, ages 14, and 20. Applicant reports having no 
previous security clearance.  
 
 Applicant disclosed her failure to timely file returns for TY 2010 and 2011 (SOR ¶ 
1.a) in section 26 of her February 2015 SCA. In 2010, after the economy crashed and 
she had to close her two stores, she struggled to make sure all vendors and taxes were 
paid. Her husband’s employer, a non-profit-hospital foundation, closed abruptly and he 
was unemployed for the year. Post-hearing, Applicant submitted AE G which is a 
favorable character reference letter from a retired state court chief judge, attesting to 
Applicant’s high regard and stature in the legal community.  
 
                                                          
2 Although I have applied the new AGs that became effective on June 8, 2017, to this decision, I have 
also considered the case under the previous AGs and my decision would be no different under either 
version.  
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s June 22, 2015 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (GE 1); her summary of clearance interview of December 15, 2015.  
 
4 Answer to SOR; AE A.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant testified that in 2001 she and her husband opened a high-end 
children’s retail store. They opened a second store in 2006, and all was going well until 
the economic collapse of 2008. Also, competition from internet shopping, affected their 
retail stores. (Tr. 22-23) All of the money that they earned from her solo practice, and 
his non-profit foundation, was funneled into keeping the two stores afloat. Around the 
same time, their long-time accountant [RA] went missing with all of Applicant’s bank 
records, financial statements, and tax documents. (Tr. 26) She left no forwarding 
address or contact information. (Tr. 27) She also left Applicant with the impression that 
she had an extension to file their returns for 2010 and 2011, due to all of the business 
distress and his loss of employment. (Tr. 24) Instead, the extension was not filed timely 
and Applicant owed self-employment taxes for those two tax years. Their request for an 
extension to file returns, had in fact been filed on October 15, 2011. (Tr. 29) 
 
 Applicant did not learn that the extension was not filed until early 2012. She 
immediately employed new accountants to try to re-create the IRS Forms including W-
2s, and 1099s, that RA had absconded with. (Tr. 26-27) It took her new accountants 
until early 2013 to straighten out the mess left by RA. Applicant and her husband paid 
the remaining balances on the leases for their two stores out of their own pockets, 
$21,000 for one lease, and $17,000 for the other. (Tr. 27) They sold their house in 2014 
to pay bills and they closed the two stores after all accounts were zeroed out. They also 
paid any federal taxes owing from TY 2010 out of pocket. (Tr. 30-31)  
 
They entered into an offer-in-compromise with the IRS concerning the back taxes 
owed for TY 2011. This amounted to approximately $90,000 with interest and penalties, 
reflected in the tax lien at SOR ¶ 1.b. (Tr. 31) Applicant provided supporting 
documentation, including IRS tax transcripts (AE A) that reflect an installment payment 
plan she entered into with the IRS for this tax deficiency. She made two payments of 
$20,000 and several subsequent payments of $750 per month and the remaining 
outstanding balance is $3,003. She expects to have this paid-off by the end of the year. 
(Tr. 34-35) The TY 2010 and 2011 returns were filed in February 2013, and July 2013 
respectively. (Tr. 29)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a judgment entered against Applicant in 2011 in the amount of 
$266. Applicant provided proof that this judgment was entered in error as she was 
named in a civil lawsuit as a defendant. In fact, she was the agent – attorney for service 
of process. (Tr. 38). She submitted an amended judgment entered in June 2016, 
correcting this error. (AE E) SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.h allege Applicant owes delinquent 
medical debts. SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are duplicate debts that have been paid in full. (AE 
F) SOR ¶ 1.f is also paid in full and Applicant successfully disputed the debt at SOR 
¶1.g. (Answer; Tr. 40) None of these delinquent medical debts appear on her latest 
credit report dated December 2017. (AE F) In SOR ¶ 1.h, Applicant received an e-mail 
confirmation from the creditor that this is “closed and deemed uncollectible” and there 
will be no further collection efforts. (AE D) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income 
            tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state or local income tax as 
            required.  
 
 Applicant admitted to failure to timely file federal income tax returns, and the 
resulting $81,359 tax lien, as alleged in the SOR. There is sufficient evidence to support 
the application of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;    
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant has now filed her 2010 and 2011 returns, albeit late. She had 
compelling economic circumstances that explained her delay in filing including business 
failures, and loss of her husband’s job. Applicant disclosed her delinquent debts in her 
SCA, and she has since contacted her creditors to make payment arrangements. She 
followed through with a demonstrated track record of consistent payments pursuant to 
installment plan with the IRS. Virtually all of her delinquent debts are now settled-in-full 
or otherwise resolved. Applicant has produced evidence that she substantially paid-off 
the federal tax lien, and the civil judgement was entered in error. She provided 
documentary evidence showing that the other delinquent debts alleged in the SOR have 
been disputed or resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(d) and 20(g) apply. I am satisfied that 
her delinquent debts have been or are being resolved.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed 
under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
Applicant’s finances are no longer a security concern. There are ample 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. She has met her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a -1.h:             For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                   
    _____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
             Administrative Judge 
 
 
