 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03043 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and substance misuse concerns, but 
she did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H and 
Guideline F. DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 16, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 15, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
April 28, 2017, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on June 22, 2017. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The Government’s exhibit index was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) 
I. I took administrative notice of the DOD urinalysis testing cutoff levels at the request of 
Department Counsel and without objection from Applicant (HE II and III). Applicant 
testified, but did not produce any documentary evidence. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. She failed to submit any additional evidence. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 6, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, with explanations. Her admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked in 
her current position since February 2015. She has a bachelor’s degree. She is single 
and has one child.2  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance in 
April 2013. It also alleged she was delinquent on five charged-off, collection, or 
repossession accounts in the approximate amount of $185,204. Applicant’s January 
2015 security clearance application (SCA), her November 2015 interview with a defense 
investigator, and credit reports from February 2015, August 2016, and January 2017 
establish the delinquent debts.3  
 
 From July 2010 until October 2013, Applicant was a cadet at the U.S. Air Force 
Academy (AFA). She held a security clearance during her time as a cadet. In April 
2013, she was in her third academic year at the AFA. After returning to the AFA from a 
weekend trip with friends, Applicant was selected for a random urinalysis test. Her test 
result came back showing a positive result for the metabolite in marijuana. As a result of 
the positive test for marijuana, Applicant received a letter of reprimand and was 
disenrolled as a cadet at the AFA. On October 15, 2013, the Secretary of the Air Force 
also ordered that Applicant reimburse the Government for the cost of her academic 
education at the AFA. The cost of the education was determined to be approximately 
$136,000, and is the delinquent debt listed in SOR ¶ 2.a. 4  
 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 5; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 1-2, 5-7. 
 
4 Tr. at 17-18; GE 1-5. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant maintained that any use of marijuana on her part was unknowing. She 
explained that she and some friends were going for a ski weekend in the mountains, but 
stopped off to attend a concert beforehand. She was separated from her friends and 
went to a bar where she met some local residents. She went home with one of the 
persons she met at the bar and stayed the night. She does not remember much from 
that night and thinks she may have been drugged. The next morning she called her 
friends to pick her up so they could continue on their ski weekend. Before her friends 
arrived, she was hungry and ate some pound cake that was sitting on the counter. She 
believed that this cake may have contained marijuana because she claimed that she 
has never intentionally used marijuana in the past.5  
 
 Applicant has not taken any action to resolve the five delinquent debts. The AFA 
recoupment debt (SOR ¶ 2.a) is the subject of an involuntary garnishment order against 
Applicant’s current pay check at the rate of $140 per week. The delinquent debt listed in 
SOR ¶ 2.b was a loan she received as a cadet that she was unable to pay after her 
disenrollment. She has not made payments on this debt, nor made arrangements to pay 
in the future. The debt listed in SOR ¶ 2.c resulted from an involuntary repossession of 
her vehicle. She has not made any arrangements to pay this debt. SOR ¶¶ 2.d (credit 
card) and 2.e (medical) both remain unpaid and no payment arrangements have been 
made.6 
 
 Since her disenrollment in October 2014, Applicant completed her bachelor’s 
degree, had a baby, and started her job with her current employer. Her gross yearly 
salary is approximately $42,000. She shares rent with her parents. She is not receiving 
child support. She has not used marijuana since her positive urinalysis in 2013.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 26-36; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 40-43; GE 7. 
 
7 Tr. at 19-21, 24. 
 
 
4 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement and 
substance abuse:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
5 
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Those that are potentially applicable in this case include: 
 
(a) any substance misuse;  
 
(b) testing positive for an illegal drug; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Applicant tested positive for marijuana in April 2013, while a cadet at the AFA 
and while holding a security clearance. I find that all the above disqualifying conditions 
apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. One 
potentially applies in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s use of marijuana was infrequent and occurred over three years ago. 
There is no evidence of more recent use. Given her responsibilities as a single parent 
and sole wage-earner, any future marijuana use is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 26(a) applies. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
6 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find all the 
above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple, and her inaction in addressing her 
debts (exclusive of the involuntary wage garnishment) shows a lack of reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s misconduct resulted in her large debt, not circumstances beyond her 
control. Applicant has not taken responsible action to address her debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is 
not applicable.  
  
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. Given the unpaid 
status of all the debts, Applicant’s financial problems are not under control.  Evidence of 
good-faith efforts to pay or resolve the remaining debts is lacking, since an involuntary 
garnishment does not amount to a good faith effort to pay. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s federal contractor service, her service as a cadet, and 
the circumstances surrounding her drug use, and indebtedness. However, I also 
considered that she was disenrolled from the AFA due to misconduct and she has made 
no effort to resolve her debts. She has not established a meaningful track record of debt 
management, which causes me to question her ability to resolve her debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and substance misuse concerns, but 
she did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 2.a – 2.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
