 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 16-00842 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas Temple, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
12/05/2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 4, 2015, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 11, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H.1 The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines.   
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 29, 2016. He answered the 
SOR in writing, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request, and Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on November 17, 2016, and I received the case assignment on 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
2 
 
 
August 14, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on September 26, 2017, and I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on November 17, 2017. The Government offered 
Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Exhibits A through E, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on December 1, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in Paragraph 
1 of the SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 63 years old, divorced, and has no children. He attended college for 
three years but did not obtain a degree. He has been employed with his current 
employer since 2001 as a contractor, and since 2005 as an employee. (Tr. 16) As a 
driver, he also possesses a commercial driver’s license (CDL).  He has held a security 
clearance since March 2005. (GX 1) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant used and purchased marijuana with varying 
frequency from about December 2013 to approximately September 2014; failed a 
urinalysis test on September 16, 2014, testing positive for marijuana, and that the use of 
marijuana was while holding a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that his use of marijuana was during a nine-month 
period. (Tr. 31) Before that time, he had never used marijuana. He would smoke 
marijuana in his home while drinking. He stated that he had never been interested in 
marijuana because his choice was alcohol. (Tr. 31) He understands that this was a 
mistake and delusional thinking on his part. He explained that he began to feel 
disoriented and that he could not cope with his problems. He knew that the use of 
marijuana while holding a security clearance was illegal and in contravention of his 
workplace policy. (Tr. 33) He also knew that he was subject to random drug testing.  
 
 Applicant recalls that he was given marijuana at a music event outdoors (field 
party) for helping to fix the speakers. Another time was at a Christmas party when 
someone gave him a canister as a present. (Tr. 34) The third time a friend gave him 
some before she left the states. At a wedding some people were using marijuana and 
he asked if he could have some. He never actually purchased the marijuana. (Tr. 35) 
The amount of marijuana that was given to him would vary and he would use a little and 
take the rest home. He would use the marijuana at home while drinking. He would be 
alone. (Tr. 35) He did not use it when driving or at work. He felt that at first, it had a 
calming effect on him. (Tr. 36) The last use of marijuana was in September 2014 before 
the work drug test. (Tr. 36) 
 
 Applicant explained that in 2012, he and his ex-wife attended Alcohol 
Anonymous (AA) meetings because he realized that he was an alcoholic and that he 
 
3 
 
 
could not handle alcohol. He knew that it affected his well-being. His use of marijuana 
was a temporary escape from the pressures he felt after his mother died in 2010. He 
had not used marijuana before that time. He felt anxious living in his mother’s home 
after she died. The home was burglarized twice in 2013 and 2014, and he was feeling 
very stressed. (AX D and E) The marijuana he used for the period of time specified was 
to supplement his alcohol use.  
 
 Applicant began attending AA in 2012. He also went to another particular group 
of men with whom he could relate and learn coping skills in dealing with life stress. He 
has a new social network and has a new perspective on life. He understands that he 
does not want to live life from a “deficit point of view.” He is consciously aware of his 
problems and has a new outlook on life. He attended Narcotic Anonymous (NA) 
meetings for a while, but he was more comfortable with AA.  
 
 After Applicant’s random drug screen in September 2014, which was verified as 
positive for marijuana, he was referred for an evaluation with a substance abuse 
professional. He completed an intensive outpatient treatment program for drugs and 
alcohol. (AX C) The program lasted eight weeks, and was led by licensed social 
workers, psychologists and psychiatrists. (Tr. 43). He attended group therapy. He was 
cleared for return to duty on December 26, 2014. He has a follow-up testing plan over a 
period of three years. The plan specifies that there are 14 tests in the first year; 10 tests 
in the second year; and eight tests in year three. He has now been enrolled in follow-up 
drug testing for one and a half years and his drug screens have remained negative. The 
testing continues through February 2018. (AX A) Applicant explained that he was told 
by his company that another positive drug test would most likely result in termination of 
his job. After the 2014 positive test, he was given a month suspension. (Tr. 37) 
 
Applicant made no excuses for his use of marijuana. He does not drink at all. He 
uses his AA network as a “family”. He has a structured routine which also allows him to 
stay on a path of abstinence. (Tr. 23) He does not associate with anyone who uses 
drugs. The AA has changed his contacts and social circle. He does activities with 
people who do not use alcohol or drugs. He attends church on a regular basis.  
 
Applicant has learned healthy strategies for coping with life. He meditates, walks, 
reads and plays music. He started to exercise and has lost a great amount of weight. 
He feels positive around people who are not using alcohol or drugs. (Tr. 41) He has 
been sober for years and has no plans to use marijuana in the future. He has the use of 
the company’s substance abuse program for six free sessions. He finds the work 
beneficial. He still attends AA meetings about three times a week. He is working on the 
steps of the program. 
 
Applicant enjoys his work, is well liked, and plans to mentor persons in the 
company. He submitted a letter of recommendation from a supervisor, who reports that 
Applicant is reliable, punctual, and acts responsibly when completing work duties. She 
has known him since he was hired in 2005. He transports classified information on 
behalf of the company to agency locations. He has performed these responsibilities 
 
4 
 
 
successfully before and subsequent to his regulated treatment plan. Applicant is 
compliant with a rigid monthly random drug test protocol. (AX B)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Three conditions are established: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
(b) testing positive….. 
 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Appellant smoked marijuana over a period of nine months. He had a security 
clearance for his job at that time. Therefore, AG ¶ 25 (a), (b), (c), and (f) are 
established.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Two conditions may be applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
 
6 
 
 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
Applicant acknowledged his problem with marijuana use and 
alcohol. He was stressed at the time and needed an escape. He 
sought help after testing positive for a random drug test. He does 
not associate with any drug users. He has a new support network 
though his counseling meetings, his men’s groups and AA. He has 
completed an intensive outpatient program and his employer stated 
as a condition of continued employment that all drug tests in the 
next years must be negative for drug use. He has changed his 
environment and was forthright and candid about his new life 
without the use of alcohol or drugs. All of the mitigating conditions 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 AG ¶ 2(b) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has taken responsibility for 
his use of marijuana and explained how in stressful times, he complemented his alcohol 
use with the illegal drug. He has stopped drinking, attends AA meetings, and completed 
an intensive outpatient program. The incident occurred in 2014. He is subject to many 
random tests and will lose his job if he tests positive again. Moreover, he has become 
aware of how to cope without using alcohol or marijuana. He has a new circle of friends, 
has a healthy life style and is monitored at work. It was a breach of trust while holding a 
security clearance. He accepts responsibility for his mistake. He sought help and 
continues with counseling. He attends church and is more aware of coping strategies 
that are available to him. He clearly sees a future for himself without alcohol or drugs. 
He was candid and reflective at the hearing. He appeared open and honest. He has 
every intention to remain on a path of abstinence and responsibility. There is nothing to 
diminish Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. My comments 
regarding the guideline are incorporated here also.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement 
and substance abuse.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
8 
 
 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
