 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03185 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
December 13, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had multiple alcohol-related incidents between 2005 and 2015. While 
he did not intentionally falsify his security clearance application (SF-86), he failed to 
mitigate the security concerns related to his alcohol use. Based on a review of the 
evidence, national security eligibility is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On January 18, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines G and E. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on February 21, 2017, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
April 26, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of 
Hearing on May 3, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 25, 2017. The 
Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 9, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called one witness, and presented 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on August 2, 2017. The record was left open for the receipt of additional evidence. On 
July 26, 2017, AE H through AE J were submitted, and received without objection. The 
record closed as scheduled on August 1, 2017. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG 
promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e. He denied SOR 
allegation ¶ 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor for more than four years. He held a security 
clearance from 2008 to 2011 in connection with prior employment, and since he started 
his current employment with the defense contractor. He served in the Army from 
January 20, 1978, to August 27, 1982. He received an honorable discharge. He is 
divorced, and has two adult daughters. He as a high school education. (GE 1; AE C; AE 
D; AE E; AE F; Tr. 27-30.) 
  
 Applicant has consumed alcohol in excess and to the point of intoxication until at 
least June 2015. He first started consuming alcohol at age 17 or 18. Until approximately 
June 2016, he would consume a six pack of beer every night and a 12 pack on the 
weekends. He now limits his consumption to a six pack of beer on Saturdays. (Tr. 32-
33, 42, 50-52.) 
 
                                                          
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
3 
 
 Applicant was arrested in June 2005 and charged with Disorderly Conduct-
Fighting, Criminal Damage-Deface, Driving Under the Influence (DUI)-
Liquor/Drugs/Vapor/Combo, and DUI with a Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) of .08 or 
more. On this occasion, he had consumed a 12 pack of beer and got into an argument 
with his then wife. He left in his truck and his wife called the police. He was convicted of 
Criminal Damage-Deface and was sentenced to probation for one year, fined 
approximately $600, and his driver’s license was suspended for three months. He was 
also required to attend a course on anger management. The DUI charges were 
dismissed as his BAC was under the legal limit. He was ordered not to consume alcohol 
while on probation. He presented a certificate of completion as proof he attended the 
non-violence education program, as required by the court. All charges were dismissed 
in April 2013 after successful completion of the terms of probation. (GE 6; AE A; AE K; 
Tr. 33-35, 37.) 
 
 While Applicant was on probation for the June 2005 arrest and subsequent 
conviction, he was arrested in November 2005, and charged with Criminal Damage and 
Disorderly Conduct. (AE I.) Applicant described this as a verbal altercation with his 
former wife. He had consumed a 12 pack of beer prior to the argument, despite the 
court order from the June 2005 incident requiring him to abstain. He pled guilty and was 
ordered to attend anger management classes and was fined $365. (AE I; Tr. 35-37.) 
 
 Applicant was arrested in November 2014 and charged with Disorderly Conduct-
Fighting. Applicant consumed a 12 pack of beer and got into a verbal argument with his 
girlfriend. She called the police. The charge was dismissed after his girlfriend declined 
to press charges. After this event, Applicant sought treatment with Dr. E, a family 
medicine practitioner. Dr. E prescribed Applicant Etabus, an alcohol deterrent that 
makes one ill if they consume alcohol while using this drug. Applicant quit taking Etabus 
after one week and switched to drinking a six-pack only on weekends. (Answer; GE 2; 
GE 7; GE 9; AE 3; Tr. 39, 53-57.)  
 
 Applicant was involuntarily admitted to a hospital in April 2015, after making 
suicidal statements in a text to his girlfriend. He was upset because she had stolen 
$3,000 from him that he planned to use to pay his bills. He had been consuming alcohol 
and was intoxicated on this occasion. Upon discharge from the hospital, he was referred 
to Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). (GE 2; GE 3; GE 5; Tr. 39-41.) 
 
 Applicant attends AA meetings once a week on Saturdays. He testified that he is 
working the 12-step program, and is currently on step six. However, he could not state 
what step six requires. He has no AA sponsor. He testified he does not go to work 
under the influence of alcohol. (AE H; Tr. 41-42, 44, 63, 68.) After his most recent AA 
meeting, he went home and consumed a six pack of beer. (Tr. 64.) When asked if he 
had considered abstinence, he testified, “Yes. But I haven’t convinced myself of that yet. 
But, yes, that would benefit me much more, yes.” (Tr. 43.) He recognizes that AA 
suggests complete abstinence from alcohol and he hopes to work toward that goal. (Tr. 
61.) He also would like to attend outpatient alcohol treatment, if he can afford it. (Tr. 62.)  
 
 
4 
 
 On Applicant’s SF-86, he was asked in Section 22, “Have you EVER been 
charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?” Applicant answered this question 
“No.” He disclosed the allegations as stated in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e, but failed to 
disclose his DUI arrest in June 2005. He testified that he did not intentionally falsify this 
question, but was under the impression that he only needed to include events in the 
past ten years. He volunteered information during his security clearance interview about 
this arrest. (GE 2; Tr. 31, 44-47.) 
 
 On April 13, 2017, Applicant signed a statement promising “to never abuse 
alcohol again.” (AE B.) He does not consider his consumption of a six pack of beer on 
Saturday to be alcohol abuse. (Tr. 59.) 
 
 Applicant presented witness testimony and numerous reference letters attesting 
to his honesty and trustworthiness. He is known to be dependable and hardworking by 
his coworkers. The president and vice president of his company speak highly of him. 
(AE G; Tr. 19-25.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
  
 
5 
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 22 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Two conditions may apply: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
 Applicant has multiple alcohol-related incidents between 2005 and 2015. He was 
arrested and charged with a DUI in 2005. He also has had three domestic disputes after 
excessive consumption of alcohol, which led to two arrests and one hospitalization. 
These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and 
shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 23 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Three conditions may apply: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 Applicant continues to consume alcohol, despite acknowledging that his goal is 
to achieve complete abstinence. Clearly, he struggles with his alcohol addiction. While 
he has made steps in the right direction by reducing his alcohol consumption, his 
continued consumption of a six pack on Saturdays, after attending AA, is troubling. His 
alcohol use continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment. He failed to present sufficient evidence to fully establish any of the mitigating 
conditions. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
 
7 
 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his SF-86. When a falsification allegation 
is controverted, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing 
alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
omission.2  
 
  In this case, there is insufficient evidence in the record to prove Applicant had a 
specific intent to falsify his SF-86. He credibly testified that he thought he didn’t have to 
include arrests over ten years old.  
 
  Further, AG ¶ 17 provides one fully applicable mitigating condition: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts. 
 
 Applicant voluntarily disclosed his 2005 DUI arrest when discussing his alcohol 
arrests prior to being confronted with this information. His omission was not intentional 
and disclosure was done in good-faith.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                                          
2 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines G and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant performs well at his job and is trusted by his management and 
coworkers. However, his continued struggle with alcohol creates questions about his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Alcohol 
Consumption security concerns, although he did mitigate the Personal Conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   Against APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
