 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-03180 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines M (Use of 
Information Technology) and E (Personal Conduct). Security concerns raised by 
Applicant’s misuse of information technology and violation of an agency photography 
policy are mitigated. Security concerns raised by his lack of candor during the security 
clearance process are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 16, 2015. 
On December 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines M and E. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
 2
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006.1  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 9, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel’s submission of the Government’s written 
is undated. It was sent to Applicant on August 14, 2017, along with a complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM), and he was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on August 21, 2017, and but did not submit any additional information. 
The case was assigned to me on December 18, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations except SOR 2.c, 
alleging falsification of his SCA, which he denied. His admissions are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old information technology systems administrator employed 
by a defense contractor since August 2015. He received a bachelor’s degree in May 2009. 
He worked as a systems administrator associate for a defense contractor from January 
2011 to March 2012. He was unemployed for about a month in April 2012. He worked as 
a systems administrator for federal contractor supporting another government agency 
(AGA) from May 2012 to May 2014. He was unemployed from June 2014 to January 
2015, after his access to the AGA work site was revoked because of the conduct alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 2.a. He worked as a systems administrator for another defense 
contractor from February to April 2015, and was unemployed from May to July 2015, 
when he began his current employment. He received a security clearance in January 
2011.  
 
 Around April 1, 2014, Applicant used his privileges as a system administrator to 
use his employer’s computer to gain access to co-workers’ computers and open their CD-
ROM trays as an April Fools’ Day prank. On the same day, he took pictures of himself, 
his computer monitor displaying the command he used for the prank, as well as other 
random items at his work site, and he posted them on social media. One of the “selfie” 
photographs included a sign identifying the AGA. Taking photographs of the work site 
was prohibited by the AGA. The prank is alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 2.b; and his 
violation of the photography policy is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. The revision included 
changing the title of Guideline M from “Use of Information Technology Systems” to “Use of Information 
Technology.” The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (FORM Item 4) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 
 3
 Applicant’s violation of the photography policy was reported to the AGA security 
office by a person not identified in the record. Applicant was questioned by an AGA 
investigator, initially denied taking photographs at the work site, and later admitted it. 
  
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in December 2015, he answered “No” to the 
question whether, in the last seven years, he had illegally or without proper authorization 
accessed or attempted to access any information technology system. He did not disclose 
his April Fools’ Day prank. His failure to disclose the prank is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.c. In his 
response to the SOR, he admitted that his “No” answer was incorrect, but he explained 
that he entered the wrong answer in the SCA because he was rushed and did not read 
the question carefully. 
 
 During an interview with a security investigator in June 2016, Applicant was 
questioned about his negative answer in the SCA, and he did not disclose the April Fools’ 
Day prank until he was confronted with the evidence. His initial failure to disclose the 
incident during the security interview is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.d. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
 
 4
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
 
 The concern under this Guideline is set out in AG ¶ 39:  
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, mobile, 
or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, manipulate, 
protect, or move information. This includes any component, whether 
integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, software, or 
firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations. 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially 
applicable to Applicant’s April Fools’ Day prank: 
 
 
 5
AG ¶ 40(a): unauthorized entry into any information technology system; 
 
AG ¶ 40(c): use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized 
access to another system or to a compartmented area within the same 
system; and 
 
AG ¶ 40(e): unauthorized use of any information technology system; 
 
 All the disqualifying conditions are established. Applicant was authorized as a 
system administrator to gain access to his co-workers’ computers, but not for the purpose 
of playing a prank.  
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant’s access to the AGA work site was revoked 
because of the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. When the same conduct is alleged twice in 
the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved 
in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005). Accordingly, 
I have resolved SOR ¶ 1.b in Applicant’s favor. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 41(a): so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
AG ¶ 41(b): the misuse was minor and done solely in the interest of 
organizational efficiency and effectiveness.  
 
 AG ¶ 41(a) is established. Applicant’s prank was an isolated incident that 
happened more than three years ago. He lost his job because of the prank and is not 
likely to repeat his conduct. 
 
 AG ¶ 41(b) is not established. Although Applicant’s prank was a minor violation, it 
was not done for organizational efficiency or effectiveness. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
 
 6
 Applicant’s lack of candor during questioning by the AGA investigator, in his SCA, 
and during the follow-up interview with a security investigator establish the following 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
AG ¶16(b): deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government representative. 
 
 Applicant’s April Fools’ Day prank is cross-alleged under this guideline in SOR ¶ 
2.b. The evidence of his prank establishes the following disqualifying condition: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established for Applicant’s false statements during questioning 
by the AGA investigator, in his SCA, and during the security interview in June 2016. 
Applicant did not correct his falsifications until he was confronted with the evidence.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is established for Applicant’s April Fools’ Day prank. It was an isolated 
incident that occurred more than three years ago, and it was harmless from a security 
viewpoint. This mitigating condition is established for Applicant’s violation of the AGA’s 
photography policy. It was a violation of security procedures and not minor, but it was an 
 
 7
isolated incident that that occurred more than three years ago. This mitigating condition 
is not established for Applicant’s falsifications, which undermined the security clearance 
process and occurred on three occasions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines M and E in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant presented no 
information regarding the quality of his performance in his current job. Because he 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to 
evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions 
under Guideline M and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his misuse of 
information technology, but he has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his lack 
of candor in response to questioning about his misconduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Information Technology):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.c and 2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 8
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
