 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01645 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns relating to his connections 
to Afghanistan; however, personal conduct security concerns relating to falsification of 
his security clearance applications are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 4, 2014, and on September 26, 2016, Applicant completed and signed 
Questionnaires for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance 
applications (SCA). Government Exhibit (GE) 1, 2. On February 27, 2017, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a 
security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign influence and 
personal conduct guidelines. 
 
On March 15, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
HE 3. On June 12, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On June 22, 
2017, the case was assigned to me. On August 17, 2017, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for August 
28, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled using video teleconference. 
Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of the 
hearing. Transcript (Tr.) 13. 
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered seven exhibits; Applicant did not 
offer any exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Tr. 17-20; GE 1-7. On August 29, 2017, the following day, Applicant provided 
six exhibits, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant Exhibit (AE) 
A-F. On September 4, 2017, the record closed. Tr. 64-65. On September 6, 2017, 
DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made 
applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs 
supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or 
after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered a summary for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Afghanistan 
with five attachments. Tr. 17-18; HE 4; I-V. Administrative or official notice is the 
appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 16-
02522 at 2-3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 
12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Applicant did not object to 
me taking administrative notice of the proffered documents and obtaining information 
from the Department of State website. Tr. 18-19. Department Counsel’s request for 
administrative notice is granted. Tr. 18-19. 
 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The first three paragraphs and the last paragraph of the Afghanistan section are 
taken from U.S. State Department Background Notes, https://2001-2009.state.gov/p/ 
sca/ci/af/. The other paragraphs are quoted from Department Counsel’s administrative 
notice request (bullet symbols and internal footnotes are omitted).  
     
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 2.a, and 2.b. HE 3. He also 
provided mitigating information. HE 3. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old linguist, and a DOD contractor has employed him for 
about four years out of the past six years in Afghanistan. Tr. 6, 9-10. In 1973, he was 
born in Afghanistan. Tr. 6; GE 1. In 1989, he graduated from high school. Tr. 7. In 1992, 
he earned a bachelor’s degree in Afghanistan from a military school. Tr. 8; GE 3 at 13. 
He served in the Afghan Air Force from 1992 to 1994. Tr. 25; GE 1. He was a lieutenant 
and flew helicopters. GE 3 at 7. He has attended college in the United States to improve 
his English skills and other basic knowledge. Tr. 7, 36.  
 
In 1999, Applicant entered the United States, and in 2014, he became a U.S. 
citizen. Tr. 17, 27; GE 1. In November 2014, he married in Afghanistan,3 and he has a 
one-year-old son, who was born in the United States. Tr. 8, 43, 52. His Afghan in-laws 
attended the wedding. Tr. 44.  
 
Applicant’s father was employed in Afghanistan as a police officer for 30 years. 
Tr. 22. He retired from that employment in the late 1980s. Tr. 22. After he retired as a 
police officer, he was employed in public transportation for about six years. Tr. 22-23. In 
1994, Applicant’s father moved his family, including Applicant and his six siblings, to 
Pakistan because of the civil war in Afghanistan. Tr. 24-26.   
 
In 1999, Applicant flew into the United States, and he was arrested because he 
did not have a visa. Tr. 28. The Immigration and Naturalization Service detained him for 
three months, and then granted him political asylum. Tr. 28. He received a work permit 
and a social security number. Tr. 28. From 1999 to 2011, Applicant worked for several 
different companies in the United States. Tr. 29-31.  
 
Applicant owns two homes in the United States. Tr. 31. He rents one home, and 
he lives in the other home with his parents, one of his brothers, his spouse, and his son. 
Tr. 32. In 2008, his parents immigrated to the United States. Tr. 32. His father and his 
younger brother are U.S. citizens, and his mother is a U.S. permanent resident. Tr. 33-
                                            
2 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 Applicant’s September 26, 2016 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or 
security clearance application (SCA) in Section 17 states that Applicant married in November 2014, in the 
United States. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
34. Applicant’s sister lives in the United States, and she is married to a U.S. citizen. Tr. 
33. Applicant has two brothers who are citizens and residents of the United States. Tr. 
35. Two of his brothers live in Germany; one of them is in refugee status; and the other 
is a citizen of the Netherlands. Tr. 35. All of his siblings live in either the United States or 
Germany. Tr. 36. In 1985, Applicant’s spouse was born in Afghanistan. GE 1. His 
spouse is a permanent resident of the United States. Tr. 37. Applicant sponsored his 
spouse’s U.S. permanent residence. Tr. 38. 
 
Applicant does not own property in Afghanistan. Tr. 38. His parents own property 
in Afghanistan. Tr. 38. He does not know whether he will inherit property in Afghanistan. 
Tr. 39. Applicant intends to raise his family in the United States and to retire in the 
United States. Tr. 52-53. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant’s mother-in-law, father-in-law, and brother-in-law are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant has contact with his in-laws about every 
two to eight weeks. Tr. 43-44. His spouse communicates with her parents about once a 
week. Tr. 45. Applicant has not met with his in-laws since his wedding in 2014. Tr. 43-
44. His most recent visit to Afghanistan for personal reasons was for his wedding in 
2014. Tr. 44. None of his in-laws are employed by or dependent on the Afghan 
Government. Tr. 49-51.   
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant has extended family in Afghanistan, and he has 
provided about $32,000 to his family living in Afghanistan since 1999. Applicant has a 
cousin living in Afghanistan, and Applicant communicates with him about once a month. 
Tr. 46. From 1999 to 2008, he provided $200 to $300 monthly to his parents when they 
were living in Afghanistan. Tr. 47, 58. He also provided some funds to his spouse before 
she left Afghanistan. He has not provided funds to anyone in Afghanistan since 2014. 
Tr. 47. He does not send funds to his in-laws in Afghanistan because they are 
financially secure. Tr. 48.  
 
Applicant served with the U.S. armed forces in Afghanistan from 2011 to 2013, 
for seven months in 2015, and 2016 to present. Tr. 39-40. Applicant’s annual linguist 
salary in 2013 was $185,000, and his annual salary now is $77,000. Tr. 40-41. He will 
receive a small pay raise if his security clearance is granted. Tr. 42. He served in 
Afghanistan under dangerous combat conditions. Tr. 41-43.    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s May 4, 2014, and September 26, 2016 SCAs asked in Section 20A, 
Foreign Activities, “Have you EVER provided financial support for any foreign national?” 
Both times Applicant answered, no, and did not disclose his financial support to his 
parents who were citizens and residents of Afghanistan. SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. Applicant 
said he “was not paying attention to that question.” Tr. 56. Although Applicant accepted 
responsibility for answering the questions incorrectly, he stated that the recruiter 
employed by the government contractor helping him answer the questions did not pay 
attention to the question. Tr. 56.   
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In his February 17, 2010 counter-intelligence interview, Applicant was asked, 
“What significant assistance, gifts, cash, or other items of value have you provided to 
non-U.S. persons . . . ,” and he responded, “none.”4 GE 6 at 10. In his May 9, 2011 
counter-intelligence interview, he disclosed that from 1999 to 2010, he provided about 
$150 to $300 to his family living in Afghanistan. GE 5 at 8.  
 
In his May 6, 2014, and October 12, 2016 counter-intelligence interviews, he 
disclosed that he provided $600 to his cousin living in Afghanistan. GE 3 at 11; GE 4 at 
10. He also indicated from 1999 to 2010, he provided about $32,000 to his family living 
in Afghanistan. GE 3 at 11; GE 4 at 10. He explained the absence of the financial 
support information from his SCA was because “HE was not aware HE had to disclose 
this information in HIS SF 86.” GE 3 at 11; GE 4 at 10. 
 
Applicant’s 2014 SCA is lengthy (56 pages) and detailed. GE 1. For example, he 
listed: 16 countries that appeared on his passport; 7 residences; and 10 employments. 
GE 2. Applicant’s 2016 SCA is also lengthy (64 pages) and detailed. GE 1. For 
example, in the employment section, he listed 12 employments, including some that 
were brief. GE 1. In the foreign travel section, he listed each of the transit stops to and 
from Afghanistan. GE 1.  
 
In his SOR response, Applicant said he sent an unspecified amount of money to 
his parents and a total of $600 to $800 in $200 payments to his cousin from 2006 to 
2014. HE 3. He said his falsifications of his 2014 and 2016 SCAs were not intentional. 
He emphasized that he revealed his financial contributions to family living in 
Afghanistan in his 2011, 2014, and 2016 counter-intelligence interviews. HE 3.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant served in the dangerous environment of Afghanistan for about four 
years. Tr. 62-63. Applicant received four certificates of appreciation for his service in 
Afghanistan from Army units lauding his selfless service, professionalism, devotion to 
duty, and contributions to mission accomplishment. AE A-AE D. In 2012, a Marine 
Corps company commander praised him for his professionalism, cultural awareness, 
dedication to duty, and contributions during “over 75 mounted and dismounted patrols,” 
                                            
4 Applicant’s SOR does not include the allegation that Applicant failed to disclose his payments to 
support his parents living in Afghanistan from 1999 to 2008 in his 2010 counter-intelligence interview. In 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in 
which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). See also ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 
14-00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). 
This allegation will not be considered except for the five purposes listed above.  
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
which helped to foster a positive rapport between the Afghan people and Coalition 
Forces.” AE E. In 2013, a military police detachment commander thanked Applicant for 
his proficiency, professionalism, reliability, rapport with soldiers, dependability, 
punctuality, and trustworthiness. AE F.    
 
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia that is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically-elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from Afghanistan, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.   
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election.  
 
A U.S. State Department Travel Warning remains in effect for Afghanistan. The 
State Department warns U.S. citizens against travel to Afghanistan because of 
continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations against U.S. citizens. Travel 
to all areas of Afghanistan remains unsafe due to the ongoing risk of kidnapping, 
hostage-taking, military combat operations, landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between 
political and tribal groups, militant attacks, direct and indirect fire, suicide bombings and 
insurgent attacks, including attacks using vehicle-borne or other improvised explosive 
devices. Attacks may also target official Afghan and U.S. governmental convoys and 
compounds, foreign embassies, military installations, and other public areas 
 
Extremists associated with various Taliban networks, the Islamic State in Iraq 
and Syria (“ISIS”), and members of other armed opposition groups are active 
throughout the country. ISIS has demonstrated its operational capability, having 
attacked both Afghan and foreign government facilities. These terrorist groups routinely 
attack Afghan, Coalition Forces, and U.S. targets with little regard for or the express 
intent to cause civilian casualties.  
 
Due to security concerns, unofficial travel to Afghanistan by U.S. Government 
employees and their family members is restricted and requires prior approval from the 
State Department. 
 
According to the State Department’s 2015 Country Reports on Terrorism, 
Afghanistan continued to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks by the Afghan 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Taliban, including the Haqqani Network and other insurgent and terrorist groups. 14 The 
Haqqani Network continued to plan and conduct high profile attacks and assassinations 
against U.S., Coalition Forces and Afghan interests, particularly in Kabul and other key 
government centers. 
 
According to the State Department, the border region of Afghanistan and 
Pakistan remains a safe haven for terrorists. It is an under-governed area that terrorists 
exploit to conduct attacks in both countries. Terrorist groups active in Afghanistan, such 
as al-Qa’ida (AQ), the Haqqani Network and others, operate in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan. ISIL-Khorasan (ISIL-K) is largely based in Afghanistan, but its support network 
also reaches into Pakistan’s tribal areas along the border. The Afghan government has 
struggled to assert control over this remote terrain where the population is largely 
detached from national institutions.  
 
In December 2016, the Department of Defense reported to Congress that, 
although al Qa’ida’s core leadership in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region has been 
degraded, elements continue to seek safe haven on both sides of the border to 
regenerate and conduct attack planning. The continued development of an al-Qa’ida 
affiliate in the region (al-Qa’ida in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS)), highlights the 
dynamic nature of the terrorist and militant landscape of the region, posing risks to the 
mission and to U.S. interests. 
 
In its annual Human Rights Report for 2016, the U.S. Department of State 
reported that the most significant human rights problems in Afghanistan during the year 
were widespread violence, including indiscriminate attacks on civilians by armed 
insurgent groups; armed insurgent groups’ killings of persons affiliated with the 
government; torture and abuse of detainees by government forces; widespread 
disregard for the rule of law and little accountability for those who committed human 
rights abuses; and targeted violence and endemic societal discrimination against 
women and girls. 
 
The United States’ extraordinary commitment to Afghanistan is balanced against 
the inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan to its citizens and residents 
and Afghan Government problems developing and complying with the rule of law. A top 
national security goal of the United States is to establish relationships, cooperation, 
training, and support of the Afghanistan Government and military in the ongoing war 
against terrorism. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should 
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President,  
Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant and his spouse have frequent contacts5 with his in-laws, who are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Their frequent contacts are a manifestation of 
their care and concern for relatives living in Afghanistan. Between 1999 and 2008 or 
2010, Applicant provided about $32,000 to support his parents living in Afghanistan. He 
also provided about $600 to his cousin living in Afghanistan. 
 
                                            
5 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Afghanistan because 
of terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has voluntarily shared in those dangers on behalf 
of the DOD for about four years, and he is willing to do so in the future. Numerous 
Afghan linguists, supporting U.S. forces, have family living in Afghanistan. Thousands of 
United States and coalition armed forces and civilian contractors serving in Afghanistan 
are targets of terrorists or the Taliban, along with Afghan civilians who support the 
Afghan Government and cooperate with coalition forces.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living 
in Afghanistan is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B; however, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
Applicant lives with and is close to his spouse. His spouse has relatives living in 
Afghanistan. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). “[A]s a matter of common sense 
and human experience, there is [also] a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of 
affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” 
ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 
at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(e). Indirect influence 
from a spouse’s relatives living in Afghanistan could result in a security concern. See 
ISCR Case No. 09-05812 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (finding “presence in India of 
close family members, viewed in light of that country’s troubles with terrorism and its 
human rights abuses, and his sharing living quarters with a person (his spouse) having 
foreign family contacts, establish the ‘heightened risk’” in AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e)).   
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Afghanistan with the United 
States, places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant 
to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members living in Afghanistan do 
not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might 
be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family 
member living in Afghanistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Afghanistan has an enormous 
problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationships with relatives living in Afghanistan 
create a potential conflict of interest because terrorists or the Taliban could place 
pressure on his family living in Afghanistan in an effort to cause Applicant to 
compromise classified information. These relationships create “a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Department 
Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with family in 
Afghanistan and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about 
potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists five conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; and  
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶¶ 8(b) applies. Applicant has frequent contact with his in-laws, who are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” In 1999, 
Applicant entered the United States, and in 2014, he became a U.S. citizen. His spouse 
lives in the United States, and she is a permanent U.S. resident. His son is a U.S. 
citizen. All of his siblings live in either Europe or the United States. His payments to 
relatives in Afghanistan after 2008, when his parents left Afghanistan, have been 
minimal.      
 
Applicant’s years of support to the DOD in Afghanistan as a linguist and cultural 
advisor, including the dangers that service entailed, weigh heavily towards mitigating 
security concerns. Applicant is currently serving in Afghanistan providing critical 
assistance to U.S. Armed Forces in a dangerous combat environment. He has offered 
to continue to risk his life to support the United States’ goals in Afghanistan. He has 
shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States during his approximately 
four years of support to DOD while serving in Afghanistan.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant’s in-laws currently live in Afghanistan. Like 
every other resident of Afghanistan, they are at risk from terrorists and the Taliban. 
 
It is important to be mindful of the United States’ huge investment of manpower 
and money in Afghanistan, and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in 
Afghanistan. Applicant and his in-laws living in Afghanistan are potential targets of 
terrorists and the Taliban, and Applicant’s potential access to classified information 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
could theoretically add risk to his relatives living in Afghanistan from lawless elements in 
Afghanistan.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his relatives living in Afghanistan are less 
significant than his connections to the United States. His employment in support of the 
U.S. Government, family living in the United States, performance of linguist duties in a 
combat zone, and U.S. citizenship are important factors weighing towards mitigation of 
security concerns. He ended his significant financial support for family living in 
Afghanistan in 2008 or 2010. His parents have moved to the United States. He has not 
visited his in-laws living in Afghanistan since his wedding in 2014. His connections to 
the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence 
security concerns under Guideline B. Foreign influence concerns under Guideline B are 
mitigated.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations,       
. . . determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .6  
   
                                            
6 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In Applicant’s May 4, 2014 and September 26, 2016 SCAs, he intentionally and 
falsely responded, no, to this question: “Have you EVER provided financial support for 
any foreign national?” AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) contains one condition that could mitigate security concerns. AG ¶ 
17(a) states, “(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.”  
 
During Applicant’s May 9, 2011, May 6, 2014, and October 12, 2016 counter-
intelligence interviews, he disclosed from 1999 to 2010, he provided financial support to 
his family living in Afghanistan. In his 2014 and 2016 counter-intelligence interviews, he 
explained the absence of the financial support information from his recently completed 
SCAs was because “HE was not aware HE had to disclose this information in HIS SF 
86.” GE 3 at 11; GE 4 at 10. At his hearing, he said he “was not paying attention to that 
question.” Tr. 56.    
 
The applicability of AG ¶ 17(a) has been limited by several Appeal Board 
decisions. An intentional omission allegation is not mitigated when an applicant admits 
the omission after an investigator tells him or her that the Government has already 
learned facts establishing the omission.7 If an Applicant provides false information in 
multiple interviews, voluntary, accurate disclosure during the third interview does not 
mitigate the falsification concern. ISCR Case No. 03-00577 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 
2006) (sustaining denial of security clearance and stating “Mitigating Condition 2 is not 
applicable to the facts of this case since it requires the falsification to have been an 
isolated incident, not recent, and that the correct information be voluntarily provided.”).   
 
 In the instant case, Applicant made three false statements about providing 
support to his parents living in Afghanistan. He also made three truthful statements. His 
monthly payments over a nine-year period to his parents were substantial enough that 
he should not have forgotten them. The question is clear and easy to understand. In 
2014, the counter-intelligence interviewer questioned him about leaving out the 
information on his 2014 SCA, which highlighted the issue for his next SCA. His SCA 
thoroughly addressed several questions, indicating he read the SCA and took significant 
time to complete it. Nevertheless, he failed to disclose the information about $32,000 
paid to family when they were in Afghanistan on his 2016 SCA. His false statements are 
not “isolated” and do not qualify for mitigation under AG ¶ 17(a). Personal conduct 
security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
                                            
7 ISCR Case No. 02-30369 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2006) (sustaining denial of security clearance); 
ISCR Case No. 04-00789 at 7 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006) (reversing grant of security clearance); ISCR 
Case No. 99-0557 at 4 (App. Bd. July 10, 2000) (reversing grant of security clearance).   
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guidelines B and E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant and his spouse have frequent contact with his in-laws, who are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan. Their frequent contacts are a manifestation of their care 
and concern for relatives living in Afghanistan. He provided financial support to his 
parents before they moved to the United States. Those relationships raise important 
foreign influence security concerns, and they must be balanced against his connections 
to the United States.      
 
In 1999, Applicant entered the United States, and in 2014, he became a U.S. 
citizen. His spouse lives in the United States, and she is a permanent U.S. resident. His 
son is a U.S. citizen. All of his siblings live in either Europe or the United States. When 
he became a U.S. citizen, he took an oath of allegiance to the United States. There is 
no evidence that Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal 
drugs, or violated any of his employer’s rules. 
 
Applicant served as a linguist, translator, linguist consultant, or cultural advisor 
for about four years in Afghanistan. He worked for U.S. government contractors. 
Applicant provided two character references and four certificates from Army and Marine 
Corps officers and enlisted personnel, who served with him in a U.S. designated combat 
zone. He made contributions to the U.S. military at personal risk. He is willing to 
continue to serve in Afghanistan in support of U.S. Armed Forces as a linguist, risking 
his life as part of his duties on behalf of the U.S. combat forces in Afghanistan. All these 
circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report 
any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit 
him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). His past honorable 
service as a linguist weighs heavily towards approval of his security clearance. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (affirming grant of security 
clearance and commenting “Applicant has served as a translator and as a cultural 
liaison between Americans and Afghan citizens, diffusing tensions and facilitating 
transactions between the two groups. . . .  Applicant put his life in danger on at least one 
occasion to protect American lives and interests in Afghanistan.”). 
 
16 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
A Guideline B decision concerning Afghanistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.8 Afghanistan is a dangerous place because of 
violence from the Taliban and terrorists. The Taliban and terrorists continue to threaten 
the Afghan Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, and 
those who cooperate and assist the United States. The Afghan Government does not 
fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many instances. The United 
States and Afghan Governments are allies in the war on terrorism.       
 
The evidence against mitigation of security concerns under the personal conduct 
guideline is more substantial. Applicant’s falsification of his SCAs in 2014 and 2016 by 
intentionally failing to disclose information about his financial support for his parents 
when they were living in Afghanistan was deliberate and improper. His falsification in a 
security context raises a serious security concern. The protection of national security 
relies on applicants to self-report conduct that jeopardizes security, even when that 
disclosure might damage the applicant’s career. Applicant cannot be trusted to disclose 
potentially derogatory information. He did not establish his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence security 
concerns are mitigated; however, personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     Against APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
                                            
8 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
17 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
