 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02491 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 13, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 28, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 14, 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
2 
 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on August 21, 2017, scheduling the hearing for September 18, 2017. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. 
  
The Government notified Applicant on January 19, 2017, that it amended the 
SOR, pursuant to ¶ E3.1.13 of the Directive, to add SOR allegation ¶ 1.p. The 
Government’s discovery letter containing the amendment, demonstrative exhibit, and 
exhibit list were appended to the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through III. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were 
admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
At Applicant’s request and with no objection from the Government, I left the 
record open until October 2, 2017, for him to submit additional documentation. He timely 
provided additional evidence, which I marked as AEs H and I and admitted in evidence 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 26, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d to 1.i, and 1.k to 1.p, and 
denied ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.j.2  
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He obtained his high-school diploma in 2004 and 
attended college from 2013 to 2014, but did not earn a degree. He served in the U.S. 
military from 2004 until he was honorably discharged in June 2013, and deployed in 
2007, 2009, and 2011. He has worked as an avionics technician since 2005. He 
previously worked for a federal contractor from June 2013 until he was laid off in 
December 2013. He has worked for his current federal contractor in state A since July 
2015. He was first granted a security clearance in 2004.3  
 
 Applicant married in 2006, divorced in 2013, and re-married in June 2017. His 
wife does not work outside the home. He has four minor children, two from his first 
marriage for whom he has physical custody and shares legal custody, a stepchild, and a 
child from his current marriage.4 
 
 The SOR alleges 15 delinquent consumer debts for $17,929 and a December 
2012 defaulted mortgage loan that resulted in a foreclosure of his home. The SOR 
allegations are established by Applicant’s admissions and credit reports from November 
2015 and January 2017.5  
 
                                                          
2 Response to the SOR; HE I; Tr. at 12-13. 
 
3 Tr. at 6-9, 33-45, 47, 54-57, 58-59; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 6-9, 33-45, 47, 54-57, 58-59; GE 1. 
 
5 Response to the SOR; GEs 1-3.  
 
3 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquent debts to his period of unemployment from 
December 2013 to December 2014, following his layoff, and his simultaneous divorce, 
during which time he lost a number of records pertaining to his debts. During this period, 
he received unemployment benefits once. He also moved in with his mother in state B, 
and worked a minimum wage, part-time sales job from January to February 2015, while 
attempting to find employment. He then transferred his part-time job to state C, where 
his ex-wife lived with their children, to assist them during a period when his ex-wife had 
issues. He subsequently moved with his children back to his mother’s home, and then 
relocated again when he obtained his current job. He testified that the first time he 
became aware of his delinquent debts was when he was provided a copy of his credit 
report after he completed his security clearance application in November 2015. He had 
not previously thought about his debts because he lacked the income to pay them. He 
started resolving his debts as soon as he obtained his current job. He used his 2017 tax 
refund and his discretionary income to resolve his outstanding debts.6  
 
 Applicant testified that the underlying creditor for SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h are the 
same. He testified that when he settled and paid SOR ¶ 1.h, which was for a store 
account, in February 2017, he inquired with the underlying creditor as to whether he had 
any other outstanding balances, in an effort to also resolve SOR ¶ 1.a. He testified that 
the creditor told him that he did not. Thus, he was in the process of disputing SOR ¶ 
1.a. He provided documentation reflecting that he paid the settlement amount he 
reached for SOR ¶ 1.h in February 2017, and his September 2017 credit report reflects 
a zero balance for that debt.7  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are for veteran’s loans Applicant obtained when he attended 
college. He testified that unbeknownst to him, the last payment he received was an 
overpayment. He notified the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) that he was 
unemployed at the time. As soon as he was employed, the VA garnished his tax refund 
in January 2017 to satisfy both debts. He provided documentation reflecting that $1,843 
of his $8,674 tax refund was garnished in February 2016 and applied to his outstanding 
debts with the VA.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d is for a cable account. Applicant testified and provided documentation 
reflecting that he paid this debt in February 2017.9  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e is for a cellular account, and SOR ¶ 1.o is for a store account. 
Applicant testified that when he contacted both of these creditors in February 2017 to 
obtain information about these debts, the creditors told him that they could not locate 
any outstanding accounts for him. He testified that he has not received any 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 15, 24-26, 32, 37-45, 48, 54-57. 
 
7 Tr. at 30-32, 46-47, 59-60; AEs A, F, H. 
 
8 Tr. at 25-26, 56, 59-60; GE 1; AE E. 
 
9 Tr. at 60-62; AE H. 
 
4 
 
correspondence from these creditors concerning any outstanding balances. He 
provided documentation reflecting that he paid both accounts in September 2017.10 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f is for another cellular account. Applicant testified that he paid this debt 
in March 2017. He provided documentation in which he indicated that he settled this 
debt, and reflecting that he paid the settlement amount in March 2017.11 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g is Applicant’s mortgage for the home he and his ex-wife purchased in 
2009. He testified that when they could not afford to pay the mortgage, they 
unsuccessfully tried to sell their home before it was foreclosed in early 2014. Since the 
foreclosure, Applicant has not been contacted by the creditor regarding any outstanding 
balance. He believes this debt was resolved through the foreclosure. His September 
2017 credit report reflects a zero balance for this account.12 
 
 Applicant testified that he contacted the credit union for SOR ¶ 1.i and attempted 
to resolve this debt, but it required that he pay in person, which he was unable to do 
since the credit union is located in state B. In addition, he needed to save the money to 
make a lump-sum payment required by the credit union. He was working with the credit 
union to resolve this debt through a cashier’s check, and he expected to resolve it 
shortly after the hearing. He provided documentation reflecting that he paid this debt in 
September 2017.13 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j is for another cable account. Applicant testified that he paid this debt. 
His September 2017 credit report and documentation reflecting a February 2017 
payment corroborate his claim.14 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l are for two debts that were charged off. Applicant provided 
documentation to show that he resolved SOR ¶ 1.l in March 2017. The credit reports 
reflect that both accounts carry a zero balance.15 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.m is for a car from Applicant’s marriage that was returned to the creditor 
and charged off. Applicant testified that he contacted the creditor the month of his 
hearing and was told that they would not and could not accept payment because of the 
status of the debt. The creditor provided with him a phone number to give to anyone 
inquiring about the status of the debt, though Applicant had not called the number as of 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 62-65; AE H. 
 
11 Tr. at 65-66; AE H. 
 
12 Tr. at 26-27, 46, 57-58; GE 1; AE A. 
 
13 Tr. at 27-28, 32, 53-54; AEs H, I. 
 
14 Tr. at 66-; AEs A, H. 
 
15 Tr. at 66-68; GEs 2, 3; AEs A, B. 
 
5 
 
the hearing date. Applicant testified that he had not given up on trying to resolve this 
debt.16 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.n is for a store account. Applicant indicated that he settled this debt. He 
provided documentation reflecting that he paid the settlement amount around February 
2017. His September 2017 credit report also reflects that the account was settled and 
has a zero balance.17 
 
 Applicant testified that he settled and paid SOR ¶ 1.p in February 2017. His 
September 2017 credit report and documentation reflecting a February 2017 payment 
corroborate his claim.18 
 
Applicant testified that he has used his credit report to resolve his outstanding 
debts, and he does not have any other delinquent debts. He stated that he lives within 
his budget. His monthly net income is $4,000, he has $750 in his checking account, and 
$2,300 in his savings account. He received financial counseling through the process of 
obtaining unemployment benefits. He provided a letter from his supervisor attesting to 
his trustworthiness and commendable performance.19 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
16 Tr. at 28-30, 32; GE 1. 
 
17 Tr. at 68; AEs A, C, H. 
 
18 Tr. at 26; AEs A, H. 
 
19 Tr. at 15, 27, 32-33, 48-54, 57; AEs D, G. 
 
6 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
7 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Since Applicant’s financial problems started in 2013, Applicant received financial 
counseling and he has made a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts. He 
resolved SOR ¶¶ 1.d to 1.f and 1.g to 1.p. The foreclosure of his home in SOR ¶ 1.g is 
reflected as carrying a zero balance on his recent credit report. He believes he resolved 
SOR ¶ 1.a with SOR ¶ 1.h, and he intends to dispute any outstanding balance reported 
for SOR ¶ 1.a. He also believes he resolved SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c through the 
garnishment of his tax refund in 2016. He intends to continue to try to resolve SOR ¶ 
1.m, though the creditor told him it could not accept any payments for this account.  
 
  A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an 
individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged 
in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she 
need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
Applicant has not incurred additional delinquent debts. Applicant has resolved a majority 
of his debts. While he has a few unresolved SOR debts remaining, he has 
demonstrated a good-faith effort and has the means to continue to resolve them. AG ¶¶ 
20(a) through 20(e) are applicable.  
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant resolved a majority of his 
debts. While he has a few unresolved SOR debts remaining, he credibly testified at 
hearing and there is sufficient evidence to show that he is committed to resolving them.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.p:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
