 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03778 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 20, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 24, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 9, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
20, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 16, 2017. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits.2 DOHA received the 
hearing transcript on November 27, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He attended college, but did not graduate. He earned 
technical and professional certificates. He is not married and has no children. He has 
been employed by his current employer, a federal contractor, since April 2015. Before 
then he held various jobs for short periods of time.3  
 
 Applicant admitted he owed the debts alleged in the SOR. He testified that he 
could have made better decisions about his finances and has not used good judgment 
regarding them. In 2012, he obtained a student loan (SOR ¶ 1.a-$3,871). It has been 
delinquent since approximately 2013. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) involuntarily 
withheld his income tax refund and applied it to this debt. He testified that last month he 
agreed to participate in a rehabilitation program with the creditor. He has made two 
payments of $15 on this debt. No documents were provided.4 
 
 Applicant has not addressed any of the remaining delinquent debts in the SOR. 
The debts are supported by Applicant’s admissions, his statements to investigators and 
credit reports from May 2015, December 2015, and October 2016.  
 
Applicant testified he was confused about the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($630), a 
medical debt delinquent since about July 2013, because he believe it should have been 
covered by his insurance. He did not present evidence of action he has taken to contact 
the creditor to address his confusion. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($1,405), 1.c ($874), and 
1.i ($740) are cell phone debts he incurred when he canceled his contracts with the 
providers and failed to pay the balances owed. SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($500) and 1.g ($412) are 
loans he obtained and did not pay. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($487) and 1.h ($2,774) are 
unpaid credit cards debts.5  
 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I is the Government’s discovery letter. 
 
3 Tr. 14-18. 
 
4 Tr. 18-22. 
 
5 Tr. 22-31; GE 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he has not acquired any new debts. He admitted that he 
has had enough time to resolve his debts, but has not done so. He worked overseas 
from October 2015 to December 2015, and from January 2016 to December 2016. He 
has no money in savings. During his June 2015 background interview with a 
government investigator, many of the SOR debts were brought to his attention. He told 
the investigator he intended to pay and resolve the delinquent debts. 
 
In August 2016, he was interviewed again by a government investigator and was 
confronted with many of the same debts from his 2015 interview that are listed on the 
SOR. He indicated to the investigator that as of January 2016, he was financially secure 
and intended to resolve his financial problems. He also stated he was planning his 
wedding and had spent $15,000 to purchase a ring, secure a venue, and made a 
prepayment on a honeymoon trip. He told the investigator he had $4,000 in savings and 
was saving $4,000 a month from his income. He intended to resolve his delinquent 
debts when he returned from overseas at the end of 2016. Applicant subsequently 
canceled his wedding and lost the deposits. He testified that he is paid well, and he 
needs to get his debts under control. He admitted he has not exercised good judgment 
in managing his finances.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 28-34; GE 3, 4. 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
 
5 
 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous unresolved delinquent debts that began accumulating 
several years ago, and which he has been unwilling to satisfy. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counselling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant has not paid or resolved any of the alleged delinquent debts, despite 
being confronted with them during background interviews and making promises to 
address them. Applicant’s debts are recent, numerous, and ongoing for several years. I 
cannot find that his behavior is unlikely to recur because of his failure to conscientiously 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
address his debts. His behavior casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Many of Applicant’s debts were incurred before he spent money for his wedding. 
He told the investigator that he was saving $4,000 a month. He has not provided 
evidence that his financial problems were the result of conditions beyond his control. He 
has not provided evidence that he has acted responsibly in addressing his delinquent 
debt. Shortly before his hearing, he made two payments of $15 towards his student 
loans. The IRS applied his tax refund to his student loan debt. I cannot find Applicant 
has acted responsibly in addressing his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling and that there are 
clear indications his finances are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant 
made minimal payments as part of a rehabilitation program to begin resolving his 
delinquent student loan. He did not provide supporting documents to show his efforts. 
His actions, which occurred shortly before his hearing, do not rise to the level of 
establishing a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts. He has not made any 
other effort to pay his delinquent debts. I find AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 29 years old. He has been employed since April 2015. He has 
numerous delinquent debts. The debts were brought to his attention during his first 
 
7 
 
 
background interview in June 2015. Despite making promises to address them and 
being confronted with them again during his August 2016 background interview, he has 
not made any efforts to resolve them. Applicant admitted he has used poor judgment in 
managing his finances and that he has had the time to resolve them. He has not 
established a reliable track record of financial stability. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude he failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
