 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-03327 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement), J Criminal Conduct), G (Alcohol Consumption), and E (Personal Conduct). 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 16, 
2015. On December 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines H, J, G, and E. The DOD 
acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
DOD on September 1, 2006.1  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 17, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 9, 
2017, and the case was assigned to me on April 7, 2017. Scheduling the hearing was 
delayed because of Applicant’s work and travel schedule. On August 16, 2017, DOHA 
notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for September 13, 2017. I conducted 
the hearing as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified but did not present 
the testimony of any other witnesses or submit any documentary evidence. I kept the 
record open until September 28, 2017, to enable him to submit documentary evidence. 
He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through R, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on September 21, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old installation technician employed by a defense contractor 
since March 2009. He graduated from high school in June 2007 and was employed in the 
private sector until he was hired for his current job. He received a security clearance in 
September 2009. 
 
 Applicant purchased and used marijuana with varying frequency from about 2004 
to February 2016. He continued to use marijuana once or twice a week after he was 
granted a security clearance in September 2009. (Tr. 26.) He was arrested in April 2011 
and charged with possession of marijuana. He appeared in court in July 2011 and was 
given first-offender status. He was sentenced to 24 hours of community service, fined, 
and required to attend a one-day, eight-hour drug education class, which he completed. 
He was placed on supervised probation for six months and was required to submit to 
urinalysis once a month, and all tests were negative for marijuana. He completed all the 
court-imposed requirements, and the charges were dismissed in December 2011. (GX 4 
at 1-2.) 
 
 Applicant was charged with reckless driving and speeding in February 2013. He 
was driving 79 miles per hour (mph) in a 55-mph zone. He pleaded nolo contendere, was 
convicted, and was fined $150. (GX 5 at 1-2.) 
 
In April 2015, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the influence 
(DUI), driving the wrong way on a one-way street, and operating a vehicle without 
headlights when required. A breathalyzer indicated a .177 blood-alcohol content (BAC). 
(Tr. 34.) He was convicted of DUI. He spent one day in jail and his driver’s license was 
suspended for six months. He was required to complete two alcohol-education classes 
and to have an interlock on his vehicle for six months. (Tr. 35.) He was placed on 
unsupervised probation for two years. He completed all the court requirements, and his 
driver’s license was reinstated in September 2015. (Tr. 36; AX J.) At the hearing, he 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance applications (GX 1 and GX 2) 
unless otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to other documents in the record. 
 
3 
 
testified that he did not consume alcohol after his DUI arrest in April 2015. (Tr. 37.) He 
later admitted that he consumed alcohol on the following Thanksgiving. (Tr. 38.) 
 
Applicant was arrested in November 2015 and charged with possession of 
marijuana. He pleaded nolo contendere. He was convicted and sentenced to 30 days in 
jail (suspended), fined $100, and placed on unsupervised probation until January 2017. 
(GX 5 at 3-4; AX C.)  
 
 When Applicant submitted an SCA in June 2009, he answered “No” to a question 
in Section 23a, asking if, during the last seven years, he had illegally used any controlled 
substance. He did not disclose his use of marijuana that began in 2004. He also answered 
“No” to a question in Section 23b, asking if, during the last seven years, he had been 
involved in the illegal possession or purchase of marijuana. He did not disclose that he 
purchased marijuana beginning in 2004. (GX 2 at 28.)  
 
When Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in August 2012, he 
falsely told the investigator that he had not smoked marijuana since age fifteen, and he 
declared that he did not intend to use it in the future. (GX 4 at 2.) At the hearing, he 
testified that he did not disclose his use of marijuana in his 2009 SCA and the follow-up 
interview by a security investigator in August 2012, because he was not using it on a daily 
basis. (Tr. 30, 43.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in September 2015, he answered 
“Yes” to a question in Section 23 asking if, during the last seven years, he had illegally 
used any controlled substance. He stated that he first used marijuana in October 2000 
and last used it in August 2015. Regarding the nature and frequency of his use of 
marijuana, he stated that it was “recreational, not very frequent, three.” He answered “No” 
to the question whether, during the last seven years, he had been involved in the illegal 
purchase of marijuana. He declared that he did not intend to use marijuana again because 
he did not want to risk losing his security clearance. (GX 1 at 24.) In his response to 
DOHA interrogatories in November 2016, his answer to the SOR in February 2017, and 
in his testimony at the hearing, he admitted that he continued to purchase and use 
marijuana until February 2016. 
 
 Applicant’s current employer submitted a letter describing him as reliable, 
trustworthy, hardworking, loyal, and dedicated. His employer regards him as one of his 
most experienced and knowledgeable craftsman. (AX A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
 
4 
 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant purchased and used marijuana with varying 
frequency from about 2004 to February 2016 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b), and that he continued 
to use marijuana after being granted a security clearance in September 2009 (SOR ¶ 
1.c). The SOR also cross-alleges the drug-related criminal conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
and 2.d, summarized and discussed below. 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing 
establish the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal possession of a controlled substance, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(f): any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information 
or holding a sensitive position.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
6 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are not established. Applicant has acknowledged his drug 
involvement but has not undergone any counseling or treatment other than the court-
ordered drug education classes. His drug involvement was not infrequent, and it did not 
occur under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. Even though he has asserted that 
his last use of marijuana was in February 2016, his last use was not “so long ago” that it 
is mitigated by the passage of time.  
 
 There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when drug involvement is mitigated 
by the passage of time. The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed 
without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine 
whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
 Applicant has purchased and habitually used marijuana once or twice a week since 
he was in high school. He continued to use it after he was granted a security clearance 
in 2009. He was not deterred by his arrest for marijuana possession in April 2011. In 
August 2012, he declared to a security investigator that he did not intend to use marijuana 
again, but he used it again in November 2015 and used it while on probation after his 
conviction in January 2016. He declared in his September 2015 SCA that he did not intend 
to use marijuana again, but he admitted in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing that 
he purchased and used it until February 2016. After considering all the evidence, I am not 
convinced that he will refrain from further marijuana use once the pressure of keeping his 
clearance is lifted. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana in April 
2011 (SOR ¶ 2.a); charged with reckless driving and speeding in February 2013 (SOR ¶ 
2.b); charged with DUI, a one-way street violation, and operating a vehicle without 
headlights in April 2015 (SOR ¶ 2.c); and charged with possession of marijuana in 
November 2015 (SOR ¶ 2.d). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG 30: 
“Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules, and regulations.” 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s record of arrests and convictions establishes the following disqualifying 
conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would 
be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not 
limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant has complied with the terms of each probation that was imposed in April 
2011, April 2015, and January 2016, except for his use of marijuana in February 2016, 
while he was still on probation. His employer considers him a reliable, trustworthy, 
hardworking, loyal, and dedicated employee. However, based on all the evidence 
discussed above under this Guideline and Guideline H, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 
32(d) are not established. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 SOR ¶ 3.a cross-alleges the DUI alleged in SOR ¶ 2.c. The security concern under 
this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the 
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.” Applicant’s arrest for and 
conviction of DUI establish the following disqualifying condition: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder. 
 
8 
 
 The relevant mitigating condition is AG ¶ 23(a): “so much time has passed, or the 
behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or judgment.” Applicant has abstained from alcohol since Thanksgiving 
of 2015, more than two years ago. There is no evidence of any other instances of 
excessive alcohol use. He was required to complete educational classes, but he has not 
been diagnosed with an alcohol use disorder, and he has not been required to undergo 
any counseling or treatment. I conclude that AG ¶ 23(a) is established. No other mitigating 
conditions are relevant. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his SCA in June 2009 by answering “No” 
to a question asking if, during the last seven years, he had illegally used any controlled 
substance (SOR ¶ 4.a) and answering “No” to a question, asking if, during the last seven 
years, he had been involved in the illegal possession or purchase of marijuana (SOR ¶ 
4.b). It also alleges that he falsified material facts during an interview with a security 
investigator in August 2012 by telling the investigator that he had not used marijuana 
since age 15 (SOR ¶ 4.c). The SOR does not allege that Applicant’s answers to drug-
related questions in his September 2015 SCA were false.3  
 
 After SOR ¶ 4.c, the SOR contains a phrase, “That information as set forth in in 
paragraphs 1, 2, and subparagraphs 4.a and 4.b., above” that is separated by a line space 
from SOR ¶ 4.c, without lettering and not closed with a period. It is not clear whether this 
phrase was inadvertently left in the text of the SOR or was intended to be SOR ¶ 4.d. In 
an abundance of caution, I have amended the SOR and treated the isolated phrase as 
SOR ¶ 4.d, cross-alleging all the conduct alleged under Guidelines H, J, and E, but not 
cross-alleging the conduct alleged under Guideline G.  
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . . 
 
                                                          
3 Because the SOR does not allege that Applicant falsified his September 2015 SCA, his answers to drug-
related questions in that SCA may not be an independent basis for revoking his security clearance. 
However, they may be considered to assess his credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative 
guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to 
consider whether he has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person analysis. 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered his answers in the September 
2015 for these limited purposes.  
 
 
9 
 
 Applicant’s explanation for not disclosing his marijuana use, i.e., that he was not 
using it on a daily basis, was implausible and unconvincing. His falsification of his June 
2009 SCA and subsequent false statements to an investigator establish the following 
disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
AG ¶16(b): deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government representative. 
 
 SOR ¶ 4.d, cross-alleging Applicant’s drug involvement and criminal conduct as 
personal conduct, is established by the evidence discussed above, and it is sufficient to 
raise the following additional disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 
10 
 
 Neither mitigating condition is established. Applicant made no effort to correct his 
omissions. Instead, he made implausible excuses for his multiple omissions of material 
facts. His falsifications were recent, numerous, and did not occur under unusual 
circumstances. His falsifications were not “minor,” because they undermined the integrity 
of the security clearance process. He knew that his drug involvement adversely affected 
his professional standing, and he chose to conceal or minimize it. His lack of candor 
throughout the security clearance process raises grave doubts about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4 I have incorporated 
my comments under Guidelines H, J, G, and E in my whole-person analysis, and I have 
considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d).  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H, J, 
G, and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concern raised by his alcohol use, but he has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his drug involvement, criminal conduct, and 
personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:    Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
11 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraphs 4, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 4.a-4.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
