 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-03618 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 28, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, the AGs were updated and the AGs effective September 1, 2006 were cancelled.  
This decision will be decided based on the new AGs effective on June 8, 2017.  If I were 
to consider this case under the AGs effective September 1, 2006, it would result in the 
same outcome.  
  
 On January 23, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
based on the administrative record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material on February 24, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on March 1, 2017. She 
had thirty days to submit matters in response to the FORM. Applicant did not submit 
matters.  On April 4, 2017, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office. The FORM 
 
2 
 
 
was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings, and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance. She has worked for the DOD contractor since August 
2011. She has a high school diploma. She is married and has two children. (Item 2; 
Item 4; Item 5)    
 
 Applicant submitted her most recent security clearance application on February 
6, 2015. A subsequent background investigation revealed some security concerns 
related to Applicant’s past involvement in her boyfriend’s (now husband’s) criminal 
marijuana business. In February 2010, Applicant’s husband was convicted of 
possession of marijuana for sale. (Item 7). During an interview on August 23, 2013, with 
an investigator conducting a previous background investigation of Applicant, Applicant 
told the interviewer that she purchased marijuana on her husband’s behalf at least 20 
times. The last time she purchased marijuana for her husband was in 2012. She also 
sold marijuana on his behalf when he was not available on approximately 15-20 
occasions. (Item 6 at 2-8) 
 
 Applicant first submitted a security clearance application on August 30, 2011. In 
response to section 23c of her 2011 security clearance application. Applicant answered, 
“No” to the question: “In the last seven years, have you been involved in the illegal 
possession, purchase, manufacture, trafficking, production, transfer, shipping, receiving, 
handling, or sale of any controlled substance . . . ? She did not disclose that she often 
purchased, possessed, handled, and transferred marijuana on behalf of her husband. 
(Item 3, section 23).  
 
 She was subsequently granted a secret security clearance in September 2011. 
Applicant submitted another security clearance application on January 11, 2013. A 
subsequent background investigation resulted in Applicant’s clearance being denied by 
another agency on February 10, 2014, based on her involvement in purchasing, 
possessing and transferring marijuana and her failure to disclose her illegal drug activity 
on her January 2013 security clearance application. (Item 6 at 8-9) 
 
 On her most recent security clearance application, dated February 6, 2015, 
Applicant answered, “No” to “Section 23 – Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity . . . In 
the last seven (7) years have you been involved in the illegal purchase, manufacture, 
cultivation, trafficking, production, transfer, shipping, receiving, or handling or sale of 
any drug of controlled substance?” She did not disclose her drug trafficking activities on 
behalf of her husband, with the latest incident occurring in 2012. (Item 2, section 23) 
 
 On her February 2015 security clearance application, Applicant also answered, 
“No” to Section 23 - While Possessing a Security Clearance. Have you EVER illegally 
used or otherwise been involved with a drug or controlled substance while possessing a 
 
3 
 
 
security clearance other than previously listed?” Applicant received a security clearance 
in 2011 and she continued to sell or purchase marijuana for her husband until 2012. 
(Item 2, section 23) 
 
 Applicant also did not disclose that her security clearance was denied by another 
government agency in December 2013, in response to Section 25 – Investigation and 
Clearance Record, of her February 2015 application, “Have you ever had a security 
clearance eligibility/access authorization denied, suspended, or revoked?” (Item 2, 
section 25)  
 
 Finally, it is alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified material facts during an 
interview with an investigator representing the Department of Defense on May 16, 2016, 
when she told the investigator that she was denied a security clearance by another 
government agency because she transferred marijuana from one hand to another hand 
with no money involved and rode in a car with marijuana. In other words, she minimized 
the amount of times she helped her husband sell or purchase marijuana. (Item 4) 
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e, 
1.h. She admits the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g.  Regarding SOR ¶ 1.f, Applicant 
admits to saying “No” regarding being involved with a drug or controlled substance while 
possessing a security clearance because she claims that it is the truth.  She admits to 
giving the wrong answer in SOR ¶ 1.g because she was confused about the question. 
(Response to SOR) 
 
 Applicant admits to making some bad decisions when she was younger, but 
claims she did not assist her husband with selling and purchasing marijuana as often as 
alleged in the SOR. She also claims the conduct occurred in 2009 or earlier, well before 
she was granted a security clearance. She believes she mixed up her dates because 
she felt she was put on the spot during the interview. She states she was young and 
immature when she was involved in marijuana trafficking. She claims she is now 
mature, responsible, honest, devoted, and trustworthy. She stays out of trouble and now 
has cares for her children.  (Response to SOR)   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
 
4 
 
 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Conclusion 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
 The following disqualifying conditions potentially apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
AG ¶ 16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to any 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental 
health professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a 
national security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information.  
 
 AG ¶ 16(a) applies with regard to Applicant’s deliberate falsification of her 2011 
and 2015 security clearance applications as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.g.  Applicant 
repeatedly lied about her involvement with her husband’s illegal marijuana business up 
until 2012 despite admitting to the conduct in previous security clearance background 
investigations. She also failed to disclose on her 2015 security clearance application 
that she was denied a security clearance in December 2013 and failed to list that she 
assisted her husband with purchasing, selling, and transferring marijuana up until 2012 
after applying for and being granted a security clearance in 2011.  
 
 AG ¶ 16(b) applies with respect to Applicant’s minimization of the extent of her 
involvement with her husband’s illegal marijuana business during a May 2016 
background interview.   
 
 AG ¶ 16(c) applies with regard to Applicant’s multiple purchases, transfers and 
sales of marijuana on behalf of her husband until around 2011 and 2012. Some of this 
conduct occurred while Applicant was granted a security clearance. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c)  
Although the misconduct occurred several years ago, Applicant’s involvement in her 
husband’s illegal marijuana business raises questions about her judgment, 
trustworthiness, candor, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. As a 
result, it raises questions about her ability to properly safeguard classified information.  
  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Under Guideline E, the following mitigating conditions potentially apply in 
Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply.  Applicant admitted to assisting her then 
boyfriend, now husband, with his illegal marijuana business for a period of time up until 
2012. While there is no evidence that she used marijuana, she admits to purchasing, 
transferring, and selling marijuana for her husband when he was unavailable to do so 
himself.  She lied about this misconduct on her 2011 security clearance application. She 
was granted a security clearance and continued to assist her husband with his illegal 
marijuana business until 2012. Her security clearance was revoked by another 
government agency in 2014.  Applicant continued to lie about her past misconduct on 
her 2015 security clearance application and during background investigation interview in 
May 2016.  Questions remain about Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness and 
reliability. Personal Conduct concerns are not mitigated.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant is now a 
 
7 
 
 
mother to two children and has matured since her earlier misconduct. However, she 
continues to deliberately mislead the government about her past misconduct. Questions 
remain about Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability. Security concerns under 
personal conduct are not mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
   
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
