1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 16-00598 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On August 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, explaining why it was unable to find it 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility for him. The 
DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On September 14, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations, admitting 
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c, and denying subparagraph 1.d. He requested a decision 
on the written record. On October 27, 2016, Department Counsel prepared a File of 
 
2 
 
Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received the FORM on November 7, 2016, and did 
not respond. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2017.  
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel amended the SOR to include six additional 
allegations under the financial considerations guideline (subparagraphs 1.e-1.j). On 
October 23, 2017, I re-opened the record, extending it to November 23, 2017, to allow 
Applicant the opportunity to answer the new allegations, and to submit any additional 
information pertinent to the disposition of these allegations. Applicant neither answered the 
allegations, nor submitted any additional evidence. I will construe his non-answer as a 
denial of the amended allegations.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG. 1 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Item 4 is an unauthenticated Report of Investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s 
Personal Subject Interview conducted on September 24, 2015. Department Counsel 
notified Applicant of his right to object to its admissibility. Applicant did not respond, 
therefore, I will admit Item 4 and incorporate it into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 55-year-old married man with one child, age 11. He is a Navy 
veteran, serving from 1986 through his retirement in 2006. Since then, he has worked for a 
defense contractor as an outside machinist. (Item 3 at 10) He is a high school graduate, 
and is currently attending community college, working towards an associate’s degree. (Item 
3 at 9) 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in September 2007. (Item 6 at 1) Under the 
plan, $19,284 was discharged. (Item 6 at 27) 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in December 2014, as alleged in 
subparagraph 1.a. Approximately $55,000 of debt was included in the plan. (Item 4 at 2) 
Under the terms of the plan, $880 per month was to be disbursed to the creditors through 
the bankruptcy plan. (Item 5 at 40) On September 10, 2015, the court dismissed the 
bankruptcy because of Applicant’s failure to make good-faith payments consistent with the 
plan. (Item 5 at 43) 
 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
  
 Currently, Applicant owes approximately $4,000 in delinquent state income taxes for 
tax years 2012 and 2013, as alleged in subparagraph 1.c. (Item 2 at 2) As of at least 
February 2015, he has been paying the state revenue authority, per an agreement, $232 
each month. (Item 11) 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d alleges a delinquency for $30,680 of dental work. Applicant 
denies this debt, and contends that all of his dental bills were paid upon the completion of 
the dental work. (Item 2 at 2) Applicant’s dentist is retired. The dentist who purchased the 
practice researched Applicant’s account and confirmed that he owed no money. (Item 2 at 
4) 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e through 1.j are miscellaneous judgments entered against 
Applicant in favor of various creditors, totaling approximately $16,000. (Item 4 at 3; Item 8-
10) They remain outstanding. 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
4 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . . .  
 
 Applicant’s delinquencies trigger the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” 
and AG ¶ 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.”  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
5 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant has been satisfying the state income tax delinquency, alleged in 
subparagraph 1.c, through a payment plan since early 2015. AG ¶ 20(g) applies. He 
provided documented proof supporting his dispute of the dental bill alleged in 
subparagraph 1.d. AG ¶ 20(e) applies. Consequently, I resolve subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d 
in Applicant’s favor. As for the remaining delinquencies, Applicant failed to provide any 
documentary evidence about their current status, and he did not explain why he did not 
comply with the Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. None of the remaining mitigating conditions 
applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Given Applicant’s history of financial problems, his recent failure to follow through on 
a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan, and the amount of debt that remains outstanding, I conclude 
that he has failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concern. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings f or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.c – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the security interests of the United States to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
