 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-03613 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 23, 2016. On 
April 17, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. The changes resulting 
from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 2, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 22, 2017, and 
the case was assigned to me on August 3, 2017. On August 15, 2017, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
September 12, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but did not 
present the testimony of any other witnesses or submit any documentary evidence. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 21, 2017. 
 
I kept the record open until October 12, 2017, to enable Applicant to submit 
documentary evidence.2 At his request, I extended the deadline for submitting 
documentary evidence until November 10, 2017. I extended the deadline again when he 
was unable to transmit some of his documents electronically. He submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX A through O) by alternate means, and the record closed on December 5, 
2017, upon receipt of AX P (a state tax account statement), AX Q (a receipt for $203.18), 
and R (a statement from his ex-wife), which were transmitted electronically.  
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.d, 1.h-1.o, and 2.a(i)-2.a(iv). He denied the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.c, 1.e-1.g, and 1.p, 
His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old senior engineer employed by defense contractors since 
February 2014. He was previously employed by defense contractors from June 2001 to 
May 2013. He was unemployed from May 2013 to February 2014. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Army from October 1997 to July 2001 and was honorably discharged. He 
attended college part time and online, and he received a bachelor’s degree in October 
2007. He testified that he first received a security clearance in 1997. His clearance lapsed 
when it was not revalidated in 2013. (Tr. 25.)  
 
 Applicant married in October 2011 and divorced in May 2017. (Tr. 23.) He has 
three children from previous relationships, an 18-year-old and twins who are 13 years old. 
He is obligated to pay child support of $599 per month. (GX 2 at 8.) 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began when he was notified in 2011 that he had a 
son from a previous relationship. He initially denied paternity, but it was established by 
DNA testing, and a child-support arrearage was computed retroactively back to the date 
                                                          
2 On September 7, 2017, Applicant requested that his hearing be postponed because a character witness 
was not available on September 13, 2017, the scheduled hearing date, and he had not had sufficient time 
to gather documentary evidence. I denied his request to postpone the hearing, but I informed him that I 
would give him additional time after the hearing to gather and submit documentary evidence. (Hearing 
Exhibit (HX) I.) 
 
3 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
of the child’s birth. The arrearage initially was about $4,000-$5,000. (GX 2 at 12.) An April 
2016 credit report reflected that the child-support payments were past due for $7,762. 
(GX 4 at 4.) However, this credit report is contradicted by state child-support records 
reflecting that his arrearage in February 2016 was about $2,058, and child-support 
records reflecting that he had made timely $599 payments since at least September 2015 
and that his past-due debt as of October 2, 2017 was $0. His child-support payments are 
current. (AX B and C.) The child support arrearage is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e 
 
Applicant testified that he was certain that he would receive a federal tax refund 
for 2011, but his accountant advised him not to file his federal tax returns, because the 
refunds would be seized to satisfy the child-support arrearage. (Tr. 35-36.) He did not 
timely file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2011 through 2014. His 
tax problems were exacerbated when he withdrew funds from his retirement account to 
support himself during his unemployment in 2013 and 2014 and incurred a federal tax 
liability of about $55,000. He filed his past-due federal returns in April and May 2015. (AX 
J through M.) In a personal subject interview (PSI) in July 2016, he told an investigator 
that his federal tax debt was resolved by applying his tax refunds. He timely filed his 
returns for 2015 and 2016. (AX N and O.) His failures to timely file his federal and state 
income tax returns are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
 
Applicant also owed state income taxes of about $2,200 as of the date of the SOR. 
In the July 2016 PSI, he told the investigator that he made a payment agreement in the 
fall of 2015 providing for monthly payments of $300, but he could not afford the payments 
at that time. (GX 2 at 11-12.) The state tax debt has since been paid. (AX P.) The state 
tax debt is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
 In addition to Applicant’s tax delinquencies and child-support arrearage, the SOR 
alleges 12 delinquent consumer debts and medical debts. The evidence concerning these 
debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: judgment for $3,184, filed in June 2013 for delinquent credit-card 
account. Applicant testified that the underlying debt (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i) arose when 
his ex-wife opened an account in his name without his knowledge. His ex-wife submitted 
a statement acknowledging that she opened four accounts in his name and without his 
knowledge, but her statement did not include this debt. (AX R.)The debt was collected by 
garnishment of his pay at the rate of $600 per month, and it was satisfied in October 2017. 
(Tr. 47-48, 51; AX D and E.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: credit-card account placed for collection of $5,224. Applicant 
testified that his ex-wife opened this account in his name without his knowledge, and his 
ex-wife submitted a statement corroborating his testimony. (Tr. 52; AX R.) In December 
2015, the creditor cancelled the debt and issued an IRS Form 1099-C. (AX I.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: credit-card account charged off for $1,799. Applicant testified that 
this was another account opened by Applicant’s ex-wife without his knowledge, and his 
wife corroborated his testimony. (Tr. 53-54; AX R.)  
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: delinquent loan for motorcycle purchase charged off for $76. 
Applicant testified that this debt arose when he financed the purchase of a motorcycle 
that was stolen and wrecked. He testified that the insurance company paid off the loan, 
and he did not know why a deficiency of $76 is reflected in his credit reports. He has not 
disputed the accuracy of his credit reports regarding this debt. He testified that he 
received an IRS 1099-C for the $76. (Tr. 55-56.) He did not submit a copy of the IRS 
1099-C, and none of the tax returns and tax return transcripts that he submitted after the 
hearing reflect that this debt was reported to the IRS as a cancelled debt. (AX J-O.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i: credit-card account past due for $861, with a total balance of 
$3,184. This debt is included in the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j: charge account placed for collection of $584. Applicant testified that 
he had been unable to identify this debt, and he was unaware of it until he saw the January 
2017 credit report. (Tr. 57-58.) His ex-wife submitted a statement after the hearing, 
admitting that she incurred this debt in Applicant’s name and without his knowledge. (AX 
R.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.k-1.o: medical debts placed for collection of $203, $92, $69. $60, 
and $30. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k-1.m have been paid. (AX F, G, H, and Q.) 
Applicant been unable to identify the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.o. (Tr. 60-63.) 
The small amounts of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.o make them minimally 
significant as security concerns. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.p: delinquent cellphone bill for $2,151. Applicant testified that this debt 
was for his ex-wife’s cellphone. (Tr. 64.) She admitted that she incurred the debt in 
Applicant’s name without his knowledge. (AX R.)  
 
 Applicant testified that he currently earns about $97,000 per year, and his monthly 
take-home pay is about $4,600. (Tr. 28-29.) He depleted his retirement account while he 
was unemployed. (Tr. 29.) His father has cancer, is disabled, and lives with him. (AX A.) 
He testified that he lives paycheck to paycheck, with no more than about $200 left after 
paying his mortgage, car payment, and living expenses. (Tr. 32.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in March 2016, he answered “No” to a question 
asking if, in the past seven years, he had been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to 
appear in court in a criminal proceeding against him. He also answered “No” to a question 
whether he had been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal, or any other type of 
law enforcement official. An FBI Criminal History Report (GX 5) reflects the following 
arrests and their disposition:  
 
 Arrest in March 2012 for assault and found not guilty;  
 
 Arrest in June 2013 for destruction of property and violating a protective order, 
disposed of by nolle prosequi; and 
 
 
5 
 
 Arrest in July 2013 for assault on a family member and violating a protective order, 
disposed of by nolle prosequi.  
 
The March 2012 arrest arose from an altercation on a golf course in which 
Applicant intervened to separate the parties. He learned that a complaint had been filed 
against him when the police stopped him for a stop-sign violation, discovered an 
outstanding warrant for his arrest, and took him to the police station where he was 
processed and released on his own recognizance. At his trial, he was found not guilty. 
(GX 2 at 9.) 
 
The arrest in June 2013 occurred when his then estranged wife called the police 
after she learned that Applicant had visited the marital home while she was away. The 
July 2013 arrest occurred after Applicant and his estranged wife had an argument and 
she accused him of assaulting her. In both instances, Applicant appeared in court, his 
estranged wife failed to appear, and the prosecutor filed a nolle prosequi. (GX 2 at 9-10.) 
 
Applicant testified that he did not disclose his arrests in his SCA because he was 
confused about the difference between arrests and convictions and the accusations on 
which they were based were false and did not result in convictions.4 He testified that he 
told an investigator about the arrests during the PSI and he disclosed the underlying 
details of each arrest. (Tr. 20-21, 66-67.) The summary of the PSI states, “Subject 
confirmed that in the last seven years he has not been issued a summons, citation, or 
ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against him; has not been arrested by 
any police officer, sheriff, marshal or any other type of law enforcement official, and has 
not been charged, convicted, or sentenced of a crime in any court.” The summary also 
states that Applicant provided details about his arrests after he was confronted with his 
arrest record. (GX 2 at 9.) 
  
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
                                                          
4 Applicant also testified that he was given only two days to complete his SCA and did not have sufficient 
time to review his credit report and gather information. (Tr. 19.) However, the SOR does not allege a 
deliberate failure to disclose delinquent debts.  
 
6 
 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant also “has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his 
security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
7 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is included in the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the 
duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-
04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I have 
resolved SOR ¶ 1.i in Applicant’s favor.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions, his testimony, and the documentary evidence submitted 
at the hearing establish the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 
19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless 
of the ability to do so”); AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”); and 
AG ¶ 19(f) (“failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s unemployment from May 2013 to 
February 2014, his ex-wife’s fraudulent conduct by opening accounts in his name and 
without his knowledge, the theft and destruction of his motorcycle, and his marital breakup 
were conditions beyond his control. If, as Applicant testified, he received bad advice from 
his accountant about his obligation to timely file his tax returns, the bad tax advice also 
would be a condition largely beyond his control. However, he has not acted responsibly 
regarding some of his financial obligations. His child-support arrearage was resolved by 
involuntary seizure of his tax refunds. The judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was satisfied 
by involuntary garnishment. He claimed that the debt alleged in SOR 1.h was cancelled 
by the creditor, but he submitted no documentary evidence to support his claim. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant submitted no evidence of financial 
counseling. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the state tax debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and medical 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k-1.m. It is not established for the other debts alleged in the 
SOR. The judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d and the child-support arrearage alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.e were resolved by involuntary collection methods that do not constitute a “good-faith 
effort” within the meaning of this mitigating condition. See ISCR Case No. 09-05700 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 24, 2011), citing ISCR Case No. 08-06058 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009). 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is partially established. Applicant claimed that the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.g, 1.j, and 1.p were fraudulently opened by his ex-wife, and he provided 
documentary evidence (AX R) to support his claim. Actual fraud, established by 
substantial evidence, may be mitigating in appropriate circumstances. ISCR Case No. 
10-02803 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2012.)  
 
 AG ¶ 20(g) is established for the past-due federal income tax returns.  Applicant 
submitted no documentary evidence that the past-due state income tax returns have been 
filed, but he presented evidence that his state tax liability has been satisfied. However, 
Applicant’s eventual compliance with his federal and state income tax obligations does 
 
9 
 
not end the inquiry. A security clearance adjudication is not a tax-enforcement procedure. 
It is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. The fact that 
Applicant has filed his past-due returns “does not preclude careful consideration of 
Applicant’s security worthiness based on longstanding prior behavior evidencing 
irresponsibility.” ISCR Case No. 12-05053 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014). Furthermore, the 
establishment of some mitigating evidence does not compel a favorable security-
clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 11-14784 (App. Bd. Jan. 17, 2014).  
 
In this case, Applicant’s deliberate failure to file his income tax returns was 
intended to prevent collection of a child-support arrearage, and it covered four 
consecutive years. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does 
not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of those 
granted access to classified information. ISCR Case No. 15-00216 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 
2016), citing Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 
183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961) 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition is AG ¶ 16(a): 
 
[D]eliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant “admitted” the allegations of falsifying his SCA in his answer to the SOR, 
but he denied that his responses were deliberately false. Instead, he claimed that he 
misunderstood the questions. At the hearing, he testified that he was confused about the 
difference between an arrest and a conviction, that the accusations on which his arrests 
were based were false, and that they did not result in convictions. I have construed his 
explanations as denying the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a(i) through 2.a(iv).  
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has 
the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
 
10 
 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s level of education and experience are relevant 
to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on a security clearance 
application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult. He has held a security clearance for 
about 20 years and is familiar with the security clearance process. He clearly remembered 
the details of his arrests during the PSI and at the hearing. He understandably believed 
that the arrests were unfair and unfounded. However, his explanation for not disclosing 
them in his SCA was not plausible or persuasive in light of his background and 
experience. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(b): the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. Applicant did not correct the omission until he was 
confronted with the evidence of his arrest record during the July 2016 PSI. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s falsification was not “minor,” because it 
undermined the integrity of the security clearance process. It was recent, and it did not 
occur under unique circumstances. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
 
11 
 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).5  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his failures to timely file his federal and state tax returns, his delinquent 
debts, and his lack of candor when he submitted his SCA. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.g:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.p:    For Applicant 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a(i)-2.a(iv):   Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
5 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
