 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 16-03909 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. She has not mitigated 
concerns raised by her unresolved delinquent debt. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 11, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a 
security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative 
determination. On June 26, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant the 
Government’s written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM), which 
contained six Items. Applicant received the FORM on August 23, 2017. Applicant did 
not respond to the FORM.  
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and has been employed by a Federal contractor since 
2015. (Item 2) She attended college for a short time in 2010-2011, but did not obtain a 
degree. As of 2013, she divorced and has three children. In 2015, she was discharged 
from the U.S. Air Force for medical reasons after serving more than ten years of active 
duty. She wrote “other than honorable” on her SF-86, but disputed that during an 
interview. (Item 3). She admits and her credit report shows 14 collection accounts and a 
judgment for a total of about $20,000. (Items 4 through 6) Although Applicant denied or 
disputed five allegations on the SOR, she provided no reason.  Applicant has not 
provided proof of satisfaction of the judgment, nor payments toward her collection 
accounts. She held a security clearance while in the military. Applicant completed her 
security clearance application in October 2015, disclosing that she had financial 
difficulties. (Item 2)  
 
 Applicant’s explanation on her security clearance application for her financial 
difficulties was a recent divorce. She provided no details except, that she needed to 
take better care of her finances. During her 2016 background interview, she noted that 
she was financially irresponsible and was overspending. She intends to pay her debts 
and stated that she will work with creditors. She also stated that since 2015, she has 
been working with a credit repair service, but provided no documentation to substantiate 
her claim. Applicant provided no documentary evidence to support any payments or 
approved payment plans to address or resolve her delinquent debts. The record 
provides no information concerning her financial status, counseling, or character 
information. 
 
  Applicant’s current financial status is not known, as she provided no information. 
She referred to a recent divorce, but provided no nexus to the delinquent accounts that 
occurred before the divorce or how the divorce may have affected her finances. She did 
not report any financial counseling or present a budget. She intends to pay the 
delinquent debts, but she did not have a definite plan. (Item 3) She did not respond to 
the FORM to supplement the record. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s finances remain a source of concern. Failure to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet  financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.2 Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports establish the 
Government’s prima facie case that Applicant has a history of not meeting her financial 
obligations, and that she has an inability to do so.3 Applicant presented no evidence to 
extenuate or mitigate the concerns about her plans to resolve the issues by working 
with a collection company. She chose not to file for bankruptcy. A promise to pay in the 
future is not enough to mitigate the financial concerns. Applicant’s financial problems 
are ongoing and were perhaps caused by events beyond her control, but she has not 
shown that she acted responsibly.  Although Applicant has expressed a desire to repay 
her creditors, the alleged delinquent accounts remain unresolved and Applicant did not 
present a plan for resolving them.4  
  
After a review of the record and a consideration of the whole-person factors at 
AG ¶ 2(d), I conclude that Applicant’s financial problems render her unsuitable for 
access to classified information at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the type of financial stability 
necessary to reapply for national security eligibility in the future.  The award of a 
security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the 
factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. While a favorable 
decision is not warranted at this time, she may present persuasive evidence of financial 
rehabilitation and reform in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 AG ¶ (18). 
 
3 AG ¶¶ 19(a),(c). 
 
4 AG ¶¶ 20(b), (c), (d), and (e) do not apply. 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
