 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01989 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq. 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant experienced 
a number of unrelated life events that had unexpected financial consequences. The 
events do not indicate a pattern of reckless or irresponsible behavior or bad judgment. 
Applicant has resolved all but one of the alleged debts. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case  
 
On July 22, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke his security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On May 22, 2017, I 
issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
                                                          
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses, and the parties 
complied.2 At the hearing, convened on June 20, 2017, I admitted Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 28, 2017. After the hearing, Applicant timely 
submitted AE G through M, without objection. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has worked for a federal contractor since 2002. He was initially granted 
a security clearance during his military service. In 2007, Applicant began working on an 
overseas contract. For the last 10 years, he has worked and lived abroad. Applicant’s 
wife of 21 years and their five children reside in the United States. Applicant’s wife 
manages the household finances in Applicant’s absence.3  
 
Applicant completed his most recent security clearance application in October 
2014, disclosing one disputed derogatory account. The ensuing investigation revealed a 
number of delinquent accounts including a state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.a), a delinquent child 
support enforcement account (SOR ¶ 1.d), a delinquent mortgage loan (SOR ¶ 1.l), a 
discharged Chapter 7 petition (SOR  ¶ 1.m), and nine other delinquent accounts (SOR 
¶¶ 1.b, 1.e – 1.k). Initially, Applicant denied knowledge of or responsibility for the debts. 
However, the record establishes that Applicant and his wife experienced a series of life 
events that had unexpected financial consequences.4  
 
In 2000, Applicant’s father-in-law was diagnosed with a terminal illness. Applicant 
decided to leave active duty service and work part-time to help care for him and support 
his wife.  During his father-in-law’s illness, Applicant and his wife guaranteed some of 
her father’s financial obligations. At the time, Applicant and his wife were in their mid-
twenties and living within their means. After Applicant’s father-in-law died, the couple 
realized they could not afford to pay the accounts they guaranteed along with those of 
their large family. After consulting an attorney, the couple decided to file for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy protection in September 2001, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. The petition was 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order and the discovery letter are appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I and II, respectively.  
 
3 GE 1; Tr. 24, 79-81. 
 
4 GE 1; Answer.  
 
3 
 
successfully discharged in January 2002. Applicant returned to full-time employment 
with a federal contracting company. The family recovered financially and lived within 
their means. They did not experience any financial issues for the next seven years.5  
 
In 2002, Applicant and his wife purchased their first home with a conventional 30-
year mortgage. In 2005, they refinanced the home. The couple did not realize that the 
refinanced mortgage was an interest-only loan originated by a sub-prime lender. In 
2008, the mortgage payment adjusted from $3,600 to $5,800, which they could not 
afford. They applied for, but did not qualify for the home affordable refinance program 
(HARP). Applicant’s wife hired an attorney in 2009 to negotiate a short sale of the 
property. As a show of good faith during the negotiation process, she continued to pay 
the original $3,600 mortgage payment. Despite ongoing negotiations between the 
mortgage company and Applicant’s counsel, the mortgage company foreclosed on the 
home in December 2010. In 2013, their state’s attorney general joined a multi-state, 
class-action lawsuit against the lender, alleging misconduct in the origination and 
servicing of loans. Applicant and his wife were included in the class. In December 2013, 
the mortgage company settled the case. The couple received a cash settlement from 
the mortgage company in 2014.6 
 
The credit report in the record erroneously reports the account as being 120 days 
past due in October 2014. However, in December 2010 the mortgage company 
cancelled the deficiency balance on the home.7  
 
Also, in 2008, the state’s department of child support services initiated an 
enforcement action against Applicant. In 2005, Applicant paid off the balance of an 
$8,800 child support arrearage stemming from a 1997 order for a child from a previous 
relationship. He received a letter from the state, dated February 24, 2005, indicating that 
the account was paid in full. Three years later, the state assessed previously uncharged 
interest on the full $8,800 arrearage amount. Applicant spent the next eight years 
disputing the debt, arguing the legality of an interest assessment on a satisfied account. 
He consulted attorneys and reached out to his state-level representatives. Applicant’s 
protests did not yield any results. Although he continues to dispute the legitimacy of the 
interest assessment, he began making payments on the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d 
by payroll deduction in fall 2016.8  
 
 In 2011, the state’s tax board executed two tax liens against Applicant after he 
failed to file state income tax returns for the 2007 through 2009 tax years. The state 
assessed the tax based on Applicant’s W-2 income for those years. Applicant, who 
began working and living abroad in 2007, misunderstood the filing requirement for state 
residents working abroad. In November 2014, Applicant filed the outstanding state 
                                                          
5 Tr. 26-29, 91-93, 119-120; GE 5. 
 
6 Tr. 30-33, 94, 107-117. 
 
7 AE D.  
 
8 Tr. 40, 74, 110, 117-119; Answer; AE J.  
 
4 
 
income tax returns. He did not owe any state taxes for that period. The state released 
both liens in March 2015 and February 2016, respectively. The tax lien alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.a is resolved.9  
 
 In December 2015, Applicant and his wife unexpectedly lost their son. He was 19 
years old. Applicant’s wife became severely depressed. She stopped working, allowing 
her professional certification to lapse. She stopped tending to the household finances, 
resulting in the delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b (credit card) and 1.f – 1.k 
(medical accounts). Neither his wife, nor the other children in the household told 
Applicant about her crippling grief and depression. He did not learn about the severity of 
his wife’s depression and its impact on their finances until his wife testified at the 
hearing. She credits a conversation with her younger son’s therapist for pushing her into 
action. She started to take steps to restore a sense of normalcy to the family. She 
returned to work and began to address the delinquent accounts.10 
 
To date, Applicant and his wife have resolved the delinquent accounts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, and 1.g – 1.k. Their cell phone account is in good standing (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
The couple is disputing the credit card account alleged in SOR ¶1.e as being a 
fraudulent account. Frustrated with the response from the credit card company, 
Applicant and his wife have filed a complaint against the creditor with their state’s 
attorney general and plan to file a small claims action against the creditor to resolve the 
issue. Only one account alleged in the SOR remains unresolved, a medical account for 
the couple’s deceased son (SOR ¶ 1.f), which the couple believes should have been 
covered by their medical insurance.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
9 Tr. 66-72, 19-20, 127; AE A. 
 
10 Tr. 120-127.  
 
11 Tr. 34-40, 46-48, 99-105; GE 4; AE B-C, E-F, H-I. 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to meet one’s financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.12 The record is sufficient to establish the government’s prima 
facie case that Applicant has a history of not meeting financial obligations and that he 
failed to timely file his state income tax returns as required between 2007 and 2009. 
However, Applicant submitted sufficient information to mitigate the alleged security 
concerns.  
 
The financial issues Applicant has experienced were not caused by reckless or 
irresponsible behavior, but a series of unrelated life events that had unexpected, 
adverse impact on Applicant’s finances. The majority of these events, his father-in-law’s 
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
illness; the foreclosure on his home; and the death of his son – were events beyond his 
control. In each instance, he acted responsibly under the circumstances.13  
 
Applicant’s decision to file for bankruptcy protection in 2001 was reasonable as 
he and his wife recovered from the emotional and financial toll of caring for a dying 
parent. Accordingly, the 2001 bankruptcy, which occurred over 15 years ago, does not 
reflect negatively Applicant’s current security worthiness. When confronted, in 2008, 
with the an adjusted mortgage payment they could not afford, Applicant’s wife retained 
counsel to help resolve the situation, but the lender acted improperly, foreclosing on the 
property during the short sale negotiation and as the couple continued to make partial 
payments on the mortgage. The most recent delinquent accounts occurred after the 
death of Applicant’s teenaged son. He was unaware that his wife became temporarily 
unable to manage the finances as she had done for years without issue. Upon learning 
of the delinquent accounts, Applicant paid them.  
 
Applicant has demonstrated a track record of debt repayment. Applicant has also 
demonstrated that he initiated and has adhered to a good-faith effort to repay his 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.14 Applicant has resolved the delinquent debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.c, and 1.g – 1.k. He has entered into a payment plan for the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.d, despite having a reasonable basis to dispute the account. He has also 
established a reasonable basis for disputing SOR ¶ 1.e, a credit card account, and has 
provided documented evidence of actions to resolve the issue.15  
 
Applicant’s failure to timely file his state income tax returns was not a result of 
avoidant behavior, but a misunderstanding of the filing requirement for state residents 
working abroad during the tax year. Applicant contacted the state authority, filed his tax 
returns, without any outstanding liability, resolving the issue alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, two 
years before the SOR was issued.16 He has since complied with the state’s filing 
requirements.  
  
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s continued access 
to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Although Applicant has experienced some financial 
problems, he has not engaged in any conduct that suggests an inability to properly 
handle and safeguard classified information. 
 
 
 
  
  
                                                          
13 AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
14 AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
15 AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
16 AG ¶ 20(g).  
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
