 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02617 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of alcohol-related arrests and delinquent Federal tax debts. 
He mitigated the resulting financial and alcohol security concerns, but failed to mitigate 
the criminal conduct security concerns. National security eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On March 10, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86). 
On October 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective 
 
 
 
 
2 
within the DoD after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented 
and are effective for decisions issued after that date. 1 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 16, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on May 16, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on May 16, 2017, setting the hearing for June 29, 2017.  Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence. Applicant testified, and 
offered Exhibits (AE) A through E into evidence. All exhibits were admitted.2 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 10, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and divorced since 2009. He has a teenage child from 
that marriage. He graduated from high school and attended college for a semester. He 
started working for defense contractors in 2003 and obtained a secret security clearance 
in 2006. He worked in Iraq from November 2008 to April 2009. He has received 
promotions during his employment and completed training programs. He is a baseball 
coach for his son’s team (Tr. 19-26; GE 2; AE E.) 
 
 Applicant admitted his history of criminal arrests and charges as alleged in the 
SOR. In September and November 1991, he was arrested and charged with driving under 
the influence (DUI), both misdemeanors. He was convicted and placed on probation for 
one year after each conviction. He was 19 years old. He admitted that he made poor 
decisions relating to drinking and driving. (Tr. 28-29.) In August 1995, he was arrested 
after he was stopped by a police officer for not having an inspection vehicle sticker. At the 
time, there was an outstanding warrant for his arrest because he failed to attend a 
mandated check writing class after he wrote a worthless check in 1994. In October 1995, 
he was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana under 2 ounces, a 
misdemeanor. He said he has not used marijuana since then. (Tr. 29-30; GE 2.) 
 
 Between 1998 and 2000, Applicant worked for a country club and supervised a 
service team. He again worked for that club from 2002 to 2003, at which time he was 
terminated for consuming alcohol on the job.3 (Tr.  26-27, 39; GE 4.) 
 
 In May 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with two counts of DUI with child 
under 15 years of age, both felonies. One count was dismissed. His blood alcohol content 
(BAC) was 0.258 at the time of the arrest. When he was arrested, his six-year-old son 
                                            
1I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
2 Applicant made several corrections to information contained in GE 2, which is the summary of his personal 
interview in November 2015 and February 2016. Department Counsel did not object to any of the 
corrections. (Tr. 12-15.) 
3According to Applicant’s 2004 SF 86, he worked for this country club from 2002 to 2003, and 1998 to 2000. 
His testimony noted that he worked there from 2001 to 2002, which is a minor inconsistency. (Tr. 26; GE 
5.)   
 
 
 
 
3 
was in the car. In December 2010, he was convicted and sentenced to eight years of 
confinement, with eight years suspended, and eight years of probation. His supervised 
probation will end in December 2018. He completed an alcohol impact program; a life 
skills program; participated in about 10 Alcohol Anonymous (AA) meetings; and 
performed between 160 and 200 community service hours, as ordered by the court. (Tr. 
31-34, 41; GE 2.) 
 
 Applicant was also ordered to have an ignition interlock device installed on his 
automobile in January 2011. In March 2011, he began wearing an ankle monitor after he 
disclosed that he consumed alcohol earlier. Between September 2011 and June 2012, 
the ignition interlock device registered eight positive readings. (Tr. 33-38, 40; GE 2.) In 
July 2012, he was arrested because of the positive readings.4 That charge was not 
prosecuted. Both the ankle monitor and interlock device were removed in March 2015. 
He is current with all probation requirements and court fees. (Tr. 40-42.) 
 
 Applicant attended an alcohol and drug outpatient treatment program from May to 
September 2011. During that program he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. Since 
completing the program, he occasional attends AA meetings, including about six weeks 
before the hearing. He stated that the last time he consumed alcohol was in March 2011. 
Neither he nor his girlfriend drink alcohol. (Tr. 42-46; 56.)   
 
 Applicant admitted that he did not timely file or pay his Federal taxes for 2009, 
2010, and 2011.5 He attributed the delay to his 2009 divorce and subsequent personal 
issues that arose. In October 2014, he sought assistance from an accountant and asked 
him to prepare his Federal taxes for years 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. (Tr. 50.)  
  
 Subsequently, Applicant filed his 2009 Federal taxes in December 2014 and his 
2010 Federal taxes in January 2015. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a substitute 
tax form for his 2011 Federal taxes in June 2014. The IRS assessed a delinquent liability 
of $3,214 for 2009; $3,927 for 2010; and $2,230 for 2011. In April 2015, he established a 
monthly installment agreement with the IRS to pay his delinquent taxes which totaled 
$9,372 for those years. He submitted evidence that as of May 2017, his outstanding 
balance is about $4,400. He is in compliance with that agreement. He does not owe taxes 
for any year subsequent to 2011 and all tax returns have been timely filed. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a budget. His net total monthly income is about $3,800. After 
paying expenses, including $250 to the IRS and $70 to the probation department, he has 
$260 remaining at the end of the month. (Tr. 52; AE C.) 
 
 Applicant submitted three character references. A retired Army officer who is also 
Applicant’s co-worker considers Applicant a trustworthy person and citizen. Two other 
                                            
4Applicant stated that the interlocking device had been malfunctioning. (GE 2.) 
5 The SOR did not allege that Applicant failed to timely file his 2009, 2010, and 2011 Federal tax returns. 
Hence, that negative information will not be considered in analyzing disqualifying conditions. It may be 
considered in the analysis of mitigating conditions and whole person. 
 
 
 
 
4 
retired soldiers, who have known and worked with Applicant for many years, stated that 
Applicant is a good father and would not jeopardize national security. All of them 
recommend that he receive a security clearance. (AE B.) 
 
 Applicant testified credibly. He admitted that he made many mistakes in his past 
life, but has changed over the years. His supervisor is aware of this proceeding. (Tr. 61-
62.) During a November 2015 interview, he acknowledged that alcohol has had a negative 
effect in his life, including in his relationships and with his child. It has caused him legal 
and financial problems. He recognized his irresponsible behavior involving alcohol abuse. 
(GE 5.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
 
 
 
5 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern related to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 lists five conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following three are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant has a history of criminal conduct, which includes arrests, charges, and 
convictions that began in 1991 when he was 19 years old and continued into 2012. Those 
charges include misdemeanors and felonies involving marijuana, alcohol, and other 
violations. He remains on probation until December 2018. These facts establish prima 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
 
AG ¶ 32 describes conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under this guideline. The following two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
 
 
 
 
6 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 The last time Applicant engaged in serious criminal activity occurred in May 2010, 
when he was charged with a DUI felony, while his young son was present. The last time 
he was arrested was in 2012 after his interlocking device registered the presence of 
alcohol in his car. However, that charge was not prosecuted. The passage of five years 
without evidence of additional criminal behavior, Applicant’s compliance with most terms 
of his criminal probation, and a good employment record establish some evidence of 
rehabilitation under AG ¶ 32(a) and AG ¶ 32(d). However, he remains on supervised 
probation for another year.  
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following four may potentially apply:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or jeopardizing the 
welfare and safety of others, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 Applicant was convicted of three DUIs, two misdemeanors and one felony with his 
young son in the car. He was terminated from an employment position after he consumed 
alcohol while at work. At the time of the DUI arrests, he was inebriated and over the legal 
limit for driving. He was diagnosed by a mental health care professional as alcohol 
dependent, which is an alcohol use disorder. The evidence established the above four 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this 
guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 Applicant testified that the last time he consumed alcohol was in March 2011. He 
acknowledged his problems with alcohol and demonstrated a six-year period of sobriety 
without a relapse. He occasionally attends AA. There is evidence to establish mitigation 
under AG ¶¶ 23(a), (b) and (c). There is insufficient evidence to establish full mitigation 
under AG ¶ 23(d), as the record contains limited information about the outpatient alcohol 
program he completed, the diagnosis he received, or treatment recommendations for 
aftercare. 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
 
 
 
8 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant failed to pay Federal taxes for years 2009, 2010, and 2011. He did not 
begin to resolve them until April 2015. The evidence established the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 The guideline includes a condition in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged tax difficulties:  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Between December 2014 and January 2015, Applicant filed his delinquent Federal 
tax returns. In April 2015, he established an installment payment agreement with the IRS. 
At that time, he had an unpaid liability of $9,372. As of May 2017, his balance was about 
$4,400. For the past two years he has complied with the installment agreement, making 
a good-faith effort to abide by his commitments. He timely filed and resolved taxes for all 
years subsequent to 2011. There is sufficient evidence to establish mitigation under AG 
¶ 20(g).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
 
 
 
9 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult and 
is accountable for the decisions that lead to his history of criminal conduct, alcohol-related 
incidents, tax issues, and the resulting security concerns. He credibly accepted 
responsibility for his conduct. For the past six years, he has established a pattern of 
sobriety to address his alcohol issues and making payments to the IRS on his delinquent 
tax obligation. The evidence indicates that he will continue to remain sober and fulfill his 
tax obligations. Those are positive factors in this case. He has also completed most of 
the court-ordered terms of his criminal probation. Those actions are also positive facts. 
While fully recognizing Applicant’s actions to date, they do not sufficiently outweigh the 
fact that the court ordered him to serve an eight-year probation in place of a jail sentence 
for a felony conviction, and that he remains on probation for another year. The sentence 
for his third DUI emphasized the seriousness of his past behaviors and the court’s 
concern that similar conduct does not recur. Given that, there is insufficient evidence to 
fully mitigate the criminal conduct security concerns and my concerns as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
       Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:      Against Applicant 
         
  Paragraph 2, Guideline G:      FOR APPLICANT 
   
        Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d:      For Applicant  
 
  Paragraph3, Guideline f:      FOR APPLICANT 
   
        Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.e:       For Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
