 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-03057 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Rocco Columbus, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on June 28, 2013. On 
November 17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.1  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 17, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. She denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.h, but she did not 
expressly admit or deny any of the other allegations. Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed on March 29, 2017, and the case was assigned to an administrative judge on 
May 12, 2017, and scheduled for hearing on August 1, 2017. The hearing was postponed 
when Applicant retained counsel, and it was reassigned to me on August 9, 2017. On 
August 15, 2017, DOHA notified Applicant that the hearing was rescheduled for 
September 13, 2017. I conducted the hearing as rescheduled. Department Counsel 
submitted Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX A), which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on September 22, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old program director employed by a defense contractor 
since November 2015. (Tr. 12.) She has worked for defense contractors since December 
1997. She married in September 1982, divorced in March 2002, and married again in 
April 2002. She and her second husband separated in December 2010 and reconciled in 
the fall of 2013. (Tr. 15, 23-24.) Her second husband has been disabled and unable to 
work since 2007. She has held a security clearance for about 30 years. (Tr. 13. 
 
 Applicant and her first husband filed a petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
November 1999 and received a discharge in April 2002 after completing the payment 
plan. The record does not reflect the nature, number, or value of the debts that were 
resolved under the bankruptcy plan. The bankruptcy was caused by a failed business 
venture. Applicant’s then husband and a former employer started a heating and air 
conditioning company, and Applicant’s husband agreed to take a substantial pay cut and 
forego overtime pay. The business failed after about a year, leaving her husband 
unemployed. The bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
 The SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.j reflects nine delinquent accounts that are reflected in credit 
reports from July 2013, April 2015, and March 2017. (GX 3, 4, and 5.) The evidence 
concerning these debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: second mortgage on marital home, charged off for $102,635. 
Applicant’s name was not on the first mortgage for the marital home, but she was included 
in a second mortgage. The first mortgage was foreclosed in 2010, after her husband was 
laid off in 2006 and they fell behind on the loan payments. Her husband has been disabled 
and unable to work since 2007. Applicant disagreed with her husband’s decision to allow 
foreclosure instead of trying to renegotiate the terms of the mortgage loan, but her 
husband prevailed. (Tr. 35.) The foreclosure sale was sufficient to pay off the balance on 
the first mortgage loan, but not the second mortgage loan, on which Applicant was a co-
debtor. In a personal subject interview (PSI) in August 2013, Applicant told a security 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to other documents in the record. 
 
3 
 
investigator that she believed the debt was paid because her online statement reflects 
that it was paid. (AX A at 4.) However, the credit reports from July 2013 and April 2015 
reflect that it was charged off. (GX 4 at 1; GX 5 at 11.) It apparently has “aged off” and is 
not reflected in the March 2017 credit report.3 (GX 3.) Applicant testified that she has not 
been contacted by the lender or any collection agencies about this debt. (Tr. 17.) She has 
not contacted the lender or attempted to make any payment arrangement for the debt. 
(Tr. 34.) It is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: deficiency after repossession of recreational vehicle, referred for 
collection of $25,423. Applicant and her second husband purchased the vehicle but 
could not afford the payments after her husband was laid off. They surrendered the 
vehicle rather than have it involuntarily repossessed. In the August 2013 PSI, Applicant 
stated that she intended to resolve the debt after negotiations by a credit-counseling 
service were completed. (AX A at 4.) At the hearing, she testified that she has not been 
contacted by the creditor or any collection agency about this debt. (Tr. 20.) She has not 
attempted to contact the creditor or make a payment arrangement. (Tr. 36.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f: delinquent credit-card accounts, one charged off for 
$18,261 and another referred for collection of $5,062; and a cellphone account 
referred for collection of $1,236. After Applicant and her husband separated in 2010, 
the separation agreement did not allocate responsibility for marital debts, but they 
informally agreed that each would pay some of the joint debts. Her husband agreed to 
resolve these three debts, but he reneged on the agreement. (Tr. 38.) She testified that 
she worked with two credit-counseling companies, who were not helpful, but she has 
never contacted these three creditors or attempted to make payment arrangements. Tr. 
40-41.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: medical bill, referred for collection of $527. Applicant testified that 
she has not tried to determine the nature of this debt or otherwise resolve it. (Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: telecommunications bill, referred for collection of $414. Applicant 
testified that this bill was incurred when she changed service providers and the previous 
provider continued to bill her for two months. She refused to pay the bill because “it is the 
principle of it.” She testified that she has not tried to resolve the debt, but she has resumed 
service with the original provider. (Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i: credit-card account, referred for collection of $4,726. Applicant 
testified that she negotiated a settlement of this debt, but she did not submit any 
documentation to support her testimony. (Tr. 46-47.) 
 
                                                          
3 Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not list accounts placed for collection or charged 
off that antedate the credit report by more than seven years. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply 
to this debt. 10 U.S.C. § 1681c.  
 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j: satellite television service bill, referred for collection of $1,004. 
This debt arose when Applicant moved into a townhouse in a community that did not allow 
satellite dishes. She told the provider that she could not continue the service. In the 
August 2013 PSI, she told the investigator that she intended to pay this debt. At the 
hearing, Applicant testified that she has not contacted the provider about resolving this 
debt, but she still has satellite service with the same provider. (Tr. 48-49.) 
 
 Applicant’s take-home pay each month is about $9,400. Her husband receives 
Social Security disability pay of $1,400 per month. (Tr. 22.) She has about $5,000 in 
savings and about $22,000 in her checking account. She has two retirement accounts 
totaling about $200,000. (Tr. 25-26.) She and her husband bought a house in March 2017, 
and their mortgage payments are about $2,300 per month. (Tr. 26.) She bought a new 
car in 2016, and her car payments are $843 per month. Her husband has a new car, for 
which he is paying about $300 per month, and an older truck on which there is no debt. 
(Tr. 27-28.) She testified that she and her husband took online counseling courses in 
2009, when they were attempting to obtain a loan modification on the home mortgage 
loan that was eventually foreclosed. (Tr. 50.) She hired a credit-counseling service in 
2013. She paid an initial fee of $1,000, followed by monthly $100 payments. (AX A at 3.) 
She testified that she terminated her contract with the credit-counseling service because 
it was not helpful. (Tr. 37, 41.) 
 
 Applicant was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013 and incurred medical bills in 
2013 and 2014. Most of the medical expenses were covered by insurance, and she was 
not sure how much she spent on co-payments. (Tr. 30.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
 
5 
 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
6 
 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s testimony and the evidence submitted at the hearing establish the 
following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy 
debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant encountered several conditions 
beyond her control: the failure of her first husband’s business, her second husband’s loss 
 
7 
 
of employment in 2006 and subsequent disability in 2007, her marital separation in 2010, 
and her second husband’s failure to keep his informal promise to resolve several joint 
debts. She provided no information about the circumstances of the medical debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.g, and she provided no information connecting her diagnosis of breast cancer 
in 2013 with any of the debts alleged in the SOR. Although the evidence regarding the 
bankruptcy alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is sparse, it appears that Applicant and her first husband 
acted responsibly and successfully completed the Chapter 13 payment plan. However, 
Applicant has not acted responsibly regarding the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.j. She 
admitted that she has not contacted her creditors, attempted to resolve the debts, or 
disputed them. She has elected to buy a home and new cars instead of resolving her old 
debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is established for the bankruptcy alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a but not for the 
delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.j. Applicant received credit counseling in 
connection with the 1999 bankruptcy and those debts were resolved. She also received 
online counseling in 2009. However, the credit-counseling firm hired by Applicant in 2013 
was in the business of disputing or negotiating settlement of debts, and there is no 
evidence that it provided the financial counseling contemplated by this mitigating 
condition. Furthermore, Applicant’s current financial situation is not under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. The record does not reflect the extent to which 
creditors were made whole by the 1999 bankruptcy. Thus the evidence is insufficient to 
show that completion of the bankruptcy payment plan constituted a good-faith effort to 
resolve the debts included in the bankruptcy. See ISCR Case No. 15-00682 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 13, 2016). Applicant presented no evidence showing that she negotiated payment 
agreements or resolved any of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.j. She claimed that she 
resolved the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, but she provided no documentary evidence to 
support her claim. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant submitted no evidence that she disputed 
any of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4  
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
8 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). I have considered Applicant’s lengthy 
service as an employee of defense contractors and the multiple conditions that 
contributed to her financial problems. On the other hand, she has not addressed her 
numerous delinquent debts, and she provided no documentary evidence reflecting 
responsible conduct. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by delinquent debts that 
arose after her bankruptcy discharge. She has not carried her burden of showing that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue her eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
