 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02053 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant, a native of 
Turkey, mitigated the foreign influence concerns raised by his relationships with his 
father and sister who are citizens and residents of that county. A naturalized U.S. citizen 
for seven years, Applicant mitigated the personal conduct concerns raised by his former 
illegal status, as well as those raised by the multiple, but minor traffic infractions he 
received between 2005 and 2010. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 3, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the personal conduct and foreign influence guidelines.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to deny his security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On September 1, 
2017, I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission 
of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses, and the parties 
complied.2 At the hearing, convened on September 20, 2017, I admitted Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through M, without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 28, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Implementation of Revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Motion to Withdraw SOR Allegation  
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant’s 
counsel did not object and the motion was granted.3  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Turkey. Without objection from Applicant, I approved the request. The relevant 
facts are highlighted in the Findings of Fact section, below.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 35, has worked for a federal contractor since November 2014. He 
completed a security clearance application in December 2014, disclosing his parents 
and sibling, who are residents and citizens of Turkey. In addition to these relationships, 
the SOR also alleges that he lived in the United States illegally from 2001 to 2007; and, 
that he received at least 25 traffic tickets between 2002 and the issuance of the SOR. 
Applicant previously disclosed his foreign relatives, his illegal status, and his driving 
record in a December 2014 counterintelligence and security-screening questionnaire.5 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order and the discovery letter are appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) I and II, respectively.  
 
3 Tr. 9. 
 
4 The Government’s administrative notice summary and attached documents are admitted to the record 
as HE III. 
  
5 GE 1, 3. 
 
3 
 
  Applicant is from the Republic of Turkey, a constitutional republic with a 
multiparty parliamentary system and a president. The U.S.-Turkey friendship dates to 
1831. Turkey is an important U.S. security partner and has been a valued North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO) ally since 1952. Turkey is a leader in the Alliance’s 
Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan and is also a vital member of the Counter-ISIL 
Coalition.  Turkey continues to face a significant terrorist threat from both external and 
home-grown sources. The current U.S. State Department travel warning for Turkey 
reflects an increased risk from terrorist groups and the potential for violence against 
U.S. citizens due to an increase in anti-American rhetoric. The U.S. State Department 
has also reported a number of significant human rights problems in Turkey, including 
inconsistent access to due process following the July 15, 2016 coup attempt.6  
 
Applicant entered the United States on a student visa to attend an English 
language school in January 2001. He was 18 years old. He was alone and did not 
speak English. Applicant believed that he would be living with his uncle. Instead, 
Applicant’s uncle installed him in an apartment with two other young men, leaving 
Applicant to support himself. Applicant relied on his roommates to help him navigate his 
new environment. After learning from his roommate that he was eligible to attend public 
high school, Applicant decided to enroll in high school to take advantage of the school’s 
English-as-a-second-language (ESL) program instead of attending the previously 
arranged language school at his own expense. In 2002, Applicant began working and 
obtained a driver’s license. He admits that he received a number of tickets and was 
required to attend traffic school at least six times. According to his state’s Department of 
Safety and Homeland security, Applicant’s current driving record is clean. The traffic 
case history provided by the state shows Applicant received 12 infractions between 
2005 and 2010 for minor violations, including speeding, not wearing a seat belt, failure 
to maintain proper documentation for his vehicle, and having tinted windows.7  
 
 In deciding to attend public school, Applicant violated the terms of his student 
visa and was unable to renew it. The visa expired in March 2001. Although he remained 
in the United States illegally, Applicant continued to work and attend school. Applicant 
graduated from high school in 2008. He performed well at work and eventually became 
the general manager of a fast food restaurant with responsibility for assisting with the 
operations of five other stores. Despite his illegal status, Applicant continued to timely 
file his federal and state income tax returns as required, using the social security 
number issued to him with his student visa. In April 2007, Applicant married a U.S. 
citizen, who sponsored him for permanent residency in the United States. Applicant 
obtained a work permit in the summer of 2007, resolving his illegal status. He obtained 
permanent residency status in 2009 and became a naturalized citizen in September 
2010. Applicant and his wife divorced in November 2010. He formally renounced his 
Turkish citizenship in March 2015.8 
  
                                                          
6 HE III. 
 
7 Tr. 21, 35, 42-44, 51, 56-58; AE D.  
 
8 Tr. 34-42, 50, 62-63, 66; AE F, K.   
 
4 
 
 Applicant obtained his first positon as a linguist in 2014, and deployed to his 
native Turkey in December. For the first two years, Applicant worked in a location that 
allowed him to visit his parents twice per month. Applicant’s father is a retired 
maintenance worker formerly employed by the local government in Applicant’s 
hometown. Applicant’s sister, who is married with a young child, also works for the local 
government. In 2016, Applicant’s work location changed. His movement within the 
country became much more restricted, and he was no longer able to visit his parents 
regularly. However, he calls his father and sister twice a month. When Applicant’s 
mother died in 2016, he was working and unable to attend her funeral. Generally, 
Applicant does not provide his family with financial support, but he paid for his mother’s 
funeral expenses. Because of his current assignment, Applicant has not seen his father 
and sister since his mother’s death.9  
 
 Applicant’s family knows that he works as a linguist for a U.S. company, but they 
do not know the specifics of his job. He works as a linguist, embedded with a military 
unit. He serves as a liaison between his unit and the Turkish military. He also serves as 
a cultural guide when needed. Given the daily contact with the unit, Applicant has come 
to see the military members he supports as his family. He considers it a vital part of his 
job to help keep them all safe.10  
 
 Applicant is held in high esteem by his coworkers. The record contains 19 
character letters from military members and civilian coworkers, covering Applicant’s 
three-year tenure as a linguist in Turkey. Each letter touts Applicant’s trustworthiness 
and reliability while working in a challenging and ever-changing environment. Each 
letter also discusses the invaluable nature of Applicant’s translation skills and cultural 
knowledge, especially during the 2016 coup.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
9 Tr. 23, 25-32, 47-49, 58-62. 
 
10 Tr. 32, 45. 
 
11 Tr. 70-71; AE A, E, H, N.  
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 An individual’s personal conduct becomes a concern when he acts is way that 
shows “questionable judgment, . . . or an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations.” Such conduct “can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”12 Applicant remained in the 
United States for six years after his student visa expired. He also accumulated at least 
12 traffic citations between 2005 and 2010. This conduct is not sufficient for an adverse 
determination under the criminal conduct guideline. However, when considered 
together, the misconduct supports the government’s prima facie case that Applicant 
engaged in behavior that supports a whole person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and unwillingness to comply with rules and 
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 15. 
 
 
6 
 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly 
safeguard classified or sensitive information.13  
 
 Applicant has produced sufficient evidence to mitigate the personal conduct 
concerns. Applicant’s illegal status is mitigated by the passage of time. He corrected his 
status 10 years ago and has been a naturalized U.S. citizen for 7 years. Furthermore, 
the circumstances are unlikely to recur and do not reflect negatively on Applicant’s 
current security worthiness. The concerns raised by Applicant’s multiple traffic 
infractions are also mitigated. A review of the record shows a series of minor infractions, 
the most recent of which occurred seven years ago. Applicant’s driving record is not 
indicative of an inability to protect or handle classified information.14   
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 “[F]oreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”15 Although Turkey has 
historically been an ally of the United States, the recent political instability in the country 
and region has become a potential threat to U.S. interests operating there. Accordingly, 
Applicant’s relationships with his father and sister, who are residents and citizens of 
Turkey, creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion.16  
 
 While Applicant’s interactions with his family members in Turkey may be 
infrequent, the relationships cannot be considered casual. However, given the position 
and activities of Applicant’s father and sister in Turkey, it is unlikely that Applicant will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the foreign interests and those of the 
United States.17 Furthermore, these relationships do not present a conflict of interest 
because the ties that Applicant has developed in his current position are so deeply 
intertwined with his own safety and self-interest, it is likely that Applicant will resolve any 
potential conflict of interest in favor of U.S. interests.18  
 
 Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect and 
handle classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). For the past three years, Applicant has been 
embedded with a military unit. He has supported the U.S. mission at his own peril. He 
                                                          
13 AG ¶16 (c). 
 
14  AG ¶ 17(c). 
 
15 AG ¶ 6.  
 
16 AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
17 AG ¶ 8(a).  
 
18 AG ¶ (b).  
 
7 
 
has demonstrated that he takes his responsibilities very seriously, as echoed by the 
many character letters he received in support of his application for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s work and conduct in his position as a linguist for the past three 
years is direct evidence of his ability to operate in a sensitive environment with direct 
national security implications.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a     Withdrawn  
 
Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
