 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 17-01896 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Available information is not sufficient to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
raised by Applicant’s financial problems. Her request for eligibility to occupy a position 
of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 17, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position for her 
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
 
 
2 
 
 
investigation, DOD adjudicators were unable to determine that it is clearly consistent 
with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request for a position of trust.1  
 
 On June 7, 2017, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts raising trustworthiness concerns addressed through the adjudicative guideline 
(AG)2 for financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR 
(Answer) and requested a hearing. I received the case on August 4, 2017, and 
scheduled the hearing for September 26, 2017. 
 
 The parties appeared as scheduled. I admitted Government Exhibits (GX) 1 - 4 
without objection. Applicant testified but did not present any documentary evidence. I 
received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 5, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $20,982 for 20 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.t). The debts alleged at SOR 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 
and 1.h – 1.o are for unpaid medical bills. The debts alleged at SOR 1.k – 1.o are for 
less than $100 each. 
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant denied, with explanations, the debts at SOR 
1.f, and 1.q – 1.s. She admitted, with explanations, all of the remaining allegations. 
Additionally, Applicant claimed that she has paid the debts at SOR 1.k – 1.o and 1.t; 
that she has disputed the debts at SOR 1.f, 1.q, and 1.r; that she is making regular 
payments for the debts at SOR 1.b, 1.c, 1.h – 1.j, and 1.p; and that she is working on a 
repayment plan for the debts at SOR 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.p. Finally, as to her largest 
debt, the $9,249 remainder due on a car loan after repossession (SOR 1.a), Applicant 
stated she would not be able to repay it. (Answer) 
 
 Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR and in her testimony at hearing, 
her disclosures of debts in her e-QIP, her discussions of her financial problems during a 
February 2017 personal subject interview (PSI), and two credit bureau reports support 
all of the SOR allegations. (Answer; GX 1 – 4) Additionally, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and employed by a defense contractor in a position that 
requires eligibility for a position of trust. Applicant started working for her current 
                                                 
1 Required by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive). 
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. Publication of the DOD Manual 5200.02 did not affect the adjudicative guidelines 
applicable to this case. In this decision, I have considered and applied the new adjudicative guidelines. 
My decision in this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
employer in December 1996. Applicant’s employer supports management of the health 
care system used by members of the military, and her job duties include safeguarding 
personally identifiable information (PII) associated with the health care system’s 
constituents. (GX 1) 
 
 Applicant was married from August 1997 until divorcing in January 2004. She 
remarried in May 2006, but has been separated since November 2016. She has two 
children, a 19-year-old daughter and a 22-year-old son. Her son is in his last year of 
college. (GX 1 and 2) 
 
  Applicant has been experiencing financial problems since at least 2000. At 
hearing, she disclosed that during a previous application for eligibility for a public trust 
position, she and her first husband filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. She 
subsequently completed a three-year repayment plan under that petition. The credit 
reports included in this record document a period of unpaid debts beginning around 
2010. (Tr. 8, 64 – 66) 
 
 Applicant provided little information about the causes of her current financial 
problems. The medical debts alleged represent expenses not covered by her medical 
insurance for surgery and other services she received between 2012 and 2014. 
Applicant also noted that she is supporting her son through loans and with the help of 
her mother. The debt at SOR 1.d is for one such loan on which Applicant has defaulted. 
(Tr. 23 – 24, 28 – 33) 
 
 Applicant’s current finances are best described as tenuous. After expenses, 
which she claims include funds being directed at some of her debts, Applicant estimates 
she has about $300 remaining each month. Applicant also has been as much as two 
months behind on her mortgage and car loan payments in the past year. The debt 
payments she claimed in response to the SOR occurred after the SOR was issued. 
Applicant testified that she is now able to address her debts, in part, because her 
mother is helping support Applicant’s son. Applicant has had a 401(k) retirement 
account through work since 1996. The most she has saved was $8,000; however, she 
has taken five hardship withdrawals over the past few years to meet some basic 
obligations, such as her mortgage and car payments. (Tr. 42, 48 - 63) 
 
 Applicant has not had any financial counseling. In 2016, she retained the 
services of a credit repair company, for which she paid $40 a month. The services 
consisted mostly of researching and challenging entries in her credit history. She 
cancelled that service after a few months after realizing she could do the same thing on 
her own. (GX 2; Tr. 24 – 26, 60 – 63) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 Eligibility for a position of public trust must be based on a determination that it is 
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.3 All such 
adjudications must adhere to the procedural protections in the Directive before any 
adverse determination may be made. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and 
material information,4 and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication 
policies in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the 
factors, commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, listed in the guidelines at 
AG ¶ 2(d).5 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by 
itself, conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever 
a case can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the 
grant or denial of eligibility for a position of trust. 
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a 
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has 
access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government 
based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in 
ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of 
one who will protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the 
Government. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The facts established by this record reasonably raise a trustworthiness concern 
about Applicant’s finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
                                                 
3 Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix A, Paragraph 1(d).  
 
4 Directive, 6.3. 
 
5  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's 
age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the 
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
5 
 
 
  Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(b) (unwillingness to satisfy debts 
regardless of the ability to do so); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). Applicant’s financial problems span most of the past 20 years. She has 
been gainfully employed, with employee-sponsored medical insurance, the entire time. 
Even though her insurance did not cover portions of medical bills incurred between 
2012 and 2014, Applicant did not act to resolve even the most modest of those debts 
until after she received the SOR. She does not intend to pay the largest of her debts. 
 
I also have considered the following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions that are 
pertinent to these facts and circumstances: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s longstanding financial problems remain largely unaddressed. Even 
were I to accept her claims of payment without any supporting documentation, she 
acted largely in response to the SOR. Her corrective actions cannot reasonably be 
considered as good-faith efforts. Applicant’s financial problems are recent, in that they 
continue unresolved. Applicant’s use of a credit repair firm does not comport with the 
type of financial counseling contemplated by AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant did not establish that 
her debts arose from circumstances beyond her control, and she did not establish a 
documented basis for her disputes of some of her debts. Applicant did not provide 
information that shows her current finances are sound and that she will be able to 
resolve her debts in the near future. On balance, she has not provided information 
sufficient to support application of any of the AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. Based on 
this record, I cannot conclude that Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns 
raised by the Government’s information. 
 
 I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors 
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the 
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant is not expected to be debt-free; 
however, she is expected to show that she is dealing responsibly with her financial 
problems. Absent such information, doubts remain about her suitability for a position of 
public trust. Because protection of the interests of national security is the principal focus 
of these adjudications, such doubts must be resolved against granting eligibility.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.t:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for public 
trust eligibility is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
