 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-01398 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns about her family connections to 
Afghanistan under Guideline B, foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 2, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under foreign influence. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Sensitive 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 20, 2017, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on September 22, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
2 
 
 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 17, 2017, scheduling the 
hearing for November 8, 2017. The hearing convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1-3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant and her 
husband testified. She submitted no documents at the hearing. I held the record open 
until November 22, 2017, to allow Applicant to submit additional information. She timely 
submitted six documents, which are marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through AE 
F and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
November 16, 2017.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These AGs 
apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Applicant received a 
copy of the revised AGs with the Government’s discovery package.1 Any changes 
resulting from the issuance of new AGs did not affect my decision in this case.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
The Government submitted a written request that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts about Afghanistan.2 Without objection, I have taken administrative notice of 
certain facts contained in the request that are supported by source documents from 
official U.S. Government publications. The facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, 
below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the sole SOR allegation, ¶ 1.a, with a narrative explanation. 
Her admission and explanation are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She was born in Afghanistan in 1970. She left with her 
family after the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in 1979. She came to the United 
States with her parents and her sister in 1982, at age 12. Her two brothers came to the 
United States earlier. (Tr. 41-45; GE 1) 
 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1982. She graduated from high 
school, college, and graduate school in the United States. She became a United States 
citizen in 1992. For much of her career, Applicant has worked as a business analyst in 
the health care industry. In connection with her employment, she submitted an 
application for a position of public trust in February 2014. Applicant’s parents and all of 
her siblings are United States citizens. (Tr. 45-47; GE 1) 
 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I; Tr. 8-11. Pre-hearing e-mail correspondence was marked HE II.  
 
2 Administrative Notice (AN) Exhibit I.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant and her husband have been married for 20 years. They have three 
children, ages 12, 15 and 17, all native-born U.S. citizens. (Tr. 50, GE 1). Applicant’s 
husband was born in the United States. He has a similar position in the health care 
industry, though for a different company. (Tr. 79; GE 1)  
 
 The sole SOR allegation concerns Applicant’s father-in-law. He was born and 
raised in Afghanistan. After graduating from college, he became a diplomat. He served 
Afghanistan in several foreign locations during his career. This included a lengthy 
assignment in the United States. (Tr. 97-99; AE A, AE B)  
  
 Applicant’s father-in-law and his family were stationed in Afghanistan at the time 
of the Soviet invasion, and, like Applicant and her family, they fled the country soon 
thereafter. (Tr. 100-101) They resettled in the United States in 1981. He spent many 
years (1986-2001) as a state government employee. (Tr. 101; AE B). Applicant’s father-
in-law and her mother-in-law are now U.S. citizens, and they live in the United States. 
(GE 1 at 27-29; AE C) 
 
 In about 2002, after the Taliban was removed from power, Applicant’s father-in-
law was asked to return to diplomatic service for Afghanistan. Between 2002 and 2014, 
he held several high-ranking diplomatic positions.3 His wife often accompanied him. (Tr. 
50-56, 61-72, 101-109; AE B)  Through her husband, Applicant was aware of her father-
in-law’s resumed diplomatic role. Applicant did not visit her father-in-law, however, as 
she was raising her children at home. (Tr. 82-84; AE A) 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law retired from diplomatic service in 2014. His last post was 
as a senior advisor. (AE A, AE B) He and his wife returned to their home in the United 
States, where they remain. Applicant’s mother-in-law manages a convenience store, 
and he sometimes helps. (Tr. 105) Applicant’s husband is not aware whether his father 
receives a pension or any retirement benefits from the Afghan government. (Tr. 75) 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law remains a dual citizen of both the United States and 
Afghanistan, and he maintains valid passports from both countries. (AE C, AE D) His 
Afghan passport, issued in February 2014, listed his former Afghan government 
position. (AE D) Applicant testified that her mother-in-law has a United States passport, 
and has traveled on it. (Tr. 78) 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law stated in a letter submitted after the hearing that he had 
infrequent (“scarce”) conversations with Applicant, and they concerned only family 
matters. He said he never discussed his job with her. (AE A) Applicant testified that 
when she sees her father-in-law, they discuss only matters related to heath and family. 
She also stated that her father-in-law has not asked her about her job or why she needs 
a determination of public trust. (Tr. 59-61) 
 
                                                          
3 In the interest of protecting Applicant’s identity, I have identified neither the specific diplomatic positions 
her father-in-law held, nor where he was assigned, though these details are in the record. (AE B)  
 
 
4 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant’s father-in-law “was a senior advisor to 
Afghanistan president Hamid Karzai until at least 2014.” This is taken from a statement 
in Applicant’s interrogatory response. However, Applicant also stated (as she did in her 
answer, and at the hearing) that her father-in-law’s employment was with the Afghan 
Foreign Ministry, rather than as a direct advisor to the Afghan president. (GE 2 at 3; 
SOR answer)  
 
Though they both testified at length about his diplomatic career, Applicant and 
her husband both clarified at hearing that they did not believe her father-in-law had any 
personal or other direct connection to then-President Karzai (Tr. 61, 106), nor did he 
have any connection to Afghanistan’s current president. (Tr. 73). Applicant’s husband 
testified that his father is “absolutely not” in contact with anyone in the Afghan 
government currently. He is not aware that his father is in any contact with anyone with 
whom he formerly worked in Afghanistan. (Tr. 110) Applicant’s father-in-law has a 
brother and a nephew in Afghanistan, with whom he maintains some contact. (Tr. 72, 
110)  
 
 Applicant and her husband have a combined annual income of about $210,000. 
(Tr. 79-80) They own their home. They own no property or other assets in Afghanistan. 
(Tr. 74, 79) Applicant’s husband testified that his father continues to own family property 
in Afghanistan. Her husband does not know if he stands to inherit it someday. (Tr. 110-
111)  
 
Applicant testified that she and her husband do not receive any financial support 
from his parents, nor do they receive any financial support from them. (Tr. 60-61) 
Applicant testified that she visits her in-laws four to six times a year, and they speak by 
phone about twice a month. Her husband speaks to his parents and his brother several 
times a week. (Tr. 58, 111-112) 
  
 Applicant provided letters of recommendation from two of her supervisors at 
work. They both attest to Applicant’s strong work ethic, professionalism, and dedication 
to her job. They also praised her intelligence, sense of compassion, and her overall 
trustworthiness and reliability. (AE E, AE F) 
 
The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (Afghanistan) 
 
 The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel to 
Afghanistan because of continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations 
against U.S. citizens. Travel to all areas of Afghanistan remain unsafe due to the 
ongoing risk of kidnapping, hostage-taking, military combat operations, landmines, 
banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal groups, militant attacks, direct and 
indirect fire, suicide bombings and insurgent attacks, including attacks using vehicle-
borne or other improvised explosive devices. Attacks may also target official Afghan and 
U.S. government convoys and compounds, foreign embassies, military installations, and 
other public areas. Extremist groups and members of other armed opposition groups 
are active throughout the country, attacking Afghan and foreign government facilities, 
 
5 
 
 
with little regard for civilian casualties. Afghanistan continued to experience aggressive 
and coordinated attacks by the Taliban and other insurgent and terrorist groups.4  
 
 Afghanistan has significant human rights problems, including widespread 
violence, attacks on civilians and killing of persons affiliated with the government by 
armed insurgent groups; torture and abuse of detainees by government forces; 
widespread disregard for the rule of law; and little accountability for those participating 
in human rights abuses; as well as targeted violence and societal discrimination against 
women and girls.5  
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance, or, as here, a 
determination of public trust.6 As the Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security [and trustworthiness] 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”7 
 
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing 
the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
4 AN I. Items II and III of the Government’s administrative notice filing are from the State Department’s 
2015 Country Reports on Terrorism, published in June 2016. The State Department updated this report in 
July 2017. See https://www.state.gov/j/ct/rls/crt/2016/272233.htm (U.S. State Department 2016 Country 
Report on Terrorism for South and Central Asia, published in July 2017). I take administrative notice of 
certain more recent (but largely similar) facts in the updated report, consistent with my obligation to make 
assessments based on timely information in cases involving foreign influence. 
 
5 AN I.  
 
6 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”).  
 
7 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
6 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the trustworthiness concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain sensitive or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
 
7 
 
 
protect sensitive or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; and  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) both require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low 
standard. It denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The 
totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie 
must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding sensitive information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”8 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is a dual U.S.-Afghan citizen. The trustworthiness issue 
in this case concerns his status as a now-retired senior Afghan diplomat. Before the 
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, he served in that capacity for many years. He and his 
family then immigrated to the United States in 1981. He became a United States citizen 
and he spent about 15 years as a state government employee. In 2002, he returned to 
Afghan diplomatic service, and served in several high-ranking positions. When he 
retired in 2014, he and his wife returned to the United States, where they remain today. 
He no longer has any ties to the Afghan government.  
 
Afghanistan’s continued instability, the ongoing threat of violence from terrorist 
organizations, extremist groups and members of other armed insurgents, and the 
country’s serious ongoing human rights issues, all create a “heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” Given Applicant’s 
contact with her father-in-law and his status as a retired Afghan diplomat, AG ¶¶ 7(a), 
7(b) and 7(e) have been raised by the evidence.   
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law resumed his diplomatic career with Afghanistan from 
2002 to 2014, and served in several high-ranking positions. Ordinarily, this 
circumstance would be inherently problematic for an Applicant seeking a determination 
of public trust from the United States government. However, there are many 
circumstances here which weigh in Applicant’s favor.  
 
The foreign influence concerns in this case are increased because of 
Afghanistan’s continuing instability and the persistent threat of terrorism and violence by 
armed insurgents. However, those concerns are lessened by the fact that Applicant’s 
father-in-law is now retired and has returned to his life in the United States. He does not 
have any ongoing connection to the Afghan government which remains a 
trustworthiness concern for the Applicant.9 He remains an Afghan citizen, but he and his 
wife are also U.S. citizens. Given their age, there is every indication that they will live 
out their lives in the United States. These circumstances significantly lessen the risk that 
Applicant might be subject to exploitation, coercion, or duress through her relationship 
with her father-in-law. However, in light of the matters accepted for administrative 
notice, AG ¶ 8(a) has limited applicability.  
Applicant was born in Afghanistan, but she has also lived in the United States 
since she was 12 years old. She was educated in the United States, and has been an 
American citizen for many years. Applicant’s husband was also born in the United 
States, albeit to Afghan parents, while his father was stationed here as an Afghan 
diplomat. However, he has spent his adulthood in the United States. Applicant and her 
husband have been married for 20 years and are raising their children here. Applicant’s 
parents and all of her siblings are citizens and residents of the United States. Applicant 
and her husband have no family members in Afghanistan with whom they maintain any 
contact. There is no evidence that they have travelled there in recent years, and they 
have no property interests there. Applicant and her husband maintain regular, frequent 
contact with his parents, but, as noted, they are both American citizens. Applicant can 
therefore be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the best interests of 
the United States. Applicant met her heavy burden of persuasion in establishing that AG 
                                                          
9 Given his long service as a diplomat. Applicant’s father-in-law may well receive a pension from the 
Afghan government, even though Applicant and her husband may not be aware of it. However, there is 
no record evidence of this, and even if so, this is outweighed by the fact that Applicant’s in-laws are 
citizens and residents of the United States.  
 
9 
 
 
¶ 8(b) applies to mitigate the foreign influence trustworthiness concerns arising in this 
case. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a trustworthiness determination by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
determination of public trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Applicant presented a strong case in 
mitigation and in support of her application for access to sensitive information. I 
observed Applicant’s demeanor, and that of her husband, while they testified. I found 
both to be honest and credible witnesses. After carefully weighing the evidence, both 
favorable and unfavorable, and considering the whole-person factors set forth in AG ¶ 
2(d), I find that Applicant mitigated the heightened concerns raised by her family 
connections to Afghanistan. The record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts 
as to her eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising under 
Guideline B, foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is granted. 
                                                 
     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
