 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00245 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: [spouse], Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 18, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 9, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 18, 2017. 
I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 14, 2017. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and offer exhibits (AE) A through D. There 
were no objections to any exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence.2 The record 
was held open until November 28, 2017, to permit the submission of additional 
documents. None were provided, and the record closed. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on November 22, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant did not admit or deny any of the allegations in the SOR. I will consider 
his nonresponse as a denial to each allegation. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He completed 9th grade. He was married in 1991 and 
later divorced. He remarried in 1999 and his wife passed away in 2007. He remarried in 
2014. He does not have children. He has worked for a federal contractor since April 2012. 
His work was seasonal and during the winter months he was laid off. In 2015, he was 
able to change jobs within the company and work all year. He was employed from July 
2011 to June 2012 for the county, and did maintenance work for a local company from 
June 2010 to June 2012. He worked for a car manufacturer from February 2005 to May 
2010. Applicant’s wife is employed.3  
 
 Applicant was overwhelmed with bills when his second wife was diagnosed with 
cancer. He did not have medical insurance, and he was unable to pay all of his bills. He 
had his debts discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2004. Most of the debts discharged 
were consumer debts.4  
 
When Applicant’s job was seasonal, he would be laid off during the winter months 
and it was difficult to meet his financial obligations because he did not earn sufficient 
income. In June 2016, he sought assistance through a financial consultant company, 
which was supposed to help him settle his debts. He provided copies of payments he 
made to the company in March 2017, totaling $4,600. He testified that the company 
helped him settle some debts. Credit reports from November 2105 and December 2016 
and bankruptcy documents substantiate the debts alleged in the SOR.5  
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I is the Government’s discovery letter.  
 
3 Tr. 20-26; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 27-33; GE 5. I have not considered any derogatory information that was not alleged in the SOR for 
disqualifying purposes. I may consider it when analyzing Applicant’s credibility, in applying the mitigating 
conditions and in a whole-person analysis.  
 
5 Tr. 33-35, 57; GE 1, 3, 4, 5; AE A, B, C, D.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 In June 2017, Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. His attorney provided a letter 
to the Government along with copies of Schedules D, E, and F of his bankruptcy. 
Applicant’s Chapter 13 plan requires him to pay $388 for the first six months and $494 for 
the next 54 months. Applicant has the amount automatically deducted from his pay. His 
first payment started in July 2017 and he has made consistent payments since then. All 
of the debts in the SOR are included in his payment plan, as are other unsecured debts. 
He testified that with his wife’s and his combined income, he is able to make the payments 
on the Chapter 13 plan and also meet their other monthly expenses. He testified that he 
is living within his means.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
                                                          
6 Tr. 50-55, 58-66; GE 4, 5; AE D. 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems for many years and accumulated debts that 
became delinquent and were unresolved because he was unable to do so. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts. He attributed his financial problems to 
seasonal unemployment and inconsistent income. In 2015, he moved to a new job and 
now works year round. In 2016, he worked with a financial consultant to help settle his 
delinquent debts. In 2017, he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy and has been participating in 
a payment plan since July 2017. Applicant’s seasonal unemployment was somewhat 
beyond his control, although he was aware annually it would occur. He began to address 
his delinquent debts through a financial consultant company in mid-2016 and filed 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy in June 2017, and has made payments since July 2017. I find AG 
¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
 Applicant worked with a financial consultant beginning in June 2016 before 
receiving the SOR and made payments to help settle some delinquent debts. He 
subsequently filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy and has been making payments since July 
2017. In order to file bankruptcy, mandatory financial counseling is required. Applicant’s 
consistent payments for the past months show that there are clear indications that his 
financial problems are coming under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Paying his creditors 
through Chapter 13 bankruptcy demonstrates that he has not abandoned his 
responsibility to pay his overdue creditors. AG ¶ 20(d) has some application. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 59 years old. He and his wife are both employed. He does not have a 
stellar financial record, but he made an earnest effort to begin resolving his delinquent 
debts when he hired a financial consultant company in June 2016, before receiving the 
SOR. All of the debts in the SOR are included in Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
payment plan. His payments are automatically deducted from his pay. He has made 
consistent payments since July 2017. Applicant understands the importance of 
completing his Chapter 13 payment plan and the impact it could potentially have on his 
job, if he fails to do so. Although there are some questions about his past commitment to 
responsible financial management, I believe he has changed and is committed to 
resolving delinquent debts. The record evidence does not leave me with questions or 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:  For Applicant  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
