 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-00110 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela, C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline 
F, financial considerations, or Guideline E, personal conduct. National Security eligibility 
for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
              Statement of the Case 
 
On September 3, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 21, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under DoD Directive 5220.6, and the Adjudicated Guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DoD after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are 
effective for decisions issued on or after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 30, 2017. She admitted SOR 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 
and 1.h.  She denied SOR 1.c, 1.d, 1.g, and 2.a. Applicant provided explanations and 
documentation with her answer. She requested that her case be decided by an 
administrative judge on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 3) On June 30, 
2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy 
of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven items, was mailed to 
Applicant on July 11, 2017, and received by her on July 25, 2017. The FORM notified 
Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM in an undated, but timely written submission, 
to which Department Counsel had no objection. She did not object to Items 1 through 7, 
which are admitted into evidence. Applicant’s FORM response is marked Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AE) A through H, and admitted into evidence. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on November 13, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact:  Applicant is 44 years old and 
employed by a Federal government contractor since March 2015. She earned her first 
Associate’s degree in 1993, and her second Associate’s degree in 1995. In December 
2002, she earned a Bachelor’s degree. She married her current spouse in 1995 and has 
a 24 year old son.  She is applying for sensitive information eligibility.  
 
As recently as November 2016, Applicant had seven delinquent accounts totaling 
$22,048. (Items 1 and 7) Another delinquent debt cited in the SOR (¶ 1.f $532), was 
listed in her credit report from October 2015. (Item 6) The total amount of indebtedness 
for the eight delinquent accounts cited in the SOR was $22,580. The SOR alleged that 
under the financial section of her e-QIP, Applicant failed to disclose any delinquent 
financial information as required. (Items 2 and 4) Applicant claimed that she misread the 
questions and did not realize that she was required to list her delinquent accounts. As of 
the close of the record, she had provided documentation of two civil cases being 
dismissed against her (¶¶ 1.c, and 1.d), and attached a payment receipt for one debt 
cited in the SOR (¶ 1.g). (Items 3, AE B, AE D, and AE E) There is insufficient 
documentation to show that the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, or 1.h, have been 
settled, resolved, or being satisfied through a payment plan. She failed to provide a 
legitimate basis to dispute her responsibility for any of these debts. Those current 
outstanding debts, not including the debts in the civil cases dismissed against her, total 
approximately $17,215. 
 
In Applicant’s response to the Government’s brief, she claimed that she recently 
discovered the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a $9,193, as belonging to another family 
member, despite the debt being listed in her November 2016 credit report, and after 
admitting this debt in her answer to the SOR. This is by far the largest debt cited in the 
 
3 
 
 
SOR. She failed to provide corroborating documentation to support her claim. She also 
listed that the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.e sent her an IRS 1099, which she reported as 
income for tax purposes, however, she failed to provide documentation so that her claim 
could be verified. The court documents provided by Applicant showed two cases from 
the same collection company being dismissed, (¶¶ 1.c, and 1.d), but she failed to 
provide an explanation as to why those cases were dismissed, or if she still owed the 
creditors for the original debts. Lastly, the court documentation purported to show a third 
collection company case dismissal, included documents that were unsigned, left blank, 
and did not include a date-stamp by the court. This evidence is insufficient to support 
her claim that this third case was also dismissed. (AE C) 
 
Applicant listed that her financial problems stemmed from her spouse’s loss of 
employment due to a medical emergency in about May 2013. (Items 3 and 5) The 
medical emergency resulted in long-term medical conditions that ultimately prevented 
her spouse from returning to work. Applicant provided documentation that her spouse 
received weekly benefits from the state employment commission. She listed that in 
addition to the reduced amount of income her spouse receives, his medical issues 
continue to be costly despite having medical insurance. At the time her spouse became 
ill, he was the only person in the home earning income. Applicant was able to find 
employment in September 2013, and continued employment until early 2015. She 
experienced a brief period of unemployment, and then she started working for her 
current employer in March 2015. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant provided no budget information from which to predict her future 
solvency, or her ability to make payments toward her delinquent debts. There is no 
evidence of financial counseling. However, Applicant did provide documentation to 
support findings that she is a valued employee and highly recognized by her employer 
for her reliability and quality performance. (AE F and G) 
 
Policies  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility for a public trust 
position, the administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
   
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
 
4 
 
 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” 
The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds….  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulty beginning in at least 2013, after her 
spouse became ill and was unable to return to work. She incurred more than $22,000 of 
delinquent debt over the past four years. She paid one small debt and was able to show 
that two court cases against her had been dismissed, without further explanation. 
However, more than $17,000 in delinquent debt remains, for which she demonstrated 
 
5 
 
 
neither progress toward resolution, nor a basis for dispute. These facts establish 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant began experiencing financial problems following her spouse’s illness in 
2013, which was a situation beyond her control.  She has been continuously employed 
with her current employer since March 2015. Applicant has only paid one small 
delinquent debt cited in the SOR. She also showed that two court cases against her had 
been dismissed, but she provided no details as to why these cases were dismissed. Did 
she enter into a settlement with the creditors? She has not been able to show that her 
financial problems are under control or that she has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
any of her remaining creditors. She denied the legitimacy of the largest debt, but she 
failed to provide corroborating evidence to show that she is not legally responsible for 
this debt. Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20 (b) partly applies, however, mitigating conditions 
¶¶ 20(a), (c), (d), and (e) do not apply.  
 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise trustworthiness concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant is a mature, educated adult who earned two Associate’s degrees and a 
Bachelor’s degree. It is not credible that she could have misread several questions in 
her e-QIP that required full and complete disclosure of her adverse financial situation. In 
addition, she was going through the legal system at, or near, the time she filled out the 
e-QIP concerning the judgments that had been filed against her. She failed to report any 
adverse financial information on the e-QIP. This evidence establishes significant 
trustworthiness concerns under AG ¶ 16(a).  
 
 AG ¶ 17 includes three conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
arising from Applicant’s potentially disqualifying personal conduct: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant did not provide, and the record does not otherwise contain, evidence 
that would support mitigation under any of the foregoing conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
7 
 
 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
  
Applicant continues to owe more than $17,000 to numerous creditors for debts 
incurred after her spouse became ill and unable to work. Although I am sympathetic to 
her situation, it is also important to note that Applicant paid one small debt cited in the 
SOR. She was able to show that two civil cases had been dismissed against her, but 
she failed to show that she is no longer legally responsible for those debts. She claimed 
a department store debt was paid after she was issued a 1099, but failed to provide any 
verification of the 1099. She claimed that the largest debt cited in the SOR belonged to 
a family member, but she failed to provide any documentation to support her claim. She 
has not demonstrated any effort to address the remaining unpaid debts. The omission 
of adverse financial information on her e-QIP was deliberate and recent. Overall, the 
evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and 
suitability for a position of trust with the Government. She failed to meet her burden to 
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under the guidelines for financial 
considerations, or personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   
 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant’s national security eligibility 
for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
   
 
                                                   
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
