 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00393 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq. 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant provided 
legitimate reasons for disputing the alleged accounts. Based on his overall financial 
record and testimony at hearing, it is unlikely Applicant incurred the delinquent debts 
alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR). Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case  
 
On March 8, 2017, the DOD issued a SOR detailing security concerns under the 
financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance and 
recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge at the Department 
of Defense Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) for a determination whether to revoke his 
security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On September 1, 
2017, I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission 
of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses, and the parties 
complied.2 At the hearing, convened on September 18, 2017, I admitted Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1, and 3 – 4, and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, without objection. 
Applicant objected to GE 2, the summary of his background interview, citing the 
document’s inaccuracy. I sustained the objection, GE 2 is excluded and I did not 
consider it.3 DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 26, 2017. After the 
hearing, Applicant submitted AE D and it is admitted without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 57, has worked for a federal contractor since February 2012 as a 
machinist. He completed his first security clearance application in November 2015. He 
did not disclose any derogatory information. The ensuing investigation revealed five 
delinquent debts for approximately $26,000 bearing Applicant’s name.4 
 
 Applicant admits that he had two credit cards as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
He opened the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a in 2001. Applicant was the only authorized 
user on the account. He used the credit card sparingly and paid the balance in full each 
month. In March 2014, the bank notified Applicant that his credit card account was past 
due. Applicant closed the account and disputed the charges as unauthorized. He 
completed the forms required by the bank to dispute the charges and considered the 
matter resolved. In March 2017, Applicant received an email indicating that several 
unsuccessful attempts had been made to access the online portal for the credit card. 
When Applicant called to investigate the issue, he was asked to provide personal 
identifying information. The inquiries made him uncomfortable and he refused to provide 
the information. Fearing a scam, he has not attempted to contact the creditor again. He 
disputed the accounts with credit reporting agencies without success.5 
 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order and the discovery letter are appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I and II, respectively.  
 
3 Tr. 17. 
 
4 GE 1, 3-4.  
 
5 Tr. 22-28, 30-31, 33-36; AE B-C.  
 
3 
 
 Applicant claims the credit card alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a fraudulent account. He 
admits having a credit card from the same bank that he opened in July 2003. He 
maintained the account in good standing until November 2016, when he closed the 
account. He had not used the card in almost ten years. The account alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b was opened in 2008 and was used through at least September 2011. In October 
2017, Applicant received a letter from the creditor indicating that the account was 
closed, collections have ceased, and that Applicant has no further obligation regarding 
the account.6  
 
 The remaining three debts in the SOR, ¶¶ 1.c – 1.e, totaling $233, are for 
medical accounts that Applicant asserts were covered by his medical insurance. In 
response to a July 2017 dispute filed with the credit reporting agencies, the debts were 
deleted from his credit reports.7  
 
 Aside from the alleged accounts, Applicant has maintained a favorable financial 
history. He has several income streams. In addition to the income from his job, $46,000 
annually without overtime, Applicant receives a pension from a previous job. He 
receives rental income from his home, which he paid off in early 2017. In comparison, 
Applicant’s living expenses are low. He and his wife live in a recreational vehicle, which 
they park at campgrounds. Applicant has less than $22,000 in consumer debt, $20,000 
of which is for a vehicle. Applicant has approximately $150,000 in assets including his 
home and savings.8 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
                                                          
6 Tr. 28-30, 31-33; AE D. 
 
7 AE A-B; Answer.  
 
8 Tr. 37-46; GE 1. 
 
4 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to meet one’s financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.9 The record is sufficient to establish the Government’s prima 
facie case that Applicant has a history of not meeting financial obligations.10 However, 
he has provided sufficient information to explain and mitigate the alleged concerns.  
 
Applicant provided a legitimate basis for disputing the debts alleged in the SOR.  
He provided documentation of his disputes with the credit bureaus and the favorable 
results of his disputes for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.e.11 Although the creditor 
in SOR ¶ 1.a has yet to resolve the account in Applicant’s favor, Applicant testified 
credibly that he did not incur the charges resulting in the delinquent account. 
                                                          
9 AG ¶ 18. 
 
10 AG ¶ 19(c). 
 
11 AG ¶ 20(e).  
 
5 
 
Furthermore, the delinquent account is out of character with Applicant’s history of 
responsible use of consumer credit.  
 
Based on a consideration of the record as a whole, I have no doubts about 
Applicant’s ability to properly handle and safeguard classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person factors detailed in AG ¶ 2(d). 
Applicant is financially healthy and it is unlikely that his finances can be effectively used 
as a source of vulnerability or exploitation or duress.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
