 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00581 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
December 15, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2017, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
On April 15, 2017, Applicant submitted a written reply to the SOR, and requested 
a decision that the case be decided after a hearing before an administrative judge. 
(RSOR.) The case was first assigned to another administrative judge on May 18, 2017, 
but it was then reassigned to me on July 5, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 30, 2017, scheduling the hearing for 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
June 22, 2017. Because the Applicant was unavailable for several months, a second 
notice of hearing was issued on May 31, 2017, scheduling the hearing for August 29, 
2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented evidence 
which was identified and entered into evidence without objection as Exhibits A and B.  
 
Based on my careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Afghanistan. Department Counsel provided a summary of the facts, 
supported by Exhibit 4. The documents provide elaboration and context for the 
summary. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government 
reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable 
dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the material described above, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 30 years old. He was born in Afghanistan in 1986, and he moved to 
the United States in 2007. He became a naturalized United States citizen in 2014. 
Applicant is unmarried and he has no children. Applicant graduated high school and 
attended community college. He has been employed by a defense contractor as a 
Linguist/Interpreter for the last three years, 11 years in total, and he seeks a DoD 
security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector. (Tr at 6-7, 
23-26, 50.) 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence  
 
 The SOR lists two allegations regarding Foreign Influence, under Adjudicative 
Guideline B:  
 
 1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s mother and father are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan, and his father is currently a judge in superior court in 
Afghanistan. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. At the hearing, Applicant 
testified that his father is still a judge, but not in the superior court. His mother has 
always been a housewife. Neither of his parents have ever come to the United States, 
but he plans to apply for them to move to the United States, which is their desire. 
Applicant last saw his parents in 2014, after five years. He speaks with his mother twice 
a week and his father once every 10 days or two weeks.  (Tr at 26-29, 46.)  
 
 
3 
 
 2.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant has six brothers, who are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. Applicant also admitted this allegation in his RSOR. Applicant 
testified that none of his brothers is employed by the Government of Afghanistan. 
Applicant is the oldest of all of his brothers. Only one of Applicant’s brother, the second 
oldest, is employed, and the others are all students. The employed brother has been 
working as a linguist for the United States military for one and a half years, and 
Applicant speaks to him once a week. Two of Applicant's other brothers have also 
applied to be interpreters. Applicant speaks to his other brothers two or three times a 
month.  (Tr at 29-33, 44.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he has other relatives in Afghanistan, but he is not in 
contact with them. Applicant has an aunt and some cousins in the United States, but 
Applicant has no contact with them. He does have one cousin, who has been in the 
United States for almost three years, who is an interpreter like Applicant. Applicant 
visited him in the United States the week before the hearing. (Tr at 33-36.)  
 
Applicant purchased a home in the United States in January 2017, for $500,000. 
Applicant testified that he has worked as an interpreter for the U.S. military since he was 
16 years old. Applicant began his career as an interpreter when his father took him to a 
United States base in Afghanistan, and he met members of the United States military. 
He has always saved his money, and that is how he was able to put $100,000 down to 
purchase the house. Applicant has no property interest in Afghanistan, nor does he 
stand to inherit anything there. He also does not provide any financial aid to his relatives 
in Afghanistan. Finally, Applicant testified that he is totally loyal to the United States. (Tr 
at 36 -42, 47.)    
 
Mitigation  
 
 Applicant submitted a number of documents in mitigation. They include: nine 
letters and Certificates of Appreciation (Exhibit B), and four very positive character 
letters, including one from a United States Marine Corps Colonel, who wrote that 
Applicant was a tremendously valuable asset to his organization, whose “ability to 
interact with uniformed personnel, government civilians . . . and local nationals is 
nothing short of outstanding.”  (Exhibit B).  
 
Current Status of Afghanistan 
 
 Afghanistan has been an independent nation since August 1919, after the British 
relinquished control. A monarchy ruled from 1919 until a military coup in 1973. 
Following a Soviet supported coup in 1978 a Marxist government emerged. In 1979, 
Soviet forces invaded and occupied Afghanistan, until the Soviets withdrew in 1989. 
After the withdrawal a civil war continued, and in the mid-1990s the Taliban rose to 
power. The Taliban committed massive human rights violations and provided sanctuary 
to Osama Bin-Laden and Al Quaida. After the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks the 
United States forces and a coalition commenced military operations in October 2001, 
and forced the Taliban out of power and a new democratic government was installed in 
2004.  
 
4 
 
 
 Afghanistan’s human rights record has remained poor, and the Afghan-Taliban 
dominated insurgency has become increasingly frequent, sophisticated, and 
destabilizing. Overall, the State Department has declared that the security threat to all 
American citizens in Afghanistan remains critical as no part of Afghanistan is immune 
from violence. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Disqualifying conditions (a) and (b) are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(c) failure to report or fully disclose, when required, association with a 
foreign person, group, government, or country; 
 
(d) counterintelligence information, whether classified or unclassified, that 
indicates the individual's access to classified information or eligibility for a 
sensitive position may involve unacceptable risk to national security; 
 
 
6 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest;  
 
(g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, 
or employee of a foreign intelligence entity; 
 
(h) indications that representatives or nationals from a foreign country are 
acting to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling or residing outside the U.S., that may 
make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a 
foreign person, group, government, or country. 
 
  Applicant’s family members, especially his mother and father, are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. His father is also a judge in Afghanistan. This evidence is 
sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
7 
 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Because of Applicant's long history of working as an interpreter for the United 
States military, his financial assets in the United States, his strong feelings of loyalty to 
the U. S., the very laudatory letters of recommendation, and the Certificates of 
Appreciation that he has received, I find that mitigating factor AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable 
and controlling in this case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence 
security concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
8 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
