 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 17-02913 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F and personal conduct under Guideline E. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 29, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in April 2017. (Item 7) 
After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance.  
 
On September 7, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F and personal 
conduct under Guideline E. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR admitting seven allegations of delinquent debt 
under Guideline F. Applicant admitted the one allegation of falsification of information in 
his e-QIP under Guideline E. He elected to have the matter decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on October 31, 2017. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on November 15, 2017. He was provided the opportunity to file objections and 
to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant 
responded to the FORM with a 25 page submission. I was assigned the case on 
January 9, 2018.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (Item 7) was not authenticated and could not 
be considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the PSI summary. Applicant responded to the FORM, but he did not raise any 
objection to consideration of the PSI. Since there is no objection by Applicant, I will 
consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 37 years old. He graduated from high school in June 1998. Applicant 
married in 2000, and has five children from his marriage. (Item 3) He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Army from 2003 to 2011, receiving an honorable discharge. He held a 
security clearance while in the military. He has been employed with his current 
employer since 2016. 
 
 The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Items 4 and 5), confirm the following 
delinquent debts for Applicant: a loan charged off in the amount of $6,641, (SOR 1.a); a 
charged off- auto loan account for $3,375 (SOR 1.b); a collection account delinquent in 
the amount of $989 (SOR 1.c); a collection account in the amount of $2,421 SOR 1.d); 
a collection account in the amount of $891 (SOR 1.e);  a collection account in the 
amount of $590 (SOR 1.f); and a collection account in the amount of $4,811 (SOR 1.g). 
The amount of the delinquent debt is approximately $20,000.  
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs.  
 
3 
 
 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline E, one personal conduct security concern for  
failing to provide full, accurate, and complete information on his June 29, 2016 e-QIP. 
Applicant allegedly did not disclose any delinquent collection accounts in response to 
question 26 of the e-QIP.  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant noted that he is in the process of resolving 
his debts and attached certain sections of his 2017 credit bureau report. The credit 
reports do not establish a pattern of responsible action or good-faith efforts to resolve 
his financial difficulties. The SOR debts shown on the report are noted as “charged off.” 
An earlier account for a smaller amount that is not is shown on the SOR has been 
resolved.  Other accounts are noted as closed. (Attachment to SOR) 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant elaborated on the fact that when he was 
discharged from the military in 2011, he did not gain stable employment until December 
2012. He acknowledged that in 2004, he was preliminarily denied a clearance due to 
financial difficulties. (Item 6)  He also noted that he had surgery on his ankle in 2005 
due to the stress of repeated Army training. He explained that he accepted a low-paying 
job for three years, but left in 2015 for a better job. However, the job offer was rescinded 
due to passport issues.  He started another job, which lasted until March 2016, but he 
moved to another state for a job in June 2016, which started in December 2016. He 
further explained that he was terminated in September 2017, but is eligible for rehire 
dependent on a security clearance. (Response to FORM) When he submitted the 
Response to FORM in December 2017, he stated that he was unemployed and 
dependent on state programs. He received unemployment benefits in the amount of 
$475 a week. However, the latest review states that he is sponsored for a clearance. 
 
 Applicant addressed each SOR allegation and basically his response for each 
was similar. He had contacted the creditor and was attempting some type of resolution. 
If that did not materialize, he would begin a payment plan of $50 per month for each 
delinquent debt.  He did not include documentation that he has as yet made any 
payments on the debts alleged in the SOR. He included his DD214, his wage 
statement, a paid in full receipt for a non-SOR debt, dated November 2017, and an 
apartment rental revised account statement showing a zero balance. (Response to 
FORM, attachments)  
 
 Applicant included a personal budget and a projected pay out schedule for the 
delinquent debts paying a monthly amount of $50. He also included a letter of reference 
from a coworker who endorsed Applicant as a valuable member of the team. He 
completed training in a short period of time and has proven himself valuable. The 
coworker acknowledged that he assisted Applicant in completing the projected payment 
sheet. The 2016 wage slip included in the information shows that Applicant ‘s actual 
monthly income is $3,200 and at the end of the month after expenses, he has no net 
remainder. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 In the PSI, Applicant reported that he was unemployed from March 2016 to June 
2016, and used a tax refund to provide for his family. When confronted about financial 
delinquencies, he claimed that he was not aware of any. He then explained that he 
would address the delinquent debts and make arrangement to pay them.  He wanted to 
see a copy of his credit report to verify the accuracy of the accounts.  He summarized 
by saying that he has a stable salary and has every intention of clearing up his debt. He 
noted that he has never lived beyond his means. He noted that he has never used a 
credit counseling service because of privacy issues. (Item 7, PSI ) 
  
 As to his failure to provide negative financial information on the e-QIP, Applicant 
admitted that he answered “No” to questions about debts in the past seven years. He 
explained that he did not know the time frame of the debts and did not think to look at a 
credit report. He stated that it was an oversight. However, he received his credit report 
before his PSI and still did not voluntarily disclose any information. When confronted 
about the various delinquent debts, he knew there was a repossession of a vehicle and 
a loan from 2011 when he was in the military. He had experience with the significance 
of financial issues from the military issue in 2004. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
5 
 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) An 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Credit reports reveal, and Applicant admitted, that he has multiple delinquent 
debts dating to as early as 2004. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns 
under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  and 
 
 
6 
 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
   
 The information raises issues about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his 
financial obligations. Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, 
the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. Applicant was 
unemployed after leaving the military, but he did not establish that the periods of 
unemployment prohibited him from attempting to resolve his financial problems. The 
conditions causing Applicant’s financial problems were within his control. He stated that 
he did not resolve some of his financial issues because of his unemployment issues, but 
he has been employed since 2016. He just recently contacted the creditors in 2017, 
after the issuance of the SOR. Applicant did not provide information concerning financial 
counseling. He did not present a projected plan to resolve his financial problems, but he 
has not started the payments or presented any documentation of good-faith efforts to  
pay or resolve his delinquent debts. Accordingly, he has not established a good-faith 
effort to pay his debts.  
 
 Applicant was gainfully employed at the time of his security clearance 
application. During his interview, he stated that he had a stable income. He stated that 
he has a stable income and yet he has not yet paid or engaged himself in a payment 
plan.  He also had financial issues when he was in the military in 2004, so he knows the 
importance of such matters. He has not acted responsibly because there is no clear 
 
7 
 
 
evidence that his debt problems have been resolved, or that his finances are under 
control. Overall, he has not acted with reason and responsibility towards his finances, 
despite his unemployment. He has not established that he will protect and safeguard 
classified information. Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate 
financial security concerns.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative 
processes. (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks 
whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence that the person can be trusted to 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a security 
clearance depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a 
person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot 
function properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive information is 
in the best interest of the United States Government.  
 While there is a security concern for a deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement to the 
Government when applying for a security clearance, not every omission, concealment, 
or inaccurate statement is a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. 
It is deliberate if done knowingly and willfully with intent to deceive. 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant did not provide full, complete, and accurate 
information concerning his delinquent debts in the past seven years. Applicant did not 
report on his e-QIP that he has any delinquent debts. Applicant’s failure to list the 
delinquent debts raises a security concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying 
Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
 
 Applicant admitted that he did not provide full, complete, and accurate 
information on his security clearance application because he did not check his credit 
report. He noted during his PSI, after being confronted, that he had a car repossession 
that he should have reported. 
 
 Applicant did not consult his credit report before completing the e-QIP. He did not 
list any delinquent debts on his e-QIP. Applicant must have known that he had loans 
and credit cards that he had not paid. He did not know all of the details of his financial 
situation, but he knew he had delinquent debt. Because Applicant should have known of 
his delinquent loans and credit cards, his failure to list any delinquent debt on the e-QIP 
 
8 
 
 
was deliberate with an intent not to present a true picture of his financial situation. His 
failure to provide the correct information obscured the full extent of his financial situation 
from adjudicators. I find Applicant deliberately failed to provide correct and accurate 
information concerning his debts on his security clearance application.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s many years 
of employment while holding a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant failed to provide documentary evidence that he has actually addressed 
the delinquent debts on the SOR. In his Response to FORM, he submitted a projected 
plan that he would make $50 payments on each delinquent account, when he was 
working. He intends to pay his debts, but promises in the future are not sufficient to 
provide mitigation. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, he failed to supplement the record with sufficient relevant 
and material facts regarding his financial circumstances, to adequately articulate his 
positions, and provide facts to mitigate the financial security concerns. In short, the file 
lacks sufficient evidence provided by Applicant to establish that he paid, arranged to 
pay, settled, compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved his delinquent accounts. 
The record lacks corroborating or substantial documents and details to explain his 
finances. He noted that he was unemployed several times, but he is sponsored for a 
security clearance. Perhaps the record is not clear as to his current situation. 
 
 
9 
 
 
  In addition, he deliberately failed to report his debts on his SCA. Applicant’s 
failure to appropriately manage his finances, and his lack of action to resolve financial 
issues, are firm indications that he may not adequately safeguard classified information. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts concerning 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his 
suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial situation and 
personal conduct.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
NOREEN A. LYNCH 
Administrative Judge 
