 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01840 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyam, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 2, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 24, 2017. She later requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 10, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
19, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 15, 2017. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. Applicant objected to GE 2, and it was not admitted into 
evidence. GE 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6 were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through M. There were no objections, and they were admitted 
into evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on November 22, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. She dropped out of high school in the 9th grade and later 
earned her General Equivalency Diploma. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 2012 and 
a master’s degree in engineering in 2016. She is currently working on a master’s in 
business administration that is being funded by her current employer. She has three 
children ages 27, 25, and 17. She was married from 2002 to 2012 and has no children 
from the marriage.2  
 
Applicant’s youngest child, a daughter, lives at home. She does not receive child 
support. She will graduate from high school in December 2017 and is taking courses to 
become a nurse.3  
 
Applicant has worked for her current employer, a federal contractor, since May 
2016. Before then she was employed from November 2014 to August 2016, where she 
overlapped working the weekends for her current full-time employer. She was 
unemployed from July 2014 to November 2014; August 2012 to April 2013; September 
2011 to January 2012; and February 2009 to November 2010 She was a full-time student 
from 2004 to 2016. She received scholarships, financial aid, and student loans to fund 
her education.4  
 
 In April 2012, after being laid off from work, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy protection (SOR ¶ 1.a). She received unemployment benefits for a period, but 
was unable to pay her rent and other bills. She paid a bankruptcy attorney $300 or $400 
to file, and a payment plan was arranged, but she could not afford the payments because 
of her unemployment. In January 2013, the bankruptcy trustee dismissed the Chapter 13 
                                                          
2 Tr. 24-37. 
 
3 Tr. 24-37. 
 
4 Tr. 24-37; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
bankruptcy due to noncompliance. Applicant testified she paid about $300 to $400 into 
the plan.5  
 
 In February 2013, Applicant was employed in temporary jobs and contacted a 
different bankruptcy attorney, and he refiled a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. She discussed with 
him that she was working at temporary jobs, so her employment was unsteady. She 
testified they discussed filing bankruptcy under Chapter 7, and she was led to believe he 
was filing under Chapter 7. The attorney’s fees for filing a Chapter 7 were $1,400, and 
she was going to make installment payments on his fee. She later learned he had filed 
her bankruptcy under Chapter 13. She lost her temporary job, and the Chapter 13 was 
dismissed in May 2013, for failing to comply with the terms of the payment plan. Applicant 
admitted she was unfamiliar with the bankruptcy process. (SOR ¶ 1.b).6  
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit reports from June 2016, 
March 2017, and Applicant’s admissions and testimony.7 Applicant enrolled in a credit 
counseling service (CCS). After reviewing her monthly finances, it was determined that 
Applicant had approximately $318 remaining at the end of the month. The CCS advised 
her not to pay small amounts on each of her debts, but rather attempt to save 
approximately $3,500 and then make settlement offers she could afford. She began 
saving each month. The CCS has reviewed her credit report with her three times to help 
her manage her debts. She works with them over the phone. She also meets in person 
with an advisor from a non-profit credit counseling service, who is helping her manage 
her finances for long-term stability. She has taken financial management classes through 
CSS. She has learned how to budget and has a written budget. She works with both 
services, but after she received the SOR, she decided to attempt to settle her debts on 
her own. She does not pay for either service.8  
 
 Applicant purchased a used car in 2009. It stopped working, and it was voluntarily 
repossessed in 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.c-$6,523). She did not have the money at the time to pay 
the deficiency owed on the debt. She attempted to settle the debt with the creditor, but it 
would not return her phone calls for a period. She made a settlement offer of $2,500 to 
the creditor in August 2017, and at the time of the hearing, she was waiting for its 
response.9  
 
Applicant disputed the amount of the debt owed in SOR ¶ 1.d. She testified that 
she completed the terms of a lease, but her landlord claimed she broke the lease and 
                                                          
5 Tr. 37-41; GE 5. 
 
6 Tr. 41-50; GE 6; AE A, B, L. 
 
7 GE 3, 4. 
 
8 Tr. 53-63; AE B, L. 
 
9 Tr. 50-53. 
 
 
4 
 
 
owed for other things. She settled the debt in September 2017, for $1,600 and provided 
proof of payment.10 
 
 Applicant became sick in 2011, and she did not have medical insurance. The 
doctors could not determine the cause of her medical problems and she had numerous 
tests. In 2013, she changed doctors and had insurance. She had surgery in 2014. The 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 1.l, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, 1.t, 1.u and 1.v are medical 
debts. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.t and 1.u have been removed from Applicant’s credit report 
after she contacted the hospital holding the claims. She completed financial forms and 
the debts were discounted. A law firm is collecting the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 1.l, 
1.n, and 1.o. Applicant contacted the firm. She is attempting to negotiate a settlement 
amount on the aggregate of the debts. They remain unpaid.11  
 
 Applicant testified that she contacted the creditor for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.q and 
1.r, and it agreed to accept a monthly payment of $50. She provided proof that she has 
made two payments on these medical debts and is resolving them. She testified that she 
does not have an agreement with the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.p, but made a $50 payment to 
start the process.12 
 
 Applicant is resolving the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f with regular $50 payments. Applicant 
settled the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g with two payments in September and October 2017. She 
was waiting for the confirmation letter from the creditor. She settled the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j 
in October 2017. She received a settlement offer from the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.m, which 
is valid until the end of December 2017. She anticipated being able to pay the settlement 
in December.13 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that she contacted the creditors for the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.s and 1.w. Both told her that they did not have accounts in her name, and she has 
been unable to locate the current creditors. She provided a copy of the collection accounts 
from a consolidated credit report and these debts are not listed.14  
 
 Applicant testified that after she received the SOR, she contacted the creditors 
about the debts. Some she was aware of and others were brought to her attention through 
her background investigation. Some of the medical creditors agreed to settle her debts, 
other would not. She was attempting to pay the smallest debts first. She is currently 
earning an annual income of $34,000 after taxes. She has researched and read financial 
advice about how to eliminate debt and make settlement offers to creditors. She is 
                                                          
10 Tr. 63-65; AE C. 
 
11 Tr. 65; AE F. 
 
12 Tr. 75-79; AE I, J. 
 
13 Tr. 80-92; AE E, G, H, M. 
 
14 Tr. 93-95; AE K. 
 
 
5 
 
 
enrolling her daughter in credit counseling, so she does not repeat Applicant’s financial 
mistakes. Her daughter is working part time and pays for non-necessity items. Applicant 
is avoiding creating future debts. She has reduced her grocery bill and downgraded her 
telephone service and cable plan. Applicant is hoping that her earning potential will 
increase with a master’s in business administration. She understands she has student 
loans that are deferred that will become due and is budgeting to ensure she will be 
current.15  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
                                                          
15 Tr. 29, 57-58, 75-109. 
 
6 
 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in about 2011, and she was 
unable to pay them. She filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy petitions twice, and they were 
dismissed in January 2013 and May 2013 for failure to make plan payments. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has debts that she is resolving and some remain unpaid. Her debts are 
recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to unemployment, underemployment 
and medical issues. She is a single mother who does not receive child support. These 
conditions were beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must 
have acted responsibly under the circumstances. After receiving the SOR, Applicant 
began participating in credit counseling so she could resolve her debts. She was told to 
save her money until she accumulated a sufficient amount and then negotiate 
settlements. After receiving the SOR, she decided to attempt to resolve her delinquent 
debts. She has made progress in doing so, but still has debts remaining to be resolved. 
Twice Applicant attempted to resolve her debts through bankruptcy. Despite having 
temporary jobs, her attorneys filed for her under Chapter 13, resulting in dismissal due to 
nonpayment because she lost her job. Applicant credibly testified she believed in one 
instance that the attorney was supposed to file for her under Chapter 7, which did not 
occur. I find that under the circumstances she has acted responsibly by paying some of 
her delinquent debts and has plans to resolve the remaining ones. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 Applicant has been receiving financial counseling from two services. She does not 
pay for their services. She has a budget. She has paid some of the debts and is making 
payments on others. She has reduced her monthly expenses to expedite repayment of 
the remaining debts. There are clear indications her financial problems are being resolved 
and under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant provided evidence that she has initiated 
good-faith efforts to repay some overdue creditors and resolve her debts. Not all of her 
debts are resolved, but she is making progress based on her resources. AG ¶ 20(d) 
applies. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases, stating:  
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and every 
debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrates 
that he has ‘. . . established a plan to resolve his financial problems and 
taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge can reasonably 
consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2 (a) 
(‘Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a 
determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
 
9 
 
 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.16 
 
Applicant is 42 years old. She has three children, one of whom lives with her. 
Despite dropping out of high school in the 9th grade, she has earned two college degrees 
and is working on a third. For many years, she was underemployed and had significant 
periods of unemployment. She recognizes the importance of being financially reliable for 
her future stability. She has been receiving financial counseling and has systematically 
been reducing her delinquent debts. Some of her debts are resolved. Others have not yet 
been resolved. I am convinced that Applicant understands the importance of remaining 
committed to resolving these debts for both her financial future and for future career 
opportunities. Although her financial track record is not stellar, she has reduced her 
expenses and is making progress. Applicant’s initiative and commitment convince me that 
she will continue to pay her remaining delinquent debts. The record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.w:  For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
16ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
