 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ADP Case No. 17--00491 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling 
$14,218, and deliberate intention to omit the delinquent debts on her May 19, 2015 
Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF-86) or security clearance 
application (SCA) with intent to deceive the Government about her finances. Financial 
considerations and personal conduct trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to sensitive information is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On May 19, 2015, Applicant signed an SCA. (GE 1) On April 26, 2017, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, and modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, 
dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective 
on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that it 
is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue his access 
to sensitive information, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
 
2 
                                         
 
whether access to sensitive information should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
Specifically, the SOR set forth trustworthiness concerns arising under the financial 
considerations and personal conduct guidelines. (SOR) 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative determination 
based on the written record. On July 24, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant the 
Government’s written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM), which contained 
seven items. Applicant received the FORM on August 4, 2017. Applicant did not respond 
to the FORM.   
  
 The SOR in this case was issued under DoD 5200.2-R and the September 1, 2006 
AGs. DoD Manual 5200.02, Procedures for the DOD Personnel Security Program (PSP) 
became effective on April 3, 2017, and it incorporates and replaces DoD 5200.2-R. While 
this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and are effective 
“for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information under DoD Manual 5200.02 and 
the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted: she was indebted to the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a through 1 o, and admitted under SOR ¶ 2.a that she did not list the delinquent accounts 
and provided no further information as alleged in the SOR.   
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old claims analyst who has worked for her public trust sponsor 
since April 2002. (Item 3) In 1997, she graduated from high school.  She did not serve in 
the military. She is married with one child. She currently holds a DOD position of public 
trust.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant volunteered during her investigative interview in 2016, that she believed 
she had three delinquent credit card accounts, but she could not recall the accounts. (Item 
4)  She is the sole account holder. She stated that she has not paid any of the accounts 
because she does not have sufficient income.  She further explained that she has no 
intention of paying the accounts because she does not have the money.  When she was 
                                            
1 Application of DOD 5200.2-R and the September 1, 2006 AGs, which were in effect when the SOR 
was issued, would not change my decision in this case. 
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
confronted with the delinquent  accounts, she answered that she did not recall the account 
or why they were delinquent. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant, in response to her DOD interrogatories in August 2016, admitted to each 
of the SOR alleged delinquent accounts; stated that she has not paid them, and has no 
payment plan for them. (Item 5) Applicant’s credit reports confirm the delinquent debts. 
(Items 6 and 7) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a. alleges that Applicant deliberately omitted material facts on her SCA in 
May 19, 2015, when she answered “No” to Section 26- Financial Record Delinquency 
involving routine accounts.  Applicant confirmed her answer of “No” when interviewed: yet 
on her budget report in the file, she listed some of the SOR accounts. Also, she reported a 
total net monthly income of $3,962 (for she and her spouse), with a monthly net remainder 
of $460.98. She admitted that she intentionally did not list any delinquent accounts. She 
did not provide any additional information in response to the FORM to provide mitigation. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a [public trust position].” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 
528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to classified information applies 
similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified information. As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national security 
or other sensitive information and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently 
trustworthy to have access to such information. See Id. at 527. 
  
Positions formerly designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as noncritical-
sensitive positions and include those personnel “[w]ith access to automated systems that 
contain military active duty, guard, or reservists’ personally identifiable information or 
information pertaining to Service members that is otherwise protected from disclosure by 
DoD 5400.11-R where such access has the potential to cause serious damage to the 
national security.” DOD Manual 5200.02 ¶ 4.1a(3)(c).   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
 
4 
                                         
 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein 
and an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to sensitive 
information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
The protection of national security and sensitive records is paramount. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated 
by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security 
concern such as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance 
misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not 
 
5 
                                         
 
meeting financial obligations.” The evidence of record establishes AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 
19(c). Further inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
 
 Seven financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof 
to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to 
resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility [for a public trust 
position], there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a [public trust position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government presents 
evidence raising [trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant 
to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The standard 
applicable in [public trust position] decisions is that articulated in Egan, supra. 
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Directive, 
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
6 
                                         
 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant presented no information concerning the delinquent accounts. She does 
not recall when they became delinquent, but she admitted to each of them. Her responses 
to the interrogatories confirmed that she has not paid any of the accounts and has no plan 
in place to do so. She provided no information except that she does not have the money 
to pay them and does not intend to pay them. There is no evidence of financial counseling.  
None of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a trustworthiness concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide 
truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or 
adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case in regard to the alleged falsification of his SCA, “(a) deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire. . . . used to conduct investigations, . . . determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .”3 Applicant confirmed that she answered “no” and gave no 
reason that would mitigate her omissions. She knew she had at least three or four 
delinquent debts and volunteered that information during her interview. She provided no 
reasonable explanation to refute the deliberate omission.  She has not mitigated the 
personal conduct issue. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
3 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an 
applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider 
the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. 
[Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had 
established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted 
to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity 
at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a public trust 
position “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration” of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines F and E are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed 
under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old claims analyst who has worked for a DOD contractor since 
2002. She graduated from high school in 1997. She is married and has one child. She has 
held a position of trust for a number of years.  
 
Applicant has not paid any of the alleged SOR delinquent accounts, but she 
admitted to each of them. Her credit reports confirm the delinquent accounts. She 
answered her interrogatories and confirmed that she has not paid any of them and has no 
plan in place to address the accounts. She informed the interviewer that she has no 
intention of paying them and cited the lack of money to pay them. She reported a net 
remainder on the budget that was in the file.  She admitted that she did not list the 
delinquent debts on the SCA. She has provided no information to supplement the record. 
She has not met her burden of proof in this case. 
 
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial considerations and personal conduct trustworthiness concerns are not 
mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for public trust position. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
                                         
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.o:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility 
for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
