 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00973 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 3, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 31, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The SOR was amended, and Applicant answered it on August 7, 
2017. The case was assigned to me on October 3, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 20, 2017. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on November 16, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C. There were 
no objections to any exhibits offered and all were admitted into evidence.2 DOHA received 
the hearing transcript on November 27, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He denied the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.j. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He is a high school graduate and attended college, but 
did not earn a degree. He married in 2008 and divorced in 2010. He has no children. He 
has worked for his current employer since January 2016.3  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to periods of unemployment and 
medical issues. His employment history shows periods of unemployment as the result of 
the following: losing a job because he received inadequate training, and it was not a good 
fit for him; being laid off when the company was sold and his assignment ended; working 
in a temporary assignment and not being chosen for the permanent job; being terminated 
due to excessive telephone usage after being warned; and being terminated due to 
excessive absences and tardiness.4 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 Bankruptcy in March 2010, and had approximately 
$13,542 of liabilities discharged in July 2010. He attributed those financial problems to 
the loss of his job and medical issues.5  
 
 In September 2014, Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy because he was behind 
in paying bills and wanted to pay his creditors. He listed more than $18,000 of debts. He 
was subsequently laid-off and unable to comply with the payment plan of the bankruptcy. 
It was dismissed in December 2014.6  
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I is the Government’s discovery letter.  
 
3 Tr. 14-16. 
 
4 Tr. 15-18; GE 1, 2. I have not considered any derogatory information that was not alleged in the SOR for 
disqualifying proposes. I may consider information for the purposes of applying mitigating conditions, in 
making a credibility determination and in analyzing the whole person.  
 
5 Tr. 24; GE 3. 
 
6 Tr. 24-25, 27; GE 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Credit reports from June 2016 and February 2017, Applicant’s admissions, and 
testimony substantiate the debts alleged in the SOR.7 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c 
($10,642) is a charged-off account for a repossessed vehicle Applicant purchased in 
approximately 2011. He testified he paid the monthly payments for two years but then 
could not afford it after he lost his job. He has not made any payments on this debt. It is 
unresolved.8  
 
 Applicant testified that the two debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e ($89; $89) are 
owed to the same creditor. The debts have two different account numbers. During his 
background interview, Applicant verified the two debts and told the investigator they 
became delinquent when he was unemployed. He intended to pay the full balances with 
his next paycheck. He testified that he contacted the creditor and was told it had only one 
account. He said he paid one debt.9  
 
 The debt is SOR ¶ 1.f ($3,091) is a judgment that was filed in 2014. Applicant 
testified he broke his lease because he was laid off in 2013 and was unable to pay the 
amount he owed. He contacted the creditor and updated them about his job situation, but 
he was unable to pay the debt. It remains unresolved.10  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($667) is for utility service for an apartment.  He did not pay 
the utility bill after he moved. Applicant told the government investigator that he intended 
to pay the account, but could not pay the full amount. Applicant testified the debt is not 
paid. It remains unresolved.11  
 
 Applicant testified that he did not recognize the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($81). During 
his background interview, he was confronted with the debt and acknowledged it belonged 
to him, and it was incurred for medical services and became delinquent in 2011. He told 
the investigator he intended to pay it in full. Applicant testified that he contacted the 
creditor and was told the account was paid by his insurance. Applicant did not provide 
supporting documents. It is unresolved.12 
 
 Applicant testified that he researched the collection account in SOR ¶ 1.i ($69). He 
thought it might be a medical bill, but had not received any mail from the creditor. During 
his background interview, Applicant acknowledged the medical debt and said it became 
delinquent in March 2012. He was unable to pay it because he had lost his job. He told 
                                                          
7 GE 2, 5, 6. 
  
8 Tr. 25-27. 
 
9 Tr. 27-30. 
 
10 Tr. 30-31. 
 
11 Tr. 31-32. 
 
12 Tr. 32-33. 
 
4 
 
 
the investigator that he would pay it as soon as he received his next paycheck. Applicant 
did not provide evidence this debt is paid.13  
 
 The delinquent debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($16,219) is an unpaid loan for a vehicle that 
Applicant purchased in 2014. He has been unable to pay the debt. He testified that it was 
included in his 2014 Chapter 13 bankruptcy that was dismissed. He understands he still 
owes the debt. It remains unresolved.14  
 
 Applicant testified that in January 2017 he hired a credit repair service. He paid 
them for a period of time and certain debts were removed from his credit report. At some 
point, he discontinued their service. He provided a letter from his attorney who filed the 
previous two bankruptcies for him. The letter reiterated that Applicant had worked with a 
credit repair company, and the attorney stated: “I do not believe his credit and/or financial 
situation was improved.” He recommended Applicant discontinue his agreement with the 
credit repair company and file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant testified he is following 
his attorney’s advice to file for bankruptcy. The attorney’s fees for filing are about $1,100. 
Applicant is making installment payments. He had $250 left to pay on the agreement.15 
 
 Applicant has had financial counseling as a prerequisite to filing bankruptcy. 
Applicant lives with his sister and pays rent. He has tried to save some money. He testified 
that he does not have any new unpaid debts. He has medical issues that require him to 
pay copays. He wants to pay his bills, but his unemployment has impacted his ability.16  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
                                                          
13 Tr. 33-34. 
 
14 Tr. 34-38. 
 
15 Tr. 19-24, 38-39; AE A, B, C.  
 
16 Tr. 40-41. 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
 
6 
 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 In 2010, Applicant discharged debts in Chapter 7 bankruptcy. In 2014, he again 
had financial problems and filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. It was dismissed several months 
later for failure to comply with the payment plan. Applicant’s delinquent debts began 
accumulating in 2011 and are unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to support the 
application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant had debts that were discharged through bankruptcy in 2010. He 
subsequently fell behind in paying his debts again after periods of unemployment. He 
filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2014, which was dismissed because he failed to comply 
 
7 
 
 
with the payment plan. He was again unemployed and unable to pay his debts. He began 
working for his current employer in January 2016. In September 2016, he was interviewed 
by a government investigator. He acknowledged many of his delinquent debts, and said 
he would pay some of the small ones when he received his next paycheck. At his hearing, 
more than a year later, he did not offer evidence that he paid the smaller delinquent debts, 
except as noted below. Instead, he stated that he intends to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy to 
resolve them. I am unable to conclude that future financial problems are unlikely to recur. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Some periods of Applicant’s unemployment were beyond his control, other periods 
were not. His medical issues were beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 
20(b) he must have acted responsible under the circumstances. After his debts were 
discharged in 2010, he again experienced financial problems due to unemployment. He 
has been working since January 2016, but did not provide sufficient evidence to show 
that since becoming employed he began resolving some smaller debts, except as noted 
below. He indicated to the investigator that he intended to do so, but did not. I find AG ¶ 
20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as required to file bankruptcy, but there are 
not clear indications that his financial issues are under control. I have given Applicant the 
benefit of the doubt that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are the same debt and he paid 
the debt. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to these debts. There is no evidence that he has made good-
faith efforts to repay his other overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his remaining 
delinquent debts. Although, it is his intention to have his debts discharged in bankruptcy, 
which is a legal means to address his debts, it does not constitute a good-faith effort to 
repay his overdue creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
 During his background interview, Applicant acknowledged that the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.h belonged to him, and he intended to pay it. He later disputed it stating it was paid by 
his insurer. He did not provide documentary evidence the debt was disputed, paid, and 
resolved. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
8 
 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 38 years old. He has had significant periods of unemployment and 
medical issues that required him to make copayments. He is single and has no children. 
Applicant’s debts were discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2010, and he intends to 
resolve his current debts the same way. Applicant has been steadily employed for 22 
months, during which time he resolved one small debt. He did not resolve any of the 
remaining debts in the SOR, despite indicating he intended to do so. Applicant’s lack of 
a reliable financial track record, even when employed, is a concern. Although there is 
some mitigation, it is insufficient to overcome the security concerns raised by his finances. 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.j:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
