 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     -------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-01065 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for access to classified information. She did not present sufficient evidence to 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from her long-standing 
history of financial problems or difficulties. Accordingly, this case is decided against 
Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on February 5, 2016.1 This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on May 15, 2017, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 3.  
 
 
2 
 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 26, 2017. She requested a decision based 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Her response consisted of (1) handwritten 
responses on a copy of the SOR in which she admitted 19 of the 23 factual allegations, 
and (2) a two-page memorandum. She did not submit any supporting documentation 
with her answer.       
 
On June 29, 2017, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, some of 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, who received it July 21, 2017. She did not reply within 30 days of receipt of 
the FORM. The case was assigned to me on December 22, 2017.     
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for her job 
as a senior consultant for a federal contractor. She has been so employed since 
October 2015. Her educational background includes a bachelor’s degree awarded in 
1991. She married in 2015, and she has one child, born in 1996, from a previous 
relationship.  
 
Applicant’s employment history, as reflected in her security clearance application, 
includes multiple periods of unemployment dating back to 2007.2 After losing a job due 
to downsizing and closure of the company in 2010, she moved in 2011 from the West 
Coast to the East Coast where she currently resides. She lived with family for more than 
two years before obtaining a rental property in 2013. After her relocation, her 
employment history was uneven and included periods of unemployment until she 
obtained her current job in 2015.    
 
The SOR alleges a history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of 23 
delinquent debts for a total of approximately $22,000. Fifteen of the 23 delinquent debts 
are medical collection accounts for a total of about $11,038. The delinquent accounts 
are established by a combination of Applicant’s admissions in her answer to the SOR, 
and credit reports from March 2017 and February 2016.3 There is no documentation in 
the written record to establish that any of the delinquent accounts were paid, settled or 
compromised, in a payment arrangement, disputed, cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise 
resolved.  
 
                                                          
2 Exhibit 3.  
 
3 Exhibits 4 and 5, respectively.  
 
 
3 
 
In her May 2017 answer to the SOR, Applicant explained the following about her 
history of financial problems: 
 
• She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.g, and she claimed that 
the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.k are duplicative.  
• She attributed her delinquent financial accounts to unemployment and 
underemployment.  
• She attributed the medical collection accounts to uninsured medical 
expenses due to a miscarriage in 2015. 
• She obtained her current job after being outside of her profession for five 
and a half years. 
• Since returning to regular, full-time employment in 2015, she has not 
reached a point where she has sufficient funds to repay her delinquent 
debts, because her focus has been on meeting her current housing and 
living expenses.  
 
As Applicant did not reply to the FORM, she likewise did not take advantage of 
the opportunity to submit documentation in extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as 
appropriate, in support of her case.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.4 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.5 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”6 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.7 The Appeal Board has 
                                                          
4 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
5 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
6 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
7 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.8 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.9 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.10 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.11 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.12 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.13 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.14 
  
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.15 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted). 
 
9 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
10 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
12 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
13 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
14 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
15 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. There is no evidence 
that Applicant has made any progress in resolving the delinquent debts. Her 
problematic financial history suggests she may be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.  
 
 With that said, I have given little weight to the 15 unresolved medical collection 
accounts that Applicant incurred due to uninsured medical expenses. Medical debt is 
unlike other types of debt. First, it is presumed that medical debt is incurred for 
necessary medical care and treatment as opposed to frivolous or irresponsible spending 
or otherwise living beyond one’s means. Second, medical debt is usually unplanned, 
unexpected, and nondiscretionary. Third, it can add hundreds if not thousands of dollars 
in debt in a short period, which can overwhelm a debtor. Accordingly, the allegations 
involving the 15 medical collection accounts are decided for Applicant.    
 
 What is missing here is documentation in support of Applicant’s case. There is no 
documentation to establish that she has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay her other delinquent debts. Although her financial problems are connected to her 
periods of unemployment and underemployment that preceded her current job, I cannot 
conclude that she has acted responsibly under the circumstances given the state of the 
written record. Moreover, given that she requested a decision based on the written 
hearing in lieu of a hearing, the lack of documentation undermines her case. It’s the 
responsibility of the individual applicant to produce relevant documentation in support of 
their case. Here, Applicant has not met her burden of production because she did not 
present sufficient documentation showing that she is making some sort of a good-faith 
effort to resolve the other delinquent debts.   
  
 Applicant’s history of financial problems or difficulties creates doubt about her 
reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In 
reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the 
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also 
 
6 
 
considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that she did not meet her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d-1.f, 1.j, 1.l,  
1.n-1.s, and 1.u-1.w:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.g-1.i, 1.k,  
1.m, and 1.t      Against Applicant    
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
