 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01112 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
On October 7, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On May 5, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Items 1 and 2) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by DoD on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 2, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 28, 2017, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including 
 
2 
 
 
documents identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant received the FORM on July 11, 
2017. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The 
SOR and answer (combined as Item 1) are the pleadings in the case. Items 2 through 6 
are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
November 13, 2017. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). The new AGs are effective June 8, 2017, for all 
the decisions on or after that date, and they supersede the AGs that Applicant received 
with the SOR.1 Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did not 
affect my decision in this case.  
 
    Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact:  Applicant is 59 years old. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 1983. He was married for over 30 years until his wife passed away 
in September 2013. He has a 31-year-old daughter, and a 27-year-old son. He has 
been employed by a Federal government contractor since May 2004. He has applied for 
a security clearance in connection with his employment. (Items 2 and 3) 
 
As recently as March 2017, Applicant had ten delinquent accounts, including 
student loans, consumer debt accounts, and a medical bill, totaling $51,043. (Items 1 
and 6) Under the Financial Section of his SCA, he did not list any delinquent debts, 
though he discussed them at length in his February 2016 background interview. (Items 
2 and 3) He claimed that his deceased spouse had several credit card accounts for 
which he was a co-signer, and acknowledged that some of these accounts may not 
have been paid. He also stated that his son may have outstanding student loans that he 
had also co-signed, but he was not certain since he had not checked his credit lately. 
He did not report these delinquent accounts on his SCA because he was not the 
account holder, but merely a co-signer on the accounts. During his interview, Applicant 
was provided information about his delinquent debts from his October 2015 credit 
report. (Items 3 and 4) Applicant stated that he was not aware of these debts, he would 
check with his son about the student loans, and that he would contact the listed 
creditors in an effort to resolve the delinquent accounts. (Item 3) 
 
Applicant nonetheless admitted all of the SOR debts in his answer. He 
acknowledged that he had not satisfied any of the SOR debts. He stated that his house 
had been struck by lightning (no date provided), resulting in a small fire. He listed that 
he had been in the process of completing the insurance claim, but provided no further 
details about how this situation impacted his finances or his ability to pay his debts. He 
stated that he planned to pay his debts with the proceeds from the future sale of his 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available on the DOHA website at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/DIRECTIVE%202017.pdf. 
 
3 
 
 
home, but gave no indication of when this might occur, or what steps were being taken 
in this regard. (Item 1) 
 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM. He did not provide any updated 
information or documents about his more recent efforts to pay or otherwise resolve his 
debts. Nor did he provide any documentation about his current financial situation or his 
current budget. There is no documentation showing that he is or has made payment 
arrangements with the creditors. There is no evidence of financial counseling. Applicant 
also did not provide any documentation about his work performance or other character 
evidence.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
4 
 
 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant admitted each debt alleged in the SOR, and the debts are also proven 
by the record evidence. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has numerous debts that remain unresolved. He has not provided proof 
that he has paid or resolved even the smallest debt in the SOR. His financial issues are 
ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant has experienced recent hardships, to include the loss of his spouse in 
2013, as well as a house fire following a lightning strike. These were circumstances 
beyond his control that likely impacted his finances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. For full 
credit, however, Applicant must establish that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant provided insufficient evidence to establish full application of 
AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant has undertaken financial counseling. He did 
not provide sufficient information as to why he has been unable to make payments on 
the debts. Applicant has been with his employer since 2004. He was made aware of the 
debts during his background interview in February 2016. As of June 2017, the 
delinquent debts alleged are all unresolved. He did not provide sufficient evidence to 
show he disputed the legitimacy of any of the delinquent debts alleged or provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of a dispute or evidence of actions to 
 
6 
 
 
resolve the issues. Insufficient evidence was provided to apply AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 
20(e). 
 
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
documentation that his debts are being resolved in a good-faith, responsible manner. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                  
 
7 
 
 
               
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
