1  
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
                                                                                   )  ISCR Case No. 17-01578 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department 
Counsel For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement 
and Substance Misuse). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 22, 2016. 
On June 7, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
H.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 29, 2017, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with 
 
 
 
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
2  
supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated July 12, 
2017, was submitted by Department Counsel. A complete copy of the FORM was provided 
to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on July 
18, 2017. He did not respond to the FORM. The Government’s exhibits included in the 
FORM (Items 1 to 4) are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on 
November 29, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old engineer for a defense contractor, employed since 2012. 
He received his bachelor’s degree in 2013. He is unmarried. He was granted a DOD 
security clearance in 2013. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana from at least February 2016 to 
March 2016. He admitted the allegation, and reported in his SCA that he used marijuana 
six times with a friend, once every other week from February to March 2016, while holding 
a security clearance. In his personal subject interview (PSI), he noted that he does not 
intend to use marijuana in the future, but continues to associate with the friend with whom 
he used marijuana. 
 
Since Applicant elected to have this case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing, I was unable to further inquire into these allegations. He did not submit 
documentary evidence in mitigation. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective on June 8, 2017. These AGs are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to “control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has 
authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for access 
to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
3  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865  
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has 
not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established 
for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from being 
eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial evidence” 
is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 
(App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01- 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they 
must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in  
AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s 
4  
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled 
substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. 
Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case includes: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or holding 
a sensitive position. 
 
Applicant admitted to illegal drug use in 2016 after being granted a DOD security 
clearance. Disqualifying conditions under AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (f) are applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without 
recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional. 
 
Applicant is a mature adult employed by a defense contractor since 2012. He was 
granted a security clearance in approximately 2013. He used marijuana while holding a 
security clearance, with knowledge that illegal drug use is not permitted. He has not shown 
a clear and convincing commitment to discontinue further drug use or to change his 
environment which resulted in his use of marijuana. He has not submitted a signed 
statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and substance misuse. Applicant’s 
5  
relatively recent use of marijuana after being granted a security clearance, without further 
explanation or mitigation, continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. No mitigating conditions are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion may 
not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be found 
ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of questionable 
judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of fact and 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a mature adult 
whose use of marijuana in 2016, especially after receiving a favorable security 
determination in 2013, leaves me with serious questions about his future intent and his 
willingness to follow rules and regulations. I am not convinced that he appreciates the legal 
and policy implications of his actions, and he has not clearly and convincingly established 
a commitment to discontinue further illegal drug use. 
 
Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
 
 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
