 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00717 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq., and Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence), based on family ties to Iraq, and E (Personal Conduct), based on responses 
to questions in two security clearance applications (SCAs). Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted security clearance applications (SCAs) May 11, 2015, and 
January 17, 2017. (GX 1 and 2.) On March 17, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines B and E. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 23, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 3, 2017, 
and the case was assigned to me on July 19, 2017. On August 16, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for September 14, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through H, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 22, 2017. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Iraq. (GX 4.) I took administrative notice as requested by Department Counsel. 
On my own motion, and without objection by either party, I took administrative notice of 
additional facts contained in Hearing Exhibit I. (Tr. 8-9.) The facts administratively 
noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d. 
He did not expressly admit or deny the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.e, but offered 
explanations. I have treated his explanations as denials. His admissions in his answer 
and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor since March 
2017. (Tr. 33.) He was born and educated in Iraq. He avoided military service in the 
Iraqi Army by paying fees to Iraqi officials.  
 
Applicant worked for a defense contractor in Iraq from 2007 to 2009, and then 
came to the United States on a special immigration visa and was granted permanent 
resident status. His program manager in Iraq ranked him in the top 1% of his peer 
group, and described him as “extremely organized, punctual, loyal, intelligent, well-
spoken, hard-working, and ethical.” Applicant witnessed numerous bombings, mortar 
attacks, and insurgent attacks and was the direct target of some of them. (AX C at 1; Tr. 
25-26.) Before Applicant’s family moved to the United States, they received threatening 
phone calls and letters because of his work with the U.S. military forces. (Tr. 43.) A 
senior military officer described Applicant as an “exceptional employee,” who accepted 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. The changes 
resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance applications (GX 1 and GX 2) 
and his personal biography (AX A) unless otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
the risk to himself and his family through his association with U.S. military forces. (AX C 
at 3.) After about a month in the United States, Applicant returned to Iraq, where he 
worked as a linguist until October 2011. While in Iraq, he was given a common access 
card (CAC) and was cleared for access to U.S. military bases throughout Iraq. He 
became a U.S. citizen in January 2015. He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 In March 2015, Applicant married an Iraqi citizen living in the United States, and 
they have a newborn son that Applicant had not seen until he returned to the United 
States for his hearing. (Tr. 17-18.) Applicant’s wife’s parents have lived in the United 
States for more than three years. (Tr. 36.) His wife intends to become a U.S. citizen as 
soon as she is eligible. (Tr. 20.) His mother and sister are Iraqi citizens living in the 
United States. His brother is a citizen and resident of Iraq. When Applicant submitted 
his most recent SCA, his brother was working for an Iraqi ministry in a 
telecommunications job unrelated to Iraqi military or security forces. Applicant has 
virtually no contact with his brother and was not sure at the hearing whether his brother 
was still employed by the Iraqi government. He last saw his brother at their father’s 
funeral. (Tr. 24.) Applicant’s father served in the Iraqi Army until he retired in 1989. His 
father passed away in 2015, before Applicant submitted his second SCA. (Tr. 28.) 
 
 Applicant owns three houses in the United States, one of which is the family 
residence. He owns no property in Iraq. (Tr. 19.) After Applicant’s father passed away, 
the family home was sold and the proceeds were split among Applicant and his two 
siblings. Applicant received about $80,000. (GX 3 at 9.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his two SCAs, he answered “No” to Question 15, 
asking whether he had ever served “as a civilian or military member in a foreign 
country’s military, intelligence, diplomatic, security forces, militia, other defense force, or 
government agency.” In both SCAs, he also answered “No” to Question 18, asking 
whether any of his relatives were “associated with a foreign government, military, 
security, defense industry, foreign movement, or intelligence service.” He did not 
disclose that his father was a retired colonel in the Iraqi Air Force. In both SCAs, he 
answered “No” to Question 20B, asking if, in the past seven years, he had “any contract 
with a foreign government, its establishment or its representatives, whether inside or 
outside the U.S.” He did not disclose that his brother worked for an Iraqi government 
ministry. 
 
 Applicant testified he did not believe that Question 18 in the two SCAs applied to 
his father, because his father retired in in 1989. His father passed away after he 
submitted the first SCA and before he submitted the second SCA. Applicant also 
testified that he did not believe that Question 20B applied to his brother, because he 
brother worked in the U.S. equivalent of a telephone company and was not involved in 
sensitive government work. (Tr. 27-29.) Finally, Applicant testified that he voluntarily 
disclosed his father’s military service and his brother’s employment in a follow-up 
interview by a security investigator after he submitted his second SCA. (Tr. 43-45.) A 
summary of the follow-up security interview was not introduced in evidence. 
 
 
4 
 
 Iraq is a constitutional parliamentary republic. The 2014 parliamentary elections 
generally met international standards for free and fair elections. Iraq’s security forces 
include the regular armed forces and domestic law enforcement agencies; the Popular 
Mobilization Forces (PMF), a state-sponsored military organization composed of nearly 
60 predominantly Shia components; and the Peshmerga, the Iraqi Kurdistan Regional 
Government’s principal military force. Civilian authorities are not always able to maintain 
effective control of all security forces. 
 
 The United States is committed to building a strategic partnership with Iraq. Iraq 
is a key partner for the United States in the region and a voice of moderation and 
democracy in the Middle East. It has a functioning government, is playing a constructive 
role in the region, and has a bright economic future. The United States maintains 
vigorous and broad engagement with Iraq on diplomatic, political, economic, and 
security issues. None of the administrative notice documents indicate that government 
of Iraq targets the United States for economic or military intelligence, although it is likely 
that various terrorist and insurgent groups seek military intelligence regarding U.S. 
military units operating in Iraq. 
 
 Numerous terrorist and insurgent groups are active in Iraq, including ISIS and 
anti-U.S. sectarian militias. The U.S. government considers the potential security threats 
to U.S. personnel sufficiently serious to require them to live and work under strict 
security conditions. The U.S. Department of States warns U.S. citizens against all travel 
to Iraq because it is extremely dangerous. 
 
 An overwhelmingly number of human-rights abuses were committed by ISIS, 
including attacks on civilians. However, human-rights abuses by Iraqi civilian authorities 
and other state-sponsored organizations also have occurred. They included 
disappearances; cruel and degrading treatment or punishment; hard and life-threatening 
conditions in detention and prison facilities; insufficient judicial institutional capacity; 
ineffective implementation of civil judicial procedures and remedies; limitations on 
freedom of expression; social, religious, and political restrictions in academic and 
cultural matters; and abuse of women and ethnic, religious and racial minorities. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
 
5 
 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s wife, mother, and sister are citizens of Iraq, 
residing in the United States (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c). It also alleges that Applicant’s brother is 
a citizen and resident of Iraq, employed by an Iraqi government ministry (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual maybe manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially 
applicable:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 7(c): failure to report or fully disclose, when required, association 
with a foreign person, group, government, or country; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(e): shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
 
7 
 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
When foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties as 
well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an 
immediate family member in a foreign country are not casual.  ISCR Case No. 00-0484 
at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Applicant’s ties to his wife, mother, and sister, all of whom reside in the United 
States, do not present the heightened risk required to establish AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) and 
do not raise the potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). However, Applicant’s ties to 
his brother, a citizen and resident of Iraq employed by a government ministry, are 
sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(a) and 7(b). Applicant’s failure to disclose his father’s Iraqi 
military service and his brother’s employment by an Iraqi ministry in his SCAs 
establishes AG ¶ 7(c). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
 
8 
 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(a) is established for Applicant’s wife, mother, and sister. It is not 
established for Applicant’s brother. Although Applicant has minimal and infrequent 
contact with his brother, he has not rebutted the presumption that his contacts are not 
casual. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Applicant has deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States. Furthermore, he has a track record of complying with 
security regulations and procedures in high-risk circumstances in which he made 
significant contributions to national security. See ISCR Case No. 07-06030 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 2008. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his two SCAs by deliberately failing to 
disclose his Iraqi military service (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b); falsified his May 2015 SCA by 
deliberately failing to disclose his father’s Iraqi military service and his brother’s 
employment by an Iraqi ministry (SOR ¶ 2.c); and falsified his two SCAs by deliberately 
failing to disclose his brother’s employment by an Iraqi ministry (SOR ¶¶ 2.d and 2.e). 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
 SOR ¶ 2.d duplicates the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.c that Applicant falsified his May 
2015 SCA by deliberately failing to disclose his brother’s employment by an Iraqi 
ministry. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, 
one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR 
 
9 
 
Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). 
Accordingly, I have resolved SOR ¶ 2.d for Applicant.  
 
The relevant disqualifying condition is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire 
. . . .” For the reasons set out below, I conclude that this disqualifying condition is not 
established. 
 
 There is no evidence in the record that Applicant served in the Iraqi military. 
Thus, SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b are not established. 
 
 Applicant’s explanation for not disclosing his father’s military service in the May 
2015 SCA was plausible and credible. The May 2015 SCA was Applicant’s first 
experience with the security clearance process, and English is his second language. 
Question 18 is written in the present tense. Applicant’s father had been retired for about 
16 years when Applicant submitted his first SCA, and Applicant reasonably believed 
that his father was no longer “associated” with the Iraqi government and military. 
 
 Applicant’s explanation for not disclosing his brother’s employment also was 
plausible and credible. Question 20B asked if he “had any contact with a foreign 
government, its establishment or its representatives.” Applicant had minimal contact 
with his brother, knew very little about his job, and believed that he worked for the 
equivalent of a telephone company. His belief that his brother was not a “representative” 
of the Iraqi government was reasonable and plausible. Based on Applicant’s 
explanations, I conclude that SOR ¶¶ 2.c, 2.d, and 2.e are not established, and no 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline are established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines B and E in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines B and E, and evaluating all the 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
10 
 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his family ties to Iraqi and his responses to questions about 
his family in his SCAs. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
