KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: Applicant’s last use of marijuana occurred after Applicant had been hired for a job
requiring a trustworthiness designation.  Any error in the Judge’s decision concerning the
number of times Applicant used marijuana is harmless, given the totality of the record evidence. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 08-05539.a1
DATE: 08/06/2009
DATE: August 6, 2009
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 08-05539
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a
trustworthiness designation.  On November 19, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline
H (Drug Involvement) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 26, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative
Judge Henry Lazzaro denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
1“Applicant had been interviewed and hired by his present employer at the time of his last reported use of
marijuana and was aware he would have to apply for a public trust position.”  Decision at 3.  The Board also notes record
evidence that, at the time of Applicant’s last use, he had already taken a pre-employment drug test.  Tr. at 33.  See ISCR
Case No. 06-18270 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007) (“As a matter of common sense, one would expect that a person who
had taken a drug test as a condition of employment would understand the importance of future abstention.”)
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings of
fact were supported by substantial record evidence and whether the Judge’s adverse trustworthiness
determination is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a manager of billing
and enrollment for a defense contractor.  He began using marijuana while in college.  From early
1993 until about December 1996, he smoked marijuana approximately two or three times a week.
He also admitted to using marijuana infrequently from 1996 until 2007.  He stated that, during that
time, there were “some years” in which he did not use marijuana at all.  Decision at 2.  “In the
Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions Applicant executed on November 16, 2007, he admitted
he used marijuana four times between November 2006 and November 2007.”  Id.  His last reported
use of marijuana occurred at his going-away party from his previous employer.  During the party
he went outside with band members and shared a joint they were passing around.  
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding that he had used marijuana four times
from November 2006 to November 2007.  He stated that, rather, he had taken three to five hits from
a marijuana cigarette on one occasion in November 2007.  Applicant contends that this purported
error impaired the Judge’s analysis and resulted in an erroneous decision.  The Board has considered
this argument in light of the record evidence.  The Board concludes that the challenged finding is
supported by substantial record evidence.  See  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is
“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in
light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”).  Even if the Judge had made findings
consistent with Applicant’s argument on appeal, however, there is little likelihood that the Judge
would have decided the case differently, given the totality of the record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 03-23829 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 27, 2007) (“[E]ven if these two challenged observations had
not been included in the Judge’s decision, it is not reasonably likely that the outcome of the case
would be different.”). 
In holding that Applicant had failed to meet his burden of persuasion as to mitigation, the
Judge noted matters which Applicant submitted in his own behalf, including a letter of reference
attesting to his trustworthiness and a letter for his employer in which Applicant renounces the future
illegal use of controlled substances.  However, the Judge also considered,  inter alia, evidence that
Applicant’s last use of marijuana occurred after he had been hired for a job requiring a
trustworthiness designation.1  He also considered Applicant’s age at the time of his last use (32) and
that this use occurred despite his having been a long-time employee of his previous place of work.
The Board concludes that the Judge has “articulate[d] a satisfactory explanation for his conclusions,
including a rational connection between the facts found” and his ultimate adverse decision.  See
ADP Case No. 06-12901 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 31, 2007).  The Judge’s decision is sustainable on this
record.
Order
The Judge’s adverse trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple          
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
