 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 09-07151 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 17, 2010. On 
June 6, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline J. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 13, 2011; answered it on June 24, 2011; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
June 27, 2011. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 20, 2011, and the 
 
2 
 
 
case was assigned to me on July 25, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 
17, 2011, scheduling it for September 8, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 16, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant has worked for a defense contractor since December 2003. He began 
an apprenticeship program in June 2005 and completed the electrician apprenticeship 
in June 2007. He then applied for an advanced apprenticeship, became a design 
apprentice, and completed this apprenticeship in June 2010. During his apprenticeship, 
he received two associate’s degrees from a community college. He is now taking 
college courses leading to a bachelor’s degree. (Tr. 31.) He has never held a security 
clearance. 
 
 Applicant married in July 2006 and separated in October 2007. He and his wife 
have a five-year-old child, and his wife has a thirteen-year-old daughter from a previous 
relationship. He and his wife are trying to work out the difficulties in their marriage. (Tr. 
31.) He recently purchased a home. (Tr. 27.) 
 
 In 1999, Applicant was in college. He and two roommates found a backpack 
containing books, personal articles, and a checkbook. They did not attempt to locate the 
owner. In April 2000, they tried to use one of the checks to pay for a pizza. Applicant did 
not write the check, but he handed it to the person delivering the pizza. In July 2000, he 
was charged with conspiracy to commit a felony, i.e., uttering a forged check. (GX 4.) In 
August 2000, he pleaded guilty to acting under false pretenses, a misdemeanor, and he 
was sentenced to probation for one year, which he successfully completed. (GX 5 at 7-
8.) 
 
 In February 2010, Applicant was charged with selling bootleg digital video discs 
(DVDs), a felony. He had about 20 DVDs that he had purchased from various 
individuals on the street. He knew that they were bootleg copies. (Tr. 49.) At the 
hearing, he testified that he bought the DVDs for personal use and did not intend to 
resell them. (Tr. 50.) In February 2012, he appeared in court with counsel, and 
disposition of the charges was deferred for one year. He was required to pay court costs 
of $400, but he had not paid them as of the hearing date. (Tr. 38-39; GX 3.) 
 
 Applicant owns a firearm, and he has purchased and sold several firearms in the 
past. (Tr. 39.) In July 2010, Applicant tried to purchase a firearm at a gun show. As part 
of the purchase, he was required to complete a statement of criminal history. The 
document was not introduced in evidence, and the only evidence of the content of the 
document is Applicant’s statement to a security investigator in September 2010 and his 
 
3 
 
 
testimony at the hearing. He told the security investigator he answered “No” to a 
question whether he had ever been convicted of a felony. At the hearing, he testified 
that he answered “No” to a question asking “have I been charged or convicted of an 
offense, or a felony, or something like that.” (Tr. 28.) 
 
Applicant submitted the document to the vendor and waited for his purchase 
application to be approved. After waiting about two hours, he was arrested and charged 
with falsifying the criminal history form.  
 
Applicant told the arresting officer that he had not falsified the form because he 
had not been convicted of a crime. He told a security investigator that he answered “No” 
to all the questions because he had never been convicted of a felony. (Tr. 28-29; GX 5 
at 7-8.) At the hearing, he testified he had previously purchased firearms and so he “just 
went down and checked no, no, no, for everything, not realizing that one of the boxes 
was, I guess, saying have I been charged or convicted of an offense, or a felony, or 
something like that.” At the hearing, he admitted he should have answered “Yes” to one 
of the questions. (Tr. 41.) 
 
In November 2010, Applicant appeared in court with counsel and pleaded guilty 
to obstruction of justice, a misdemeanor. The factual predicate for the lesser offense is 
not reflected in the record. He received a suspended sentence to jail for 12 months, and 
he was placed on probation for three years. (GX 2.) He testified that he did not report 
this conviction to the court that deferred disposition on the bootleg DVD case, and he 
did not know if he was required to report it. (Tr. 42-43.) 
 
 The attorney who represented Applicant at the trials of the charges involving the 
bootleg DVDs and the criminal history form submitted a statement reciting that the 
disposition of the charges in both cases was pursuant to a plea agreement to avoid 
having felony charges pending for a long time. The attorney has known Applicant for 
more than 20 years, and he considers him to be reliable, trustworthy, dependable, and 
“the polar opposite of what one traditionally thinks of when you see that someone has 
been charged with a crime.” (AX A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
 
4 
 
 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was arrested in July 2010 for making a false 
statement on a criminal history form, a felony; that he pleaded guilty to obstruction of 
 
5 
 
 
justice, a misdemeanor; and that he was sentenced to 12 months in jail, suspended and 
placed on probation for three years (SOR ¶ 1.a). It also alleges that in February 2010, 
he was arrested for selling bootleg DVDs, a felony, and that disposition was deferred 
until February 21, 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Finally, it alleges that in April 2000, he was 
charged with conspiracy to commit a felony, found guilty of a misdemeanor, and placed 
on probation for one year (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity 
creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very 
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules 
and regulations.” Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include AG ¶ 31(a) (“a 
single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses”); AG ¶ 31(c) (“allegation or admission 
of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted”); and AG ¶ 31(d) (“individual is currently on parole or 
probation”). 
 The circumstances of the arrests in April 2000 and February 2010 are well-
documented in the record. The circumstances of the July 2010 arrest are less clear, 
because there is no documentary evidence of the questions on the document he was 
alleged to have falsified. There also is no indication in the record of the factual predicate 
for his guilty plea to obstructing justice.  
 I found Applicant’s explanation for answering “No” to all the questions on the 
criminal history form unconvincing. He is an intelligent, educated adult. He had 
completed the criminal history form on several previous occasions in connection with 
previous gun purchases. He was pending trial for a felony offense when he completed 
the criminal history form. He admitted at the hearing that he should have answered 
“Yes” to at least one of the questions. Either he intentionally falsified the form or he was 
grossly negligent in completing it. Either explanation raises serious questions about his 
ability to adhere to rules and regulations pertaining to classified information. 
 Based on the evidence of record, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 31(a), (c), and (d) are 
established. Thus, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts.  
Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). The first prong of 
this mitigating condition focuses on whether the criminal conduct was recent. There are 
no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must 
be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time 
has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must 
determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct 
sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s arrest in April 2000 occurred when he was an immature college 
student. He had no further criminal involvement for 11 years. During that time he found 
gainful employment, completed a challenging apprenticeship program, obtained two 
associate’s degrees, and earned additional college credits toward a bachelor’s degree. 
On the other hand, his two felony arrests in 2010 are recent. His February 2010 arrest is 
still pending disposition, and he is on probation for his July 2010 offense. None of the 
offenses occurred under unusual circumstances making them unlikely to recur. I 
conclude that AG ¶ 32(a) is established for the April 2000 arrest, but not for the others.  
Security concerns based on criminal conduct also may be mitigated by “evidence 
that the person did not commit the offense.” AG ¶ 32(c). Applicant denied falsifying his 
criminal history form, but I found his explanation unconvincing. I conclude that AG ¶ 
32(c) is not established. 
 
Finally, security  concerns may be mitigated if “there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of 
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 32(d). Applicant has 
an impressive employment record and has made significant strides in furthering his 
education, but he is still under court supervision for his two arrests in 2010. I conclude 
that insufficient time has passed to determine if he is rehabilitated. Thus, I conclude that 
AG ¶ 32(d) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant expressed remorse at the hearing, but his remorse is for the adverse 
consequences of his conduct on his career aspirations rather than his lack of honesty. 
His current job is his first opportunity for a meaningful career. He expressed enthusiasm 
for his job and pride in his work. He is intelligent and determined to improve himself. 
However, he needs more time to demonstrate a sense of obligation and the ability to 
comply with rules and regulations.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline J, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on criminal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b.-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
