KEYWORD: Security Violations; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant is a facility security officer who was held responsible by the Defense Security
Service when two company employees improperly used laptop computers to process classified
information at offsite locations in early 2001. Her positive discharge of her security duties over the
past six years is sufficient to overcome the concerns raised by her negligence in failing to ensure
compliance with computer accreditation requirements. She did not deliberately falsify her subject
interviews when she denied any prior knowledge of the employees’ actions. In the absence of proof
that her foreign-born brothers-in-law were still foreign nationals as of her June 2005 security
clearance application, her failure to list them does not raise personal conduct concerns. Clearance
is granted.
CASENO: 03-06115.h1
DATE: 06/13/2007
DATE:  June 13, 2007
In re:
------------------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 03-06115
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ELIZABETH M. MATCHINSKI
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Francis J. Flanagan, Esq.
The SOR was issued under Applicant’s married name, even though on her divorce in December 2004, she1
resumed use of her maiden surname (reflected above in parentheses).
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a facility security officer who was held responsible by the Defense Security
Service when two company employees improperly used laptop computers to process classified
information at offsite locations in early 2001. Her positive discharge of her security duties over the
past six years is sufficient to overcome the concerns raised by her negligence in failing to ensure
compliance with computer accreditation requirements. She did not deliberately falsify her subject
interviews when she denied any prior knowledge of the employees’ actions. In the absence of proof
that her foreign-born brothers-in-law were still foreign nationals as of her June 2005 security
clearance application, her failure to list them does not raise personal conduct concerns. Clearance
is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant. As required by Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 ¶ E3.1.2
(Jan. 2, 1992), as amended, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 30, 2005, detailing
the basis for its decision–security concerns raised under Guideline K (Security Violations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the adjudicative guidelines.  In a  pro se Answer of July 20, 2005,1
Applicant denied the allegations with explanations and requested a hearing before a DOHA
administrative judge.
On January 31, 2007, the government moved to amend the language of SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and
1.c under Guideline K to clarify the nature of the security violations Applicant allegedly failed to
report (¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) and knowingly or negligently permitted to occur (¶ 1.c) while employed as
facility security officer (FSO). Under Guideline E, the government moved to amend the language
of ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c to allege with specificity the bases for the false statements Applicant allegedly
made in August 2002 (¶ 2.a), September 2002 (¶ 2.b),  and January 2003 (¶ 2.c),  and to add two new
subparagraphs, ¶ 2.d (alleging that Applicant falsified a June 2005 security clearance application by
not listing foreign relatives), and ¶ 2.e (cross-alleging the Guideline K conduct under Guideline E).
The case was assigned to me on February 2, 2007, with the motion pending. On February 9, 2007,
I ordered Applicant to respond by March 1, 2007, or the SOR would be amended as proposed and
the allegations admitted. On February 15, 2007, Applicant indicated through counsel that she had
no objections to the motion to amend.
Pursuant to notice dated February 26, 2007, I convened a hearing on April 25, 2007, to
determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security
clearance for Applicant. The SOR was amended as proposed by the government, and Applicant
admitted her responsibility for the security violations in the amended SOR. The government’s case
consisted of 22 exhibits and the testimonies of three government investigators who interviewed
Applicant and a Defense Security Service (DSS) industrial security representative. Applicant and
three witnesses testified on her behalf. A transcript of the hearing was received on May 7, 2007.
In the original SOR, the government had alleged failure to report a security incident involving the use of an2
unaccredited laptop to process classified information on board submarines at a naval base in January 2001. In the
amended SOR, the government focused on the alleged violations that occurred offsite at a defense contractor facility in
January 2001.
3
FINDINGS OF FACT
DOHA alleged under Guideline K, as amended, that Applicant as FSO: (1) in or about January
2001 failed to report that a computer hard drive marked classified and a laptop circuit board for an
unaccredited laptop had been used by a company employee offsite at another defense contractor’s
facility to process SECRET information, in violation of ¶¶ 1-200, 1-201, 1-300, 1-303, 1-304, 5-100,
and Chapter 8 of the National Industrial Security Manual for Operating Information (NISPOM) and
§§ III.1, III.2, and V of the company’s standard practices procedures manual (SPP) (¶ 1.a) ; (2) in or2
about March and April 2001 failed to report that a computer hard drive marked classified and a laptop
circuit board for an unaccredited laptop had been used to process SECRET information by a company
employee at the same offsite location on two occasions in addition to that alleged in ¶1.a, in violation
of ¶¶ 1-200, 1-201, 1-300, 1-303, 1-304, 5-100, and Chapter 8 of the NISPOM and §§ III.1, III.2, and
V of the SPP (¶1.b); and (3) in or about March and April 2001 knowingly or negligently permitted
SECRET information to be processed on two occasions on an unaccredited laptop computer system
owned or under the operational control of company employees while outside of the company facility,
in violation of ¶ 5-100 and Chapter 8 of the NISPOM and § X of the SPP (¶ 1.c).
DOHA alleged under Guideline E, as amended, that Applicant falsified material facts:  (1) in
an August 7, 2002, statement by denying she had any prior knowledge that classified information was
used on unclassified computers (¶ 2.a); (2) during a September 2002 interview by denying she had
any prior knowledge of the use of unclassified laptop computers to process classified information and
denying she had sent out an unaccredited laptop for classified use at a defense contractor facility (¶
2.b); (3) during a January 28, 2003, interview by denying that she had allowed or given permission
for any company employee to use an unaccredited computer system to process classified information
(¶ 2.c); and (4) on a June 2005 security clearance application (SF 86) by not listing her two foreign
national brothers-in-law (¶ 2.d). In addition, the security violations alleged under Guideline K were
cross-alleged under Guideline E (¶ 2.e).
In her Answer of July 20, 2005, Applicant explained as to ¶ 1.b that in late January 2001, she
had received a package containing a hard drive and circuit board, both classified SECRET. Told they
were used in a laptop owned by the Navy but operated by employees of her company at another
defense contractor’s facility, she indicated the Navy temporarily accredited the equipment so it could
be used during a critical project pending DSS accreditation. In a supplemental response, she indicated
that the hard drive and circuit board were not returned to the other company until they had been
temporarily accredited by the Navy. Applicant denied knowingly or negligently permitting employees
of her company to process classified information on unaccredited laptops. Applicant also denied
intentional falsification of her August 2002 statement or September 2002 and January 2003 interviews
with an authorized investigator. In response to the amended allegations, Applicant admitted that as
FSO, she was responsible for the violations since they occurred on her watch (Tr. 11-12). After
consideration of the pleadings, exhibits, and hearing transcript, I make the following findings of fact.
Only Applicant and the President of the company were listed as key management personnel (Owner, Officer,3
Director, Executive Personnel, “OODEP”). Pursuant to ¶ 2-104 of the NISPOM, the senior management official and the
facility FSO must always be cleared to the level of the facility clearance. Other officials, as determined by the cognizant
security authority, must be granted a personnel security clearance or excluded from classified access.
4
Applicant is a 49-year-old FSO, who started her career as a civilian clerk-typist for the U.S.
Navy in June 1976. She was first granted a SECRET clearance in late July 1976. In April 1978, she
became a branch secretary for the Navy, and in July 1978 married her first husband. In August 1984,
Applicant had her first child, a daughter. Two years later, she was divorced. Applicant supported
herself and her daughter by working as a division/branch secretary at the naval base. As a division
secretary, Applicant was in charge of the classified safes in the office.
In April 1988, Applicant married her second husband. He adopted her daughter from her first
marriage, and they had two daughters who were born in November 1990 and November 1995. In June
1991, Applicant left her job at the naval base. She had been out on maternity leave and requested an
additional month of unpaid leave so that she could remain with her husband, who was working for
the Navy out of state and not scheduled to return until July 1991. She resigned when the leave was
not granted as she could not afford to maintain a household, work full-time, and raise her two
daughters on her own. After about three months unemployed, she took a position with a very small
defense contracting firm. In addition to her administrative duties, she was given the job of facility
security officer (FSO) responsible for personnel and facility security compliance at the workplace.
Her SECRET clearance was renewed in March 1992. In early July 1995, a few months before the
birth of her third daughter, she was laid off. In about February 1996, she was diagnosed with cancer,
and was unable to work for about a year while undergoing treatment.
In late February 1997, Applicant returned to work. In mid-May 1997, she resumed her duties
as FSO for her previous employer. She was granted a SECRET clearance in early June 1997.
In mid-April 1999, Applicant began working for her present employer (company X) in human
resources and as the FSO. To fulfill her duties as FSO, Applicant had to be cleared to the level of the
company’s clearance.  The facility was cleared to the level of TOP SECRET (SECRET for storage3
capability) on August 15, 1996. Applicant completed a security clearance application (SF 86) on April
29, 1999. She listed her seven siblings (two brothers and five sisters) on her application (Your
Relatives and Associates), but did not include two brothers-in-law who had been born in Spain.
Applicant was granted her TOP SECRET clearance in mid-May 2000.
As company X’s FSO, Applicant was responsible for supervising and directing the security
measures necessary for implementing the Department of Defense’s requirements for classified
information as set forth in the NISPOM, and in the company’s Standard Practices and Procedures
(SPP) manual, which provided specific security guidance to cleared employees within the facility as
required by NISPOM ¶¶ 1-201 and 1-202. Applicant’s duties as FSO included coordinating the use
of company computers for classified work and ensuring that company employees with clearances
(about 130 as of August 2002) were educated about and adhered to their security responsibilities.
The DSS industrial security specialist (ISS) assigned to monitor and assist company X’s
security compliance visited the facility in June 2000 and found five security issues that needed
correction, including some problems with the computer systems approved for classified processing.
The classified material transmittal document (Ex. 8) signed by Applicant on January 12, 2001, indicates that4
it was sent to her attention at company X. Her signature appears on the classified material transmittal document. She told
a DSS polygraph examiner that employee #1 delivered the classified package to her office (Exs. 15 and 16), and that the
company X employee who had used the laptop informed her of its contents before she opened it (Ex. 15). At the hearing,
she testified that it brought, still wrapped, to her office by employee #1 (Tr. 150).
This security incident was the subject of ¶ 1.a in the original SOR issued on June 30, 2005. DOHA amended5
the SOR, in part, to focus on the use of an unaccredited laptop to process classified information at the facility that was
the subject of ¶ 1.b in the June 2005 SOR and now ¶1.a and ¶ 1.b. The use of the laptop on the submarine is nonetheless
relevant to assessing the security posture of the facility and Applicant’s knowledge of security practices as the FSO.
At the hearing, the ISS testified that the DSS “generally has responsibility for such accreditation within6
industry. Within the Government, Government activities have their own authorization to approve certain automated
information systems to process classified information.” (Tr. 64).
5
Steps were taken to have an employee with technical knowledge of computer systems adequately
trained in automated information systems security. In December 2000, a non-accredited automated
information system (AIS) was used to process classified information and CONFIDENTIAL
information was sent unencrypted over the Internet.
On January 9, 2001, a laptop computer, which had been used by company X personnel
(employee #1) to process classified information on board a Navy submarine, was sent via registered
mail to Applicant’s attention.  The package was wrapped and marked SECRET. On her receipt on4
January 12, 2001, she was advised by employee #1 that the package contained a laptop with hard
drive that had been used by him in a classified environment. Aware it would violate security to
process classified information on a company X laptop that had not been accredited by the DSS, she
opened the package and asked him if it was accredited, i.e., approved by DSS for processing of
classified information. Applicant informed employee #1 that the laptop had to be approved ahead of
time to process classified information. Employee #1 assured her that he had a technical change
proposal document from the Navy that allowed the laptop to be connected to a classified system on
the submarine where he was working for company X. After logging it into the classified
accountability system and storing it in an approved container, she notified the DSS industrial security
specialist (ISS) with cognizance over the facility.  The ISS advised her that if company X owned the5
laptop, an AIS security plan would need to be generated and accreditation requested from DSS, but
that the Navy was responsible for the laptop accreditation if it belonged to the Navy.6
Applicant learned that the computer belonged to the Navy. She kept the laptop with hard drive
in an approved GSA container at her facility until it was again needed on the submarine. On
assurances from employee #1 that he had sanitized the hard drive, and on belief that an interim
accreditation had been granted by the Navy for use of the laptop to process classified information on
the submarine, Applicant allowed employee #1 to again use the laptop in late February 2001 to
process classified information on the submarine without obtaining accreditation from DSS. She did
not pursue accreditation because it was a government-owned (Navy) laptop. Applicant informed the
ISS on February 26, 2001, that the laptop would be sent directly from the submarine to the Navy after
its use where it would then be declassified according to Navy regulation. After the laptop was
returned in its unclassified state, company X would begin the 30-day accreditation process. The ISS
approved of the process proposed, and requested that once the company regained custody of the
laptop, company X send in the accreditation package as well as certification of the declassification.
There is conflicting evidence as to whether the laptop was owned by the Navy but used by company X7
personnel (see Answer) or owned by the company (see Ex. 15).
Applicant told a DSS polygraph examiner that the hard drive and circuit board had been transferred back and8
forth during the March to April 2001 time frame (Ex. 16), and that she learned in May 2001 that the hard drive had been
used in a laptop owned by company X for the processing of classified information (Ex. 16). She testified at her hearing
that it was in late January 2001 when the hard drive came back into the facility that she investigated and determined that
the laptop belonged to company X so it would have to be accredited. (Tr. 169-70)
Applicant testified on direct examination that when she first received the SECRET hard drive from company9
Y, she assumed it was a piece of test equipment and properly stored it. (Tr. 154) The evidence is conflicting as to how
and when Applicant realized the hard drive was not a piece of test equipment (See Tr. 160, 166-74, 188-190), but it was
not shown that she ever sent out a laptop from company X to company Y knowing that it would be used to process
classified information at company Y. 
The AIS security plan was not included in the hearing record, and it cannot be determined from the record10
what laptop(s) this AIS concerned. In a letter of April 17, 2001, to company X’s president, the ISS indicated he received
an AIS security plan pertaining to the laptop used at company Y, with no mention that the laptop had been previously
used to process classified information. (Ex. 12) The inference is that Applicant sought to accredit a computer she knew
had been used at company Y to process classified information, a post hoc effort at rectification. In a letter of April 10,
2001, to DISCO, the ISS indicated company X’s vice president went to the Navy to obtain approval to accredit the laptop
used at company Y. (Ex. 11) The vice president did not confirm that he had contacted the Navy with respect to the laptop
used at company Y (Tr. 216-17), which apparently was a company and not government-owned laptop. 
6
The Navy subsequently declassified the hard drive and Applicant sent verification of that
declassification to the ISS.
On January 24 and 25, 2001, a company X employee (employee #2), who was cleared to at
least the SECRET level, connected an unaccredited laptop  to a SECRET AIS at another defense7
contractor facility (company Y) (SOR ¶ 1.a). Company X was a prime contractor on the contract.
Employee #2 was told by a company Y employee that it was not a problem as long as the computer
hard drive was treated as SECRET following the testing. At the conclusion of the classified testing,
the hard drive and circuit board were removed, marked SECRET and appropriately wrapped, and sent
back to company X via registered mail to the attention of employee #2. The laptop itself was hand
carried. On receipt of the classified shipment on January 26, 2001, Applicant opened it and discovered
it contained a laptop hard drive and circuit board, both marked SECRET. Applicant notified employee
#2 of the receipt, logged both items into company X’s classified accountability records, and secured
them. Applicant originally thought it was test equipment and did not realize that they had been used
in the laptop. The classified hard drive and circuit board were transmitted back and forth on at least
two additional occasions between companies X and Y so that employee #2 and his coworkers could
use them at company Y.  Applicant assumed they were being used properly at company Y and she8
did not question company X employees as to how they were being used and she did not inform the
ISS.9
On February 16, 2001, the ISS received from Applicant an AIS security plan dealing with a
laptop.  On March 2, 2001, the security plan was returned to company X with a number of required10
corrections.
On March 12, 2001, the ISS met with the Navy to ask about accreditation of the laptop used
to process classified information on the submarine in January 2001. During the onsite visit, the ISS
learned a second laptop had been used to process classified information by company X employees at
7
company Y in January 2001. Applicant was informed by the ISS  in an email of March 13, 2001, that
pending his completion of an administrative inquiry of the use of the two laptops, he needed the
particulars of the use of the laptop at company Y (location, dates and names of employees, classified
system, contract number, measures taken to protect the laptop and transmit to company X). In
response on March 26, 2001, Applicant indicated that the classified hard drive had been removed
from the laptop, transmitted via registered mail from company X, and stored in an approved container
since it was received. A DSS investigation revealed that the laptop had been connected to an AIS
approved to process SECRET information for testing on January 24 and 25, 2001, at company Y, with
the classified sessions lasting six or seven hours in each instance. In an email message of March 28,
2001, the DSS representative with security cognizance over facility Y concluded that initial
indications were that no compromise had occurred, but that company Y had been asked to conduct
an inquiry. Company Y questioned the need for reaccreditation as the proper procedures had been
followed, and it was similar to adding new workstations to the AIS which did not require
reaccreditation.
On April 10, 2001, the ISS  filed with DISCO an adverse information report under ¶ 1-304
of the NISPOM, assessing Applicant as responsible for two security violations involving the use of
unapproved laptops to process SECRET information at company Y and on a naval submarine. The
ISS indicated that Applicant had “ample knowledge of AIS security requirements through formal
instruction, years of experience as well as past and present oversight of DSS accredited AIS systems.”
He opined that Applicant “was aware that both laptops were operating in a classified mode, left the
facility on three occasions for classified use, and were returned twice as SECRET hardware.
[Applicant] allowed the use of the laptops to continue, failed to stop it, or report the violations.” In
a letter of April 17, 2001, the ISS alerted company X’s president of what he saw as the overall
declining security posture at the facility. He characterized the processing of classified information on
an unaccredited laptop by an employee at company Y in January 2001 as disturbing. While he could
not determine the knowledge Applicant had before the processing, he indicated she should have been
alerted to the problem on receipt of the marked hard drive in late January and she did not mention to
him that it had been used to process classified when she submitted an AIS security plan on February
16, 2001. He commented that the recent violations demonstrated “an ongoing lack of knowledge on
the part of [company X’s] employees as well as [the FSO].” 
Sometime in 2001, a human resource employee was hired, and Applicant assumed full-time
responsibility for security at the facility. In her capacity as FSO, Applicant continued to be responsible
for personnel and facility compliance with security regulations, and was the point of contact within
the company for the assigned DSS representative. In January 2002, a new DSS ISS assumed security
cognizance over company X.
On August 7, 2002, Applicant was interviewed by a DSS special agent about her knowledge
of the use of two unaccredited laptops to process SECRET information. Applicant provided a sworn
statement in which she admitted she had a detailed knowledge of the DSS standards for AIS
accreditation, but she denied any prior knowledge that classified information had been processed on
unclassified computers. She indicated that on receipt of the hard drive properly wrapped and shipped
from company Y, she notified the employee involved that it was an unauthorized use of the computer,
and contacted the DSS for advice on how to deal with the situation, that within days she had
submitted security plans for company X AIS systems, and had initiated accreditation of the
8
computers. Applicant indicated that she had thereafter taken greater control of all computers utilized
to process classified information, and provided necessary education to company X employees.
On September 3, 2002, the DSS ISS was interviewed about the administrative inquiry at
company X in 2001 and the finding that no compromise had occurred. No longer the assigned DSS
representative for the facility, he could not recall the actions taken to accredit the laptops at issue. He
expressed his belief that Applicant did not deliberately allow the violations, but may have been
somewhat incompetent with regard to the incidents.
During a subsequent interview with a DSS agent on September 5, 2002, Applicant again
denied any knowledge of the use of the unclassified laptops while it was taking place, and she denied
she ever sent out an unaccredited laptop from company X for classified use. She explained she had
sent the hard drive back to company Y on two occasions on company Y’s request but had never sent
out the laptop.
On January 28, 2003, Applicant was interviewed by a DSS special agent/polygraph examiner
in conjunction with a scheduled polygraph examination. During the pretest interview, Applicant
denied she ever knowingly allowed or gave permission for any employee at company X to use any
unclassified or unapproved (unaccredited) computer system to process classified information.
Applicant explained that while the same laptop had been taken back to the submarine and used to
process classified information, the Navy had provided paperwork showing the accreditation. As for
the use of a second laptop at company Y, Applicant related she properly logged and stored the
classified hard drive and circuit board received from company Y, and that between March and April
2001, the same classified hard drive and circuit board were transmitted back and forth between
company X and company Y so that employee #2 and his cleared coworkers could use them at
company Y (¶ 1.b). Applicant said she assumed the computer components were being used for
processing classified information because they were both marked as classified, but she did not
question anyone.  Applicant indicated that she learned in May 2001 from employee #2 that the same
hard drive was being used in a laptop owned by company X at company Y for the processing of
classified information, and she did not allow that hard drive to return to company Y until the laptop
was accredited by the DSS. During a post-test interview, Applicant acknowledged she had allowed
the security violations to occur in that she made assumptions and failed to ask the required questions
about the classified hard drive and circuit board. She indicated it was never her intent to allow
classified information to be processed on an unapproved system and she never gave verbal permission
to do so. Applicant attributed the security problems in 2001 to her being responsible for both FSO and
human resource duties at that time. She denied falsifying any information during previous interviews
with the ISS or DSS special agent.
To renew her TOP SECRET clearance, Applicant executed a security clearance application
(SF 86) on June 27, 2005. Divorced from her second husband in December 2004, Applicant filed the
application under her maiden name. Applicant listed her parents, three daughters, and seven siblings
on her SF 86. While two of her brothers-in-law were foreign-born, she did not include them in
response to question 9, “Your Relatives and Associates.” She did not  think to list them since they
had lived in the U.S. for many years and are in the U.S. legally.
On June 30, 2005, DOHA issued the original SOR to Applicant under her married name.
While her request for hearing was pending, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator
9
for the Department of Defense on September 14, 2006. Asked about her foreign-born brothers-in-law,
and her failure to list them on her SF 86, Applicant explained she did not realize she was required to
list them on her clearance application. She was uncertain of their citizenship status, whether they had
become U.S. citizens by naturalization or were citizens of their native Spain, but knew they had
acquired permanent residency status in the U.S. Asked about the DSS ISS’ allegations that she had
known about security violations and allowed them to continue, Applicant indicated that the ISS was
confusing two incidents, one that did not involve any company X personnel. Concerning the
processing of classified information on board the submarine, she explained that as soon as she learned
that employee #1 had used an unaccredited laptop to process classified information on the submarine,
she called the ISS to determine what steps should be taken. She then discussed a second incident
involving storage by company X of company Y hard drives; that in the process of investigating the
classified items in company X’s possession, the ISS found some of company Y’s hard drives that had
not been certified were found to contain classified information. (Ex. 21) It is not clear whether
Applicant was discussing another security incident or the use of the laptop at company Y. Applicant
denied that she made any knowingly false statements to government investigators.
As of late April 2007, Applicant was the information security officer as well as FSO for
company X. An information technology professional was the information security manager with
particular oversight over AIS at the facility. Continuation of Applicant’s TOP SECRET security
clearance is supported by upper management at the company. She has shown herself to be dependable
and conscientious with regard to fulfilling her security responsibilities. Under her watch, the company
has not failed any security inspections. Minor deficiencies have been corrected on the spot. Applicant
has been more diligent in her efforts to acquire security expertise in the past six years.
POLICIES
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to . . . control access to
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently
trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person access to such information.” Id. at 527.
The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb.
20, 1960). An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue [her] security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3
(App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).
The adjudicative guidelines set forth potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating
conditions (MC) under each guideline. In evaluating the security worthiness of an applicant, the
administrative judge must also assess the adjudicative process factors listed in ¶ 6.3 of the Directive.
The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant. See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a
clearance. 
In his letter to company X’s president of April 17, 2001, the ISS indicated Applicant had “ample knowledge11
of AIS security requirements through formal instruction, years of experience as well as past and present oversight of DSS
accredited systems.” However, he also indicated that the more recent security violations involving the laptops
“demonstrates an ongoing lack of knowledge on the part of [company X] employees as well as your Facility Security
Officer.” (Ex. 12).
10
CONCLUSIONS
Under Guideline K, noncompliance with security regulations raises doubt about an
individual’s trustworthiness, willingness, and ability to safeguard classified information. (Directive
¶ E2.A11.1.1).  Applicant has a duty as a cleared individual to safeguard classified information under
her custody or in her control (NISPOM ¶¶ 1-200, 1-500; SPP § II), and to report adverse information
that comes to her attention involving any loss, compromise, or suspected compromise of classified
information, or concerning any cleared (or in the process of being cleared) employee which indicates
such access or determination may not clearly be consistent with the national interest (NISPOM ¶¶ 1-
302a, 1-303; SPP § III.1). Furthermore, by virtue of her position as FSO, Applicant is responsible for
supervising and directing security measures necessary for implementing the requirements of the
NISPOM and her employer’s SPP (¶ 1-201 NISPOM). Specific duties include educating employees
about the government’s information security program, advising them of the requirements for
disclosure of classified information and contractual obligations involving classified access, informing
them of the adverse impact on national security that could result from unauthorized disclosure,
instructing them  about the procedures for handling classified material, providing employees with the
particular security requirements applicable to their jobs, alerting them about counterintelligence
issues, and informing them of their reporting obligations (SPP § II.1). Any failure of an FSO to
comply with security regulations necessarily raises questions about the appropriateness of continued
access for the cleared facility as well as for the FSO.
Applicant did not know before January 12, 2001, that employee #1 had used an unaccredited
laptop on board the naval submarine, and she acted appropriately in reporting the violation to the ISS.
While the ISS subsequently concluded that Applicant violated security requirements when she
permitted employee #1 to use the laptop to process classified information on the submarine a second
time without first obtaining proper accreditation (Ex. 11), the evidence shows that Applicant
understood from the ISS that it was the Navy’s responsibility to accredit the laptop since it was owned
by the government. In late February 2001, Applicant notified the ISS that the employees involved
with the laptop would have it sent directly to the Navy and not company X on its return from the ship,
and the laptop would be declassified according to Navy regulations before being sent back to the
company. The ISS responded, “What you have described works for me.” (Ex. 7) Applicant knew from
her AIS training that a company X laptop had to be accredited by DSS before any classified
processing. NISPOM ¶ 8-102 specifies that the cognizant security agency (DSS in the case of
company X) is the designated accredited/approving authority responsible for accrediting information
systems used to process classified information in industry. Yet, laptops were also new in the facility.
Even DSS representatives had questions about AIS accreditation and what was required at that time
(see Ex. 7). When questioned in September 2002 about the violations, the ISS indicated that
Applicant “may have been somewhat incompetent with regard to the incidents.” (Ex. 6).11
However, the circumstances surrounding the use of the laptop at company Y and Applicant’s
knowledge (what she knew and when she knew it) raise concerns under Guideline K, disqualifying
condition ¶ E2.A11.1.2.2, Violations that are deliberate or multiple or due to negligence, and general
See Directive ¶ E2.15.1.1, conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of12
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations could indicate that the person may not properly
safeguard classified information.
11
concerns under Guideline E, ¶ E2.A5.1.1, Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations could indicate that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.
Applicant has repeatedly maintained throughout several interviews that she did not give permission
to employee #2 to process classified information at company Y on an unaccredited laptop. While
Applicant told a DSS polygraph examiner in January 2003 that she had “knowingly allowed classified
information to be processed on [a] computer system that was not accredited by DSS” (Ex. 14), she
did not admit to prior knowledge or approval of the improper use of the laptop; rather, she admitted
she failed as FSO to ensure that the hard drive and circuit board transmitted between company X and
company Y were being used appropriately by company X personnel at company Y. Aware that
company X employees were working on a project at company Y involving a classified circuit board
and hard drive, Applicant was negligent in not inquiring into the circumstances of their use. While
there is conflicting evidence as to when she confirmed with employee #2 that he had used an
unaccredited company X-owned laptop, once she learned of the security violation, she had an
obligation to report it to DSS under NISPOM ¶¶ 1-302.a and 1-304 and SPP § III. Although she
contends she contacted DSS as soon as employee #2 confirmed he had used the unaccredited laptop,
the available evidence indicates the ISS learned of the improper use of the laptop at company Y on
March 12, 2001, from the Navy during his investigation of the use of the other laptop on the
submarine. She did not provide any document to corroborate her claim of notification.
 The success of the industrial security program within a given defense contractor facility
depends on the FSO upholding his or her fiduciary duty. The demands of two positions (human
resources and security) cannot justify any failure to report a known or suspected violation. However,
Guideline K mitigating conditions ¶ E2.A11.1.3.2, violations were isolated or infrequent, and ¶
E2.A11.1.3.4, demonstrate a positive attitude towards the discharge of security responsibilities,
apply. Due at least in part to the delay (unexplained) in the adjudication of this case, it has been six
years since the laptop was used at company Y. Deficiencies in the facility’s security posture between
December 2000 and April 2001 have been corrected. With the hiring in 2001 of another employee
to take over Applicant’s human resource duties, she has been able to devote her full attention to
security with positive results. The company has not failed any inspections. Minor deficiencies have
been corrected on the spot. While company X’s upper management has a stake in ensuring that
Applicant retains her TOP SECRET clearance, the corporate officers are not likely to have falsely
attested to Applicant’s diligence with regard to her own security education.
Applicant’s increased competency in understanding and implementing security requirements
notwithstanding, the government must be assured that her representations can be relied on, and with
regard to fulfilling her security responsibilities, that she will timely report any security violation or
adverse information about a cleared employee that comes to her attention. Any evidence of intentional
falsification would necessarily raise serious doubts about her judgment and reliability under Guideline
E,  and about her willingness to comply with her obligations under the NISPOM, including reporting12
requirements. The government contends Applicant made several false statements by claiming in
August 2002, September 2002, and in a pre-polygraph interview of January 2003,  that she had no
prior knowledge of unaccredited computers being utilized to download classified data. Submitted as
12
proof of her falsification was Applicant’s sworn statement of January 28, 2003, in which she indicated
with respect to the use of the laptop at company Y:
In about Feb 01, I received a classified package from [company Y]. . . . I opened it
and saw that it contained a hard drive classified as SECRET and a circuit board
classified as SECRET. . . . Between Mar 01 and Apr 01, this classified hard drive
and circuit board were transmitted back and forth between [company Y and
company X] so [employee #2] and his cleared coworkers could use them at the
[company Y] facility. Each time they were properly wrapped and marked in keeping
with DSS regulations. I assumed at the time that the hard drive and circuit board
were being used properly at [company Y] so did not question anyone. I did not
report this to DSS at the time, and I did not ask [company Y] officials, [employee
#2] or any of our [company X] employees specifically how they were using the hard
drive and circuit board.
In May 01, I found out through a conversation with [employee #2] that this same
classified hard drive was being used in a laptop owned by [company X] at [company
Y] for the processing of classified information. At that time, I called [the ISS] and
told him what happened. I did not allow that hard drive to go back to [company Y]
until the [company X] laptop was accredited by DSS. By Jul 01, [company X] had
this laptop and another one accredited by DSS. I now realize that by making the
above assumptions and not asking all the questions about this classified hard drive
and circuit board, I did knowingly allow classified information to be processed
on [a] computer system that was not approved by DSS. . . . It was never my
intent to disregard any security regulation or to commit any security violations. (Ex.
15, emphasis added).
Applicant also indicated in that same statement, “I now realize, however, that because of my title of
FSO, I was responsible for the security violations because the ultimate security responsibility for my
facility falls on me. I do not like the fact that I am being investigated for this security violation when
it was committed by another cleared [company X] employee.” (Ex. 15)
There is no evidence that Applicant knew employee #2 had used his laptop to process
classified information at company Y during the week of January 22, 2001, when it was going on.
Although she transmitted the circuit board and hard drive back to company Y at least twice on
employee #2's request, the government did not prove that she returned a laptop with express or tacit
permission to use it to process or download classified information. It was reasonable of her to assume
that employee #2, who had at least a SECRET clearance, would fulfill his security responsibilities.
Company Y did not see any problem with the procedure, as the equipment was logged in, and
properly declassified when they finished. (Ex. 7) While this does not eliminate the need for company
X to accredit the computer beforehand, it suggests that any violation of security was not deliberate
but due to inadequate knowledge of security requirements. Employee #2 may not have realized that
it was a violation, as employee #1 did not understand that the temporary change document was
insufficient to accredit the laptop he used. Applicant’s recognition, albeit in hindsight and with some
reluctance, that she is responsible for the violations of employees at her facility, is not tantamount to
an admission that she knew beforehand and approved of the improper use of a laptop. Based on the
13
evidence before me, I conclude Applicant did not deliberately falsify her statement and interviews as
alleged in ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c.
Nor did the government prove a knowing falsification of her June 2005 security clearance
application. Applicant does not dispute that she failed to list on her June 2005 SF 86 the two brothers-
in-law who were born in Spain. The government bases its case for Guideline E DC ¶ E2.A5.1.2.2, The
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts on any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations,
determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities, solely on the fact of foreign birth
of these two relatives. Assuming the instructions for completing the EPSQ version of the SF 86 (Ex.
20) are the same as the Questionnaire for National Security Positions (Ex. 22), Applicant would have
been required to report those “foreign national” relatives or associates to whom she is bound by
affection, obligation, or close and continuing contact. Applicant readily admitted to an investigator
in September 2006 that two of her sisters are married to former professional Jai-Alai players born in
Spain. However, she also indicated that she was not certain whether her brothers-in-law were still
citizens of Spain or had become U.S. citizens by naturalization. Their citizenship status was not
sufficiently clarified at the hearing to permit the threshold finding that they were foreign nationals as
of her execution of the June 2005 security clearance application. If they acquired U.S. citizenship and
did not possess dual citizenship, they would not be foreign nationals as a matter of law.
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR, as amended:
Paragraph 1. Guideline K: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is granted.
14
Elizabeth M. Matchinski
Administrative Judge
