KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge balanced the favorable evidence against the nature of the Sudanese
government and its relationship with the US as well as the number of close relatives Applicant
has in the Sudan.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 03-11420.a2
DATE: 06/13/2007
DATE: June 13, 2007
In Re:
-----------
SSN: -------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 03-11420
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Phillip D. Cave, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 14, 2005, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Michael J. Breslin denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant filed a timely appeal pursuant to Directive
¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  On appeal, this Board remanded the case to the Judge to resolve an
2
ambiguity caused by a handwritten change to the hearing transcript.  ISCR Case No. 03-11420 (App.
Bd. Oct. 5, 2005).  On August 31, 2006, the Judge issued a second decision, reflecting compliance
with this Board’s remand instructions.  Applicant again submitted a timely appeal pursuant to the
Directive.  
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s treatment of the
Guideline B mitigating conditions is erroneous; whether the Judge’s unfavorable security clearance
decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law; and whether Appeal Board interpretations of
Guideline B adjudicative factors are erroneous and, therefore, deny Applicant due process of law.
Finding no error, we affirm.
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  Facts
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant, REDACTED at the time
of the hearing, was born in Sudan, leaving there at            to attend college             .  He completed
his undergraduate degree                                                                                                            .  In 
        he came to the U.S.,                                                                    From that date until           he was
a                                                                                                      he served as an                            
                                                                   .  In this position he                                                         
                                                                                                                                                  .  
Applicant became a U.S. citizen                 and for              years taught           in U.S. schools.
 Subsequently he became a                                                    .  
Applicant married                 and divorced in              . Applicant has       children from his
first marriage.  His                a naturalized citizen of the U.S. and                  native born citizen of
the U.S.
Applicant married again, in           .  His wife was born in Sudan and lives in the U.S. in
permanent resident status.  She is applying for U.S. citizenship.  Applicant’s parents-in-law are
citizens and residents of Sudan.  Both are retired and neither worked for the government.
Applicant’s wife has          siblings who are citizens and residents of Sudan, and contacts them about
                 times a year.  She has         children from a previous relationship, who live in Sudan.  
Applicant himself has         siblings.  His                  are citizens and residents of Sudan.  He
contacts              three or four times a year; the other           do not have phones.  His          are also
citizens and residents of Sudan, none of whom apparently work for the government.  
Sudan has been a military dictatorship since 1989.  The U.S. has determined that Sudan
sponsors terrorism.  It has an extremely poor record on human rights.                                             
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                
3
B.  Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of fact is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  Directive
¶  E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s findings
from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S.
607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give deference to the
Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive  ¶  E3.1.32.1.  Applicant does not challenge the Judge’s
findings of fact.  Therefore, they are not at issue in this appeal.
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. V. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Appeal
Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
There is a presumption against granting a clearance.  Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399,
1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the government presents evidenceth
raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish any appropriate mitigating
conditions.  See Directive  ¶  E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions
and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the
particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light
of the record evidence as a whole.”  See ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006). 
In analyzing the case, the Judge noted such favorable information as the fact that Applicant
is a U.S. citizen by choice and has lived in this country for most of his adult life.  All his assets are
in this country and he has held an interim clearance.  However, the Judge balanced those matters
against the number of Applicant’s close family members who reside in Sudan, the nature of the
Sudanese government and its relationship with the U.S., and                                                           
                                                                                        , finally concluding that he is “vulnerable to
pressure or duress from a foreign power.”  We conclude that the Judge has articulated a rational basis
for concluding that Applicant had not met his burden of persuasion as to the application of mitigating
conditions.  Furthermore, we conclude that his whole person analysis complies with the requirements
of Directive ¶ E2.2.1, in that the Judge considered the totality of Applicant’s conduct and
circumstances in reaching his decision.  See ISCR Case No. 04-09959 at 6 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006).
Finally, we note that Applicant argued that Board precedent denied him due process of law.
In making this argument, he incorporated the Judge’s own relatively lengthy survey of Board
precedent, which the Judge included in his decision.  Applicant also cites other cases by Hearing
4
Office Judges which he believes support the granting of a clearance to him. We have considered
Applicant’s argument in light of the record as a whole.  We find no basis to conclude that he was
denied the due process provided him by the Directive and by Executive Order 10865.  Decisions of
Hearing Office Judges do not serve as mandatory authority for Board decisions.  See ISCR Case No.
05-03143 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).        
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a clearance is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple            
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
