KEYWORD: Guideline K
DIGEST: Given the record that was before him the Judge articulated a rational explanation for
his favorable decision.  Favorable decision affirmed.
CASENO: 04-05802.a1
DATE: 06/13/2007
DATE: June 13, 2007
In Re:
------------
SSN: ------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 04-05802
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Edmunds, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 13, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline K (Security Violations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On August 22, 2006, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Philip S. Howe granted Applicant’s
2
request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel filed a timely appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30. 
Department Counsel raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s conclusion
that Applicant had mitigated the Guideline K security concerns was based upon a piecemeal analysis
and was arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  We affirm the decision of the Judge.
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  Facts
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant is a computer technician for a
defense contractor and has held a security clearance since 1990.  His duties include “being custodian
of the computer resource lab closed area (CRL), information security officer (ISSO) of a classified
computer network in the CRL, and a backup systems administrator for various computer systems his
employer owned and operated.  He acquired these duties over time as other personnel departed the
company and replacements were not hired.  Applicant worked in the CRL four to eight hours daily,
often up to 10 hours daily when the workload was heavy.  He would enter and exist this secured area
several times daily in the course of his duties.” 
“Applicant committed seven security violations between 1997 and 2005 during the course
of his official duties for his employer.  Each violation was investigated by his employer.  Applicant
was retrained on security protocols after each violation.  Applicant also made procedural changes
in his routine to prevent repeats of the individual violation types after each incident.  No compromise
of classified material occurred as a result of any of Applicant’s actions because the violations
occurred in a secured and limited access area within the employer’s facility, and the facility has
‘security in depth’ procedures.  As of February 2006 his company has reduced his workload by
removing and reassigning Applicant’s former additional duties as main custodian for the CRL and
ISSO.  The company’s chief security officer is confident that with these changes the possibility of
future security violations are substantially eliminated.”  (Citations omitted)
Applicant’s security violations included four incidents of failing to log off a classified
computer system; a failure to engage the combination lock on the CRL door and to sign the log sheet
upon departure; a failure properly to secure a computer disc classified at the secret level; and a
failure to secure a secret tape in the CRL server room.  His last incident consisted of a failure to log
off the computer system.  Applicant’s employer placed a sign prominently within the CRL asking,
“Did you log off?”  Applicant has placed a chain across his cubicle entrance as a reminder, and he
triple checks his computers.  Furthermore, a guard is now called when the CRL is closed after the
last person departs.
The Judge noted that Applicant’s security officials “regard him as a conscientious employee
who takes his security responsibilities seriously.”  In his Conclusions section, the Judge stated,
“Applicant is a very credible and honest witness whose explanations of the various situations were
direct and persuasive.”    
    
B.  Discussion
3
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  Directive
¶  E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s findings
from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S.
607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give deference to the
Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive  ¶  E3.1.32.1. 
Department Counsel has not challenged the Judge’s findings.  Therefore, they are not at issue
in this case. 
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. V. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Appeal
Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are arbitrary or capricious, the Board
will review the Judge's decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails
to articulate a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of
judgment; it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision
that runs contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere
difference of opinion. In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are contrary to law, the
Board will consider whether they are contrary to provisions of Executive Order 10865, the Directive,
or other applicable federal law.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).
Because  the Department Counsel did not challenge the Judge’s factual findings, they are
binding upon the Board in our analysis of the issue on appeal.  See ISCR Case No. 04-11369 at 2
(App. Bd. Mar. 16, 2007) (“The Board may consider whether a Judge’s factual findings are based
upon substantial evidence, presuming that issue is raised.  Failing that, we rely on the findings as set
forth in the decision”).  See also ISCR Case No. 03-11765 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 11, 2005).  The issue
before us is not whether we ourselves would have granted Applicant a clearance, since we do not
review cases de novo.  Rather, it is whether, in light of the Judge’s unchallenged findings, his
decision is sustainable.
  We acknowledge that there is much in the Judge’s findings that would have supported the
opposite decision, primarily the fact that Applicant committed seven security violations, not an
inconsiderable number.  However, we also take note of the Judge’s findings concerning the impact
that Applicant’s workload had upon his mistakes; the inadvertent nature of the violations; the
employer’s decision to assign some of Applicant’s responsibilities to others; the employer’s belief
Regarding  Department Counsel’s argument that the Judge addressed the case in a piecemeal fashion, we1
conclude that the Judge’s whole person analysis complies with the requirements of Directive  ¶  E2.2.1, in that the Judge
considered the totality of Applicant’s conduct in reaching his decision.  See ISCR Case No. 04-09959 at 6 (App. Bd. May
19, 2006). 
4
that these changes will eliminate the possibility of future violations; and steps Applicant has taken
to ensure his compliance with security procedures.  We also note the Judge’s evaluation of Applicant
as a believable and honest witness in his own behalf.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1 (“[T]he Appeal
Board shall give deference to the credibility determinations of the Administrative Judge.”); see also
ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 9 (App. Bd. Jan. 15, 2003).  In light of this, we conclude that, given the
record before him, the Judge has articulated a rational explanation for his favorable decision.  An
appealing party’s disagreement with a Judge’s decision is not a sufficient basis to establish that he
erred.  See, e. g., ISCR Case No. 01-05912 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2001).    The Board concludes that1
the Judge’s favorable security clearance decision is not arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law, given
the totality of facts and circumstances in this case.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
Order
The Judge’s decision granting Applicant a clearance is AFFIRMED.
See Dissenting Opinion           
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin          
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE JEFFREY D. BILLETT
The Administrative Judge’s favorable security decision should be reversed.  While I do not
subscribe to Department Counsel’s theory that the Judge engaged in a piecemeal analysis of the case,
I do think that the Judge erred when he analyzed the evidence in mitigation outside the context of
the considerable amount of evidence that forms the basis for the government’s security concerns.
5
I  agree fully with Department Counsel’s larger point that the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s
security violations have been mitigated cannot be sustained.
Applicant committed seven security violations at his workplace over an eight year period
between 1997 and 2005.  Additionally, in 2005 Applicant was responsible for a breach of physical
security involving alarms at his workplace that was later determined not to be a security violation
under the terms of the NISPOM.  After each security violation, Applicant was “re-briefed” and steps
were taken to ensure he understood his security responsibilities.  However, repeated remedial actions
did not prevent the commission of multiple additional violations.  During the period that the
violations took place, Applicant was the Information Systems Security Officer and the Custodian of
the Computer Resource Lab, positions that required him to spend considerable time maintaining
security.  In February 2006, the same month as the hearing in this case, Applicant was relieved of
his duties as the Information Systems Security Officer and Custodian of the Computer Resource Lab.
Security violations are one of the strongest possible reasons for denying or revoking access
to classified information, as they raise very serious questions about an applicant’s suitability for
access to classified information. ISCR Case No. 97-0435 at 3-4 (App. Bd. July 14, 1998).  Once it
is established that Applicant has committed a security violation, he has “a very heavy burden of
demonstrating that [he] should be entrusted with classified information.  Because security violations
strike at the very heart of the industrial security program, an Administrative Judge must give any
claims of reform and rehabilitation strict scrutiny.”  ISCR Case No. 00-0030 at 7 (App. Bd. Sept. 20,
2001).  In many security clearance cases, applicants are denied a clearance for having an indicator
of risk that they might commit a security violation in the future (e.g., alcohol abuse, drug use, or
delinquent debts).  In this case, there is more than the presence of an indicator.  The Judge found
Applicant repeatedly disregarded in-place security procedures in violation of the NISPOM.  The
frequency and duration of Applicant’s security violations are aggravating factors.  ISCR Case No.
97-0435 at  5 (App. Bd. July 14, 1998.)
Given these standards and the totality of the record evidence in the case, the matters in
mitigation cited by the Judge are insufficient to sustain his overall favorable security clearance
determination.  The Judge makes much of the fact that Applicant’s security violations were not
deliberate but were due to oversight and were unintentional.  However, the Board has held that
security violations are a serious matter, whether they are the result of deliberate or negligent conduct.
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting classified information from disclosure to
unauthorized persons, regardless of whether such disclosure is the result of deliberate or negligent
conduct.  ISCR Case No. 00-0030 at 6 (App. Bd. Sept. 20, 2001).  In a case like this one, where there
are numerous violations, the fact the violations were inadvertent or the result of oversight is of
limited value in mitigation.
In his “Conclusions” section when discussing matters in mitigation, the Judge also mentions
that there was never a compromise of classified information and all of Applicant’s violations
occurred within a secure area.  To consider the lack of compromise a matter in mitigation was clear
error.  The negative security implications of Applicant’s history of security violations are not reduced
or diminished by the fact that no compromise of classified information occurred.  See, e.g., DISCR
Case No. 89-1397 at 7 (App. Bd. Sept. 25, 1997)(“The absence of any compromise of classified
information may be a fortunate circumstance, but it does not diminish the seriousness of Applicant’s
multiple security violations over a period of years.”); DISCR Case No. 88-2773 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.
6
30, 1990)(“Applicant’s pattern of negligent or careless security violations is not rendered any less
serious or problematic by the purely fortuitous circumstance that none of them resulted in a
compromise of national security”).       
The Judge found that in February 2006 Applicant’s company reduced his workload by
removing his previous responsibilities for maintaining security in the hopes of substantially
eliminating the possibility of future security violations.  The Judge cited this change as a matter in
mitigation.  However, the change occurred, at most, two or three weeks prior to the hearing in the
case.  The lack of ability to evaluate whether the change has had the salutary results Applicant’s
superiors were hoping for significantly undercuts the mitigating effect of this evidence.  
The Judge cited as another factor in mitigation the fact that Applicant displays a positive
attitude toward his security responsibilities by various remedial actions he instituted himself to
prevent security violations, including his “rebriefs” on security.  However, as pointed out by
Department Counsel, on at least one occasion a remedial measure instituted and undertaken by
Applicant failed to prevent a subsequent security violation.  Numerous “rebriefs” undergone by
Applicant also failed to forestall subsequent violations.  Omitting these facts in an analysis of
Applicant’s display of a positive security attitude reduces the analysis to an assessment of mere good
intentions.  By ignoring Applicant’s unsuccessful attempts at reform and rehabilitation, the Judge
has not employed the strict scrutiny required when evaluating claims of reform and rehabilitation in
security violation cases.  Moreover, by not reviewing evidence of reform and rehabilitation in light
of Applicant’s subsequent violations after reforms and rehabilitation were instituted, the Judge erred
by not considering an important aspect of the case.    
The Judge gave considerable weight to the assessment of Applicant’s superiors and his
security managers regarding Applicant’s conscientiousness and high integrity.  The Judge also gave
weight to the fact that Applicant was a very credible and honest witness “whose explanations of the
various situations were direct and persuasive.”  The willingness of Applicant’s superiors to vouch
for his trustworthiness and integrity must be considered in light of Applicant’s long history of
security violations.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-0109 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2000).  Applicant’s
personal trustworthiness and credibility has not prevented him from committing many security
violations over a period of years.  The Judge’s failure to address this issue and his failure to evaluate
this evidence in the context of the totality of the record evidence is error. 
Given the totality of the record evidence, and given the high mitigation burden necessary to
overcome seven prior security violations, the Administrative Judge’s findings of mitigation and
reform and rehabilitation sufficient to overcome the negative implications of Applicant’s long history
of security violations are not sustainable.  Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, Item 32.a. See
Lauvik v. INS, 910 F.2d 658, 660 (9th Cir. 1990)(“there is some point at which the evidence, though
it exists, becomes so slight and so thoroughly outweighed by contrary evidence, that it would be an
abuse of discretion to base a decision upon it.”)(cited in DISCR Case No. 92-0404 at 3 (App. Bd.
May 25, 1993)).  I would reverse the Judge’s favorable security clearance decision.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
7
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
