KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge was not bound, a s a matter of law, either to accept or reject Applicant’s
explanation for her failure to disclose the pertinent information on her security clearance
application.  The Board may not consider new evidence on appeal.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 05-07183.a1
DATE: 06/26/2007
DATE: June 26, 2007
In Re:
-----------
SSN: --------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-07183
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 31, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested the case be decided
The Judge’s favorable finding under Guideline J is not at issue in this appeal.1
2
on the written record.  On January 31, 2007, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Shari
Dam denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding
Applicant’s falsification of her security clearance application was deliberate; whether the Judge’s
unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline F is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.1
(1) Applicant argues that she did not deliberately falsify her security clearance application
by failing to disclose four prior criminal charges relating to worthless checks.  In support of that
argument, Applicant contends that she failed to list the charges due to an oversight, and she
subsequently provided the correct information to the government once she realized the gravity of the
situation.  Applicant’s argument does not demonstrate that the Judge erred.
The Judge had the opportunity to consider Applicant’s explanation for why she failed to
disclose the information in question.  The Judge was not bound, as a matter of law, to accept or reject
Applicant’s explanation.  The Judge considered Applicant’s explanation in light of the record
evidence as a whole, and concluded there was a sufficient basis to find that Applicant’s omission was
deliberate and intentional.  On this record, the Judge’s finding of deliberate falsification is
sustainable.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.   
(2) Applicant also argues that the Judge should have concluded that the security concerns
raised by her history of financial difficulties had been mitigated because her indebtedness arose from
circumstances beyond her control, and she has now received counseling and started to make
payments on her outstanding debts.  As attachments to her brief, Applicant submits new evidence,
including four character reference letters, and a letter and statement of account from her credit
counseling service which indicates that she is continuing to make payments on her outstanding debts
in accordance with her established plan.  Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge
erred. 
The Board may not consider new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Accordingly,
we may not consider the attachments to Applicant’s brief, and they do not demonstrate error on the
part of the Judge.
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.   The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn simply
on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application
requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact,
3
the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
The Applicant has not met her burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the Guideline F allegations had not been mitigated.  Although Applicant strongly disagrees with
the Judge’s conclusions, she has not established that those conclusions are arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.  We note that Applicant did not avail herself of the
opportunity to submit evidence in response to the File of Relevant Material.
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations
which extended over many years.  At the time the case was submitted for decision, she still had
outstanding debts and was still in the process of making arrangements to repay them.  In light of the
foregoing, the Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were recent and
still ongoing.  The favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the
Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at
4 (App. Bd. June 29, 2005).  The Judge specifically noted Applicant’s arrangement with a credit
counseling service and the payment of a debt.  The Board does not review a case de novo.   Given
the record that was before her, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline
F is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan      
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
4
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
