KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant’s husband is a Chinese citizen and not a US citizen.  Applicant and her
husband are in regular touch with relatives in China.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 05-17812.a1
DATE: 06/11/2007
DATE: June 11, 2007
In Re:
------
SSN: -------
Applicant for Trustworthiness Determination
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 05-17812
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) proposed to deny or revoke
Applicant’s access  to unclassified automation systems in an ADP-I/ II/ III sensitivity position.  On
February 8, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On October
24, 2006, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Joseph Testan granted Applicant’s request for a
2
security clearance.  Department Counsel submitted a timely appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28
and E3.1.30. 
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s whole person
analysis is unsupported by record evidence and is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  Finding
error, we reverse the Judge’s decision.
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  Facts
Applicant is a health care analyst, born in the People’s Republic of China (China).  She and
her husband married in China in 1989.  Applicant’s husband moved to the U.S. in 1992 to attend a
university, and Applicant joined him a year later.  She earned a MBA from the same university.  
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2003.  Her husband holds U.S. permanent resident status
but is not willing to give up his Chinese citizenship and passport because he may need to return to
China on short notice should his elderly parents, who reside there, become ill.  Applicant speaks to
her parents-in-law on holidays, two or three times a year.  Her husband speaks with his parents about
once a month.  Applicant has two children, both of whom are citizens of the U.S.  She has two
siblings, both of whom are citizens and residents of China.  She communicates with them on an
average of once every two or three months.  Applicant has a brother-in-law who is a citizen and
resident of China.  Applicant’s husband speaks with him “a few times a year.”  None of Applicant’s
foreign relatives work for the Chinese government.  
Applicant has visited China five times since moving to the U.S.  The last time was to attend
to family issues arising from her mother’s death.  She has no plans to return.  Applicant has
substantial equity in her home as well as assets in a 401K plan.  She and her husband have no assets
in China.  
In his Conclusions section, the Judge characterized China as “a human rights abuser which
actively engages in military and economic espionage. . .”  Decision at 4.  See ISCR Case No. 02-
20110 at n.2 (App. Bd. June 3, 2004) (“The Board will treat a finding of fact [as such] regardless of
where it appears in the Judge’s decision.”)
B.  Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of fact is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  Directive
¶  E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s findings
from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S.
607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give deference to the
Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive  ¶  E3.1.32.1.  Department Counsel has not explicitly
challenged the Judge’s findings of fact.  To the extent that such a challenge is implicit in the issue
raised on appeal the Board will deal with it below.
Government Exhibit 4, U.S. State Department, Report on Human Rights Practices for 2005 (China) (March1
8, 2006).  “During the year authorities monitored telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text
messaging, and internet communications.  Authorities also opened and censored domestic and international mail.  The
security services routinely monitored and entered residences and offices to gain access to computers, telephone, and fax
machines.  All major hotels had a sizable internal security presence, and hotel guestrooms were sometimes bugged and
searched for sensitive or proprietary materials.”  Id. at 10.
Applicant’s “contacts with her siblings in the PRC cannot be considered ‘casual and infrequent. . .’”  Decision2
at  4.  See Directive ¶  E2.A2.1.3.3.    
3
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. V. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).   Once the
government presents evidence establishing facts in the SOR that have been controverted, the burden
shifts to the applicant to establish any appropriate mitigating conditions.  See Directive  ¶  E3.1.15.
“The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn
simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their
application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See
ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).   Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s
decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s whole person analysis does not adequately
address the nature of the Chinese government.  In support of this proposition, Counsel cites the
following:  the Chinese government’s use of torture; its harassment, detention, and imprisonment
of those perceived as threatening to the communist party or the government; its use of arbitrary arrest
and detention; and its monitoring of citizen’s mail, telephone and electronic communications.1
Counsel  argues that neither the Judge’s analysis nor the record as a whole “support a rational finding
that the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress resulting from Applicant’s family. .
. is reduced to an acceptable level.”  Given the record in this case, Department Counsel’s argument
is persuasive.  
We have considered the Department Counsel’s brief, Applicant’s reply brief, the Judge’s
decision, and the record as a whole.  We note the number of Applicant’s foreign relatives who are
citizens and residents of China, the fact that Applicant and her husband communicate regularly with
their Chinese relatives,  the fact that Applicant’s husband is a citizen of China and not of the U.S.,2
holding a Chinese passport.  The Judge correctly noted that China engages in military and economic
espionage, and abuses human rights.  Department Counsel recites record evidence about specific
practices of the Chinese government, especially that of monitoring mail and electronic
communications.  These facts suggest a tangible and meaningful possibility that Applicant’s family
members could become a means through which she could be subject to coercion.  The government’s
concern is not sufficiently refuted by record evidence favorable to Applicant.  We conclude that
neither the Judge’s whole person analysis nor the record evidence as a whole reasonably support the
4
Judge’s ultimate conclusion that Applicant has met her burden of persuasion.  We hold that the
Judge’s favorable decision is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.
Order
The Judge’s favorable trustworthiness determination is REVERSED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                 
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
