KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Board’s review of a Judge’s finding is limited to determining if they are supported
by substantial evidence—such evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 05-1175.a1
DATE: 06/15/2007
DATE: June 15, 2007
In Re:
----------
SSN: --------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-11175
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 12, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
The Judge found in Applicant’s favor with respect to SOR paragraphs 1.k, l.l, and 1.m.  Those favorable1
findings are not at issue on appeal.  As part of his appeal, Applicant offers new evidence in the form of additional
explanations about post hearing efforts to resolve his outstanding indebtedness.  The Board cannot consider this new
evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Its submission does not demonstrate error on the part of the Judge.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03143 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).
2
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On
November 30, 2006, after the hearing,  Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse credibility
determination is sustainable; whether the Judge erred in concluding that Applicant’s falsification of
his security clearance application was deliberate; and whether the Judge’s adverse clearance decision
under Guidelines F, J and E is arbitrary, capricious or contrary to law.1
(1) Applicant contends that the Judge’s adverse credibility determination with respect to the
Applicant is unsupported by the record evidence, and asks that the Board set it aside and substitute
a favorable credibility determination in its place.  In support of that contention, Applicant relies on
a page from an unknown document.  Applicant has not demonstrated error on the part of the Judge.
The Board’s review of a Judge’s findings is limited to determining if they are supported by
substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
“This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding from
being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620,
(1966).  A Judge’s credibility determination is entitled to deference on appeal.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 03-05072 at 5 (App. Bd. July 14, 2005).  Although such determinations are not immune from
review, the party challenging them has a heavy burden. See ISCR Case No. 04-00225  at 2 (App. Bd.
Nov. 9, 2006).   After reviewing the record, the Board concludes Applicant has not met that burden.
In this case, the Judge’s adverse credibility determination is based upon a permissible interpretation
of the record evidence.  It is supported by substantial evidence and is not arbitrary, capricious or
contrary to law.
(2) Applicant also contends that he did not deliberately falsify his security clearance
application by failing to disclose adverse information about his financial problems in response to two
different questions.  The Board does not find this argument persuasive.
The Judge had the opportunity to consider Applicant’s explanation for why he failed to
disclose the information in question.   The Judge was not bound, as a matter of law, to accept or
reject Applicant’s explanation.  The Judge considered Applicant’s explanation in light of the record
evidence as a whole, and concluded there was a sufficient basis to find that Applicant’s omissions
were deliberate and intentional.  On this record, the Judge’s findings of deliberate falsification are
sustainable.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1; See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-03849 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jan. 26,
2006).
3
(3) Finally, Applicant argues that the Judge erroneously weighed the evidence in this case
and that her overall unfavorable decision under Guidelines F, J and E failed to consider the whole
person concept and  is arbitrary, capricious and contrary to law.  The Board does not find this
argument persuasive.
The Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the security concerns raised by his disqualifying conduct had not been mitigated.  Although
Applicant strongly disagrees with the Judge’s conclusions, he has not established that those
conclusions are arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not
turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their
application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating
evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the
trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
nature and seriousness of the disqualifying circumstances, and considered the possible application
of relevant mitigating conditions and whole person factors.  The Judge found in favor of the
Applicant with respect to several of the factual allegations.  However, the Judge reasonably
explained why the evidence which the Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to
overcome the government’s security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The
favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Administrative
Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at
4 (App. Bd. June 29, 2005).  Given the record that was before her, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable
clearance decision under Guidelines F, J and E is sustainable.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan    
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields       
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
