KEYWORD: Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant is a 64-year-old consultant employed by a federal contractor.  He served four
years in the Marine Corps, and 20 years as a federal law enforcement agent.  The government
failed to present evidence to prove its case that he was suspended for disclosing confidential
information, and that he harassed and threatened a coworker, as alleged in violation of Guideline
E (personal conduct).  Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 05-10363.h1
DATE: 06/30/2007
DATE: June 30, 2007
In re:
--------------
SSN:  -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-10363
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
CHRISTOPHER GRAHAM
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a 64-year-old consultant employed by a federal contractor.  He served four years
2
in the Marine Corps, and 20 years as a federal law enforcement agent.  The government failed to
present evidence to prove its case that he was suspended for disclosing confidential information, and
that he harassed and threatened a coworker, as alleged in violation of Guideline E (personal
conduct).  Clearance is granted.
Government Exhibit 1 (Security Clearance Application, dated March 1, 2004).1
Tr. at 13, 18.2
Id. at 13.3
Id. at 14.4
Id. at 15.5
Id. at 14-18.6
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On March 1, 2004, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86).   The Defense Office of Hearings1
and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  As required
by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended,
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 ¶ E3.1.2 Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) on August 25, 2006, detailing the basis for its decision – security concerns raised under
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)  of the Directive.  The President issued revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) on December 30, 2005.  DoD implemented them effective September 1, 2006.
Pending official amendment/reissue of DoD Directive 5220.6, the AG are to be used in all cases
when the SOR is issued on or after September 1, 2006.  Because the SOR was issued prior to
September 1, 2006, DOHA policy requires that this case proceed under the former guidelines.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 7, 2006, and elected to have a hearing
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on January 26, 2007, and a Notice of
Hearing was dated on February 16, 2007.  I convened a hearing on March 5, 2007, to consider
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security
clearance.  The government offered one exhibit, marked as Exhibit 1.  Applicant offered  no exhibits.
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 19, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant denied all allegations in the SOR.  After a complete and thorough review of the
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant, a 64-year-old consultant,  is employed by a federal contractor.   He is married with2
two grown children.   He has a bachelor’s degree in sociology, and is about 50% complete towards3
earning a master’s degree, also in sociology.   He served in the United States Marine Corps from4
1960 to 1964, and received an honorable discharge.   He held a security clearance while a Marine,5
and later held a clearance for 20 years working as a federal law enforcement agent.  The current
application is for a new security clearance.6
Subparagraph 1.b. of the SOR alleged that Applicant was suspended from employment with
a federal agency, on February 26, 1996, for disclosing confidential information.  It also alleged that
he  voluntarily retired following this suspension.  The internal affairs office of the agency
Id. at 19-22.7
Id. at 24.8
Id. at 26.9
Id. at 33-34.10
Id. at 26-30.11
Id. at 38.12
Id. at 30.13
4
interviewed him and suggested that he not talk to anyone about the investigation.  Applicant called
X to see if she knew anything about an investigation.  X indicated she had heard of an investigation,
but revealed no other information..   Applicant revealed nothing to her about his involvement with7
it.  At this time, Applicant did not know that X was also a subject in the investigation.  Applicant
learned that Y made allegations about Applicant and X disclosing confidential information,
following X’s promotion over Y. Several people later apologized to Applicant for their role in the
investigation.  Later, Y was investigated, suspended, and possibly fired.   8
The agency never gave Applicant the specifications of the charges against him and never
suspended him.   A second allegation involved his alleged revealing or uncovering or giving9
information to someone he didn’t even know.  The agency dismissed this charge.  His employer
planned to transfer him to another area of the country, to a dangerous assignment where other agents
had been killed.  Because he was 55, he and his wife decided it would be better for him to retire.10
Subparagraph 1.a. of the SOR alleged that Applicant re-signed as Chief of Internal Affairs,
in a municipality’s inspector general’s office, on February 21, 2003, following an internal
investigation.  Allegations arose in 2001, hat he had harassed and threatened a coworker by leaving
a note with a bullet on top of it.  He had worked with the coworker for about six months, and had
actual contact with her four or five times in that period of time during a Medicaid fraud
investigation.  Because she was a bookkeeper, she helped Applicant retrieve financial information
to assist with his investigations.  He accepted employment with another agency within the city.  On
his last day on this job,  he unloaded his weapon at home, took a bullet out, and put it in his pocket.
At work, he turned in his weapon, ammunition, badge and other such items.  He supervisor  then told
he had to go back to his office and retrieve some documents.  Another investigator accompanied him.
He wanted to leave a token of appreciation to the bookkeeper for her cooperation, in hopes that she
would cooperate with him in his new job.  He wrote her a note, put his name on it, put the bullet on
top of the note and left.   Her supervisor made a big deal out of it.  The coworker made no11
allegations against Applicant.   The agency never allowed Applicant to read the report against him.12
He was told it was null and void, and that they wouldn’t pursue it.  13
POLICIES
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security suitability, an administrative judge must consider
“Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a14
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4,
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of
drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported
by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  “Substantial evidence”
is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v.Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375,
380 (4  Cir. 1994).th
 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  ?The Administrative Judge [considers] the record15
evidence as a whole, both favorable and unfavorable, [evaluates] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light
of pertinent provisions of the Directive, and [decides] whether Applicant [has] met his burden of persuasion under
5
Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which sets forth adjudicative guidelines.  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines are divided into
Disqualifying Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions (MC), which are used to determine an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law.  Instead, recognizing
the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge should apply these guidelines in
conjunction with the factors listed below.  An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal
is a fair, impartial and common sense decision.
Because the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept,” an administrative judge should consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision.
Specifically, an administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at Directive ¶ E2.2.1: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency
and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the
voluntariness of participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, the final decision
in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that the issuance of the clearance is “clearly
consistent with the interests of national security.”  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those
conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise,
I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial evidence.”  The
government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a potentially disqualifying
condition under the Directive.  Once the government has produced substantial evidence of a
disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to the applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating
condition.   Directive ¶ E3.1.15 provides, “The applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and14
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable clearance decision.”  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the
government.15
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.”  ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  The Administrative Judge [considers] the record16  
evidence as a whole, both favorable and unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light
of pertinent provisions of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.”  ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
6
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the government predicated upon trust and confidence.  It is a relationship that transcends normal duty
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well.  It is because of this special relationship the
government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to
whom it grants access to classified information.  Decisions under this Directive include, by necessity,
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited.  Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty,
and patriotism are not at issue in these proceedings.  Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 specifically
provides industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  Security clearance
decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than allegiance, loyalty, and patriotism.
Nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or
in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism.16
CONCLUSIONS
The Directive ¶ E2.A5.1.1. The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations could indicate that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or administrative termination
of further processing for clearance eligibility:
The government argued that Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC)
E2.A5.1.2.1. (Reliable, unfavorable information provided by associates, employers, coworkers,
neighbors, and other acquaintances), and (PC DC) E2.A5.1.2.4. (Personal conduct or concealment
of information that increases an individual's vulnerability to coercion, exploitation or duress, such
as engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, professional, or
community standing or render the person susceptible to blackmail) apply in this case.  
When an allegation involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations is controverted, the government has the burden
of proving it.  Applicant denied the allegation.  With respect to the 1996 employment investigation,
the government produced no evidence of such charges, suspension, or disciplinary action against
Applicant of any kind.  He did not retire as a result of the investigation, but retired because he was
asked to transfer to a dangerous assignment, with the chances of getting killed realistic.  I find no
evidence that Applicant disclosed any confidential information.  His job as a federal agent was
Directive ¶ E.2.2.1.17
Id.18
Id.19
7
extremely hazardous, and one in which disclosure of confidential information could often prove
fatal.  The government failed to make its case, and I conclude SOR subparagraph 1.b. for Applicant.
The government also failed to provide evidence which supports its case under SOR
subparagraph 1.a.  The only credible evidence was supplied by Applicant, and there was no
suspension, and Applicant did not leave employment with the city as a result of the investigation
about the note to the bookkeeper.  The bookkeeper’s supervisor initiated an investigation.  The
bookkeeper saw nothing improper in Applicant’s note.  Nothing came of the investigation.  His
testimony is insufficient to establish the government’s case, because he did not resign his position,
but transferred to another job before the allegations were made.  He retired two years after the
incident happened.  I find SOR subparagraph 1.a. for Applicant.
Whole Person Analysis
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life
to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.”17
“Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable,
should be considered in reaching a determination.”   In evaluating Applicant’s case, in addition to18
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I also considered the “whole person” concept in
evaluating Applicant’s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national interests.   I considered his19
age (64), his education which includes partial completion of a masters degree, his service in the
Marine Corps, and his 20 years service as a federal law enforcement agent under some hazardous
conditions.
I observed Applicant during the hearing, and especially during his testimony.  I find his
testimony to be believable and find him to be a sincere and credible witness, because he answered
questions directly, completely, and honestly.  The totality of the record raises no reasonable or
persistent doubts about Applicant's ability to protect classified information and to exercise the
requisite good judgment and discretion expected of one in whom the government entrusts its
interests.  I conclude it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s
security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
8
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  Clearance is granted.
Christopher Graham
Administrative Judge
