KEYWORD: Personal Conduct; Criminal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant’s 2005 alcohol-related arrest was the result of an isolated incident of poor
judgment that is unlikely to recur.  Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 06-07230.h1
DATE: 06/25/2007
DATE: June 25, 2007
In Re:
-------------------
SSN: ----------- 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-07230
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
JOSEPH TESTAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Virginia Gomez, Attorney at Law
SYNOPSIS
Applicant’s 2005 alcohol-related arrest was the result of an isolated incident of poor
judgment that is unlikely to recur.  Clearance is granted.
2
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On February 9, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for applicant and recommended referral to
an Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on March 30, 2007. The case was assigned to the
undersigned on May 1, 2007. A Notice of Hearing was issued on May 29, 2007, and the hearing was
held on June 12, 2007. The transcript was received on June 21, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 26 years of age. He has been a full-time employee of a defense contractor since
June 2004.
Applicant began drinking alcohol in Junior or Senior High School. He continued to consume
it through college and after he obtained his current employment. Other then the incident discussed
below, there is no credible evidence that he abuses alcohol.
In November 2005, applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Driving Under the Influence
of Alcohol or Drugs and (2) Driving While Having a 0.08% or Higher Blood Alcohol Level. In
August 2006, he pleaded no contest to the second charge and the first charge was dismissed. He was
placed on probation for three years, ordered to pay approximately $1,697.00 in costs and fines, and
ordered to complete a first offense alcohol program. Applicant paid the $1,697.00, and completed
the alcohol program (Exhibit A). He is still on probation.
Applicant testified that on the night he was arrested he didn’t appreciate the extent of his
intoxication. He further testified that since he now realizes he can’t accurately estimate if he has
consumed too much alcohol to drive, he will no longer drive after consuming any alcohol. He further
testified that he is committed to this course of action irrespective of his probationary status (TR at
21, 26-27, 36-37).  Applicant’s testimony was credible and worthy of belief.
Declarations from three of applicant’s coworkers, including his immediate supervisor, were
admitted into evidence. All three individuals state that applicant is reliable and trustworthy, and has
shown no signs of having an alcohol problem.
CONCLUSIONS
Applicant’s alcohol-related arrest and conviction reflect adversely on his judgment, and raise
Guideline E: Personal Conduct. 15. The Concern. Conduct involving questionable1
judgment . . . can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct. 30. The Concern. Criminal activity creates doubt about a2
person’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Pages 18 and 19.3
3
concerns under both Guideline E  and Guideline J.  Disqualifying Conditions 31(a) (a single serious1 2
crime or multiple lesser offenses) and 31(d) (individual is currently on parole or probation) are
applicable. 
 Applicant clearly learned a valuable lesson from this incident; namely, he cannot accurately
assess his level of impairment after consuming alcohol. As a result, he made the decision not to drive
after consuming any alcohol. This decision, the lack of any evidence indicating he may be unable
to follow through with it (e.g., diagnosis of alcohol dependence), and the very favorable character
references admitted into evidence, lead me to conclude that this was an isolated incident of criminal
conduct that is unlikely to recur. Mitigating Conditions 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the
criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and
32(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education,
good employment record, or constructive community involvement) are applicable.
Based on the foregoing, and after consideration of the general factors set forth in Enclosure
2, Paragraph 2 of the Directive,  Guidelines E and J are found for applicant.3
FORMAL FINDINGS
PARAGRAPH 1: FOR THE APPLICANT
PARAGRAPH 2: FOR  THE APPLICANT
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for applicant.
____________________________
Joseph Testan
Administrative Judge
