KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The federal government need not wait until an applicant mishandles or fails to handle
properly sensitive information before it can deny or revoke access to such information.    An
applicant’s need for a a trustworthiness designation is not material to her suitability.  Adverse
determination affirmed.
CASENO: 06-09293.a1
DATE: 06/06/2007
DATE: June 6, 2007
In Re:
----------
SSN:-------
Applicant for Trustworthiness Designation
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-09293
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a
trustworthiness designation.  On June 14, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising
Applicant of the basis for that decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive
2
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested the case be decided upon the
written record.  On November 29, 2006, after considering the record,  Administrative Judge Barry
M. Sax denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant timely appealed
pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s unfavorable
trustworthiness determination under Guidelines F and E is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse trustworthiness determination should be reversed
because she has been an outstanding employee for eight years and has never taken anything from her
company.  She also argues that there is no connection between her prior financial problems and her
ability to perform her job, and that an adverse trustworthiness determination could cause her to lose
her job.  Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge erred. 
The federal government need not wait until an applicant actually mishandles or fails to
properly handle sensitive information before it can deny or revoke access to such information.  See
Adams v. Laird, 420 F. 2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1039 (1970).  An
applicant with good or exemplary job performance may engage in conduct that has negative
trustworthiness implications.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-0123 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 11, 2000).  The
Directive's Guidelines set forth a variety of examples of off-duty conduct and circumstances which
are of trustworthiness concern to the government and mandate a whole person analysis to determine
an applicant's trustworthiness eligibility.  A whole person analysis is not confined to the workplace.
See ISCR Case No. 03-11231 at 3 (June 4, 2004).
Similarly, an applicant’s need for a trustworthiness designation to keep her job is not material
to the evaluation of her trustworthiness suitability.  The possibility that an unfavorable
trustworthiness determination could have adverse consequences for an applicant’s job situation is
not relevant or material to an evaluation of the trustworthiness significance of that applicant’s
situation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-21070 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2004).  The trustworthiness
significance of Applicant’s history of financial difficulties is not diminished or reduced by the fact
that an unfavorable trustworthiness determination could result in the loss of her job.  See, e.g, ISCR
Case No. 06-00799 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 16, 2007).
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn simply on a finding
that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the
exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-
14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone
compel the Judge to make a favorable trustworthiness determination.  As the trier of fact, the Judge
has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the
unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
The Applicant has not met her burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the financial considerations and personal conduct allegations had not been mitigated.  Although
Applicant strongly disagrees with the Judge’s conclusions, she has not established that those
3
conclusions are arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations
which extended over many years and had deliberately failed to disclose adverse information about
her indebtedness on her Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF-85P).  At the time the case was
submitted for determination she still had significant outstanding debts.  In light of the foregoing, the
Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were still ongoing.  The
favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. June
29, 2005).  The Board does not review a case de novo.   Given the record that was before him, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable trustworthiness determination under Guidelines F and E is sustainable.
Thus, the Judge did not err in denying Applicant a trustworthiness designation.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin     
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields        
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
