KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline J
DIGEST: Although pro se Applicants cannot be expected to act like lawyers they are expected to
take timely reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 06-07674.a1
DATE: 06/18/2007
DATE: June 18, 2007
In Re:
------------
SSN: ------
Applicant for Trustworthiness Designation
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-07674
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Edmunds, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
John D. Hyland, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a
trustworthiness designation.  On May 17, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising
Applicant of the basis for that decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal
Conduct) and Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2,
1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested the case be decided upon the written record.
2
On November 27, 2006, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Marc E. Curry denied
Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Applicant was denied due
process; and whether the Judge’s unfavorable trustworthiness determination under Guidelines J and
H is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Applicant’s counsel on appeal asks that the case be remanded so that Applicant can introduce
“detailed information regarding successful completion of drug treatment, probation, and general
employment and lifestyle issues which were not made available to the Judge due to the appellant’s
decision to represent himself during the proceeding below.”  The Board construes Applicant’s
request as raising the issue of whether Applicant was denied due process.  In that regard, Applicant’s
counsel has not demonstrated error by the Judge.
A review of the record indicates Applicant was provided with the procedural rights set forth
in Executive Order 10865 and the Directive.  Applicant requested that his case be decided on the
written record.  He was  provided with a copy of the government’s file of relevant material (FORM),
which contained the evidentiary exhibits upon which the Judge based his decision.  He was given
an opportunity to object to those exhibits and provide his own evidence to rebut the government’s
allegations.  Applicant failed to object to the exhibits in the government’s FORM or offer any
evidence in his own behalf. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03143 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).  
Although pro se applicants cannot be expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take
timely, reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 00-0593
at 4 (App. Bd. May 14, 2001).  If they fail to take timely, reasonable steps to protect their rights, that
failure to act does not constitute a denial of their rights.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-19896 at 6
(App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2003).  Because Applicant did not object to the government’s exhibits or provide
his own evidence with respect to the matters at issue, he has no valid claim for denial of due process
under the Directive or Executive Order, and is not entitled to a second opportunity to present
evidence on his behalf.    
(2) Applicant’s counsel also contends that the Judge erred in concluding that the security
concerns raised under Guidelines J and H had not been mitigated.  In support of that contention, he
argues that the Judge’s findings overstate the seriousness of the disqualifying conduct by
characterizing two of the four Guideline J allegations as criminal “charges” for which Applicant paid
a “fine” rather than as “ordinance violations” involving the “forfeiture of money” as provided for
under Wisconsin law.  Applicant’s counsel also argues that Applicant “ has been drug free for at least
two years, if not longer” so that his drug use is “not recent.”  Finally, Applicant’s counsel restates
the other favorable evidence of record and argues that it was sufficient to support a favorable
determination under the whole person concept.  In regard to that argument, he cites to several DOHA
hearing decisions in which applicants with ostensibly similar circumstances received a favorable
decision.  These arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge erred.    
The decision in another DOHA Hearing Office case does not demonstrate error by the Judge
in this case.  A decision by a Hearing Office Judge is not legally binding precedent on DOHA Judges
or the Board.  See ISCR Case No. 01-22606 at 3-5 (App. Bd. June 30, 2003).
3
The Board’s review of a Judge’s findings is limited to determining if they are supported by
substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
“This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding from
being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620,
(1966).   The Board does not review a case de novo.  Considering the record evidence as a whole,
the Judge’s material findings with respect to Applicant’s conduct of security concern reflect a
plausible interpretation of the record evidence and are sustainable.  Moreover, even if it were
assumed for the purposes of this appeal that Applicant’s characterization of two out the four criminal
incidents was correct, it would not have materially affected the outcome of the case.
 
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn simply on a finding
that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the
exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-
14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone
compel the Judge to make a favorable trustworthiness determination.  As the trier of fact, the Judge
has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the
unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
The Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the trustworthiness concerns presented by Applicant’s prior conduct and circumstances had not
been mitigated.  Although Applicant strongly disagrees with the Judge’s conclusions, he has not
established that those conclusions are arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶
E3.1.32.3.
In this case, the Judge specifically considered the recency of Applicant’s drug abuse and the
extent of his rehabilitation.  He made sustainable findings as to a serious history of improper or
illegal drug and criminal conduct.  That history included: illegal marijuana use, sometimes on a daily
basis, from 1998 to at least 2003;  illegal use of cocaine, sometimes on a daily basis, between
February and July 2003; illegal use of ecstacy and crack; the purchase of marijuana; and instances
of criminal conduct in 2000, 2003, and 2004.  The Directive does not define “recent,” and there is
no “bright-line” definition of what constitutes “recent” conduct.  ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 5
(App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006).  The Judge is required to evaluate the record evidence as a whole and reach
a reasonable conclusion as to the recency of an applicant’s conduct.  ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at
5 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006).  Given the record in this case, it was not arbitrary, capricious or unlawful
for the Judge to conclude that Applicant’s illegal drug use and criminal conduct were recent.  In that
regard, the Judge considered the totality of Applicant’s circumstances.  The Judge weighed the
mitigating evidence against other record evidence including the length and seriousness of the
disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant mitigating conditions and
whole person factors.  The Judge reasonably explained why there was insufficient mitigating
evidence to overcome the government’s trustworthiness concerns.  Given the record that was before
him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guidelines J and H is not arbitrary,
4
capricious or contrary to law.  Thus, the Judge did not err in denying Applicant a trustworthiness
designation.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple       
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin             
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields          
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
