KEYWORD: Foreign Influence; Foreign Preference
DIGEST: Applicant is 28 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since 1999 as a sales
associate. She immigrated to the U.S. in 1997 from Iran and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in
2003. She considers herself a dual citizen of Iran and the U.S. and intends on renewing her passport
in the future so she can travel to Iran. Her parents and sisters are also dual citizens residing in the
U.S. She has many relatives and friends that she maintains regular and frequent contact with in Iran.
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under Guideline C for foreign preference
and Guideline B for foreign influence. Clearance is denied. 
CASENO: 06-11569.h1
DATE: 06/30/2007
DATE:  June 30, 2007
In re:
--------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-11569
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
CAROL G. RICCIARDELLO
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive1
5220.6, dated January 2,1992, as amended and modified (Directive).
Item 2 at 35.2
Under a memorandum issued by Assistant Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communication, and3
Intelligence, Arthur L. Money, dated August 16, 2000, (Money Memorandum), a security clearance must be denied or
revoked for an Applicant with a foreign passport “unless the applicant surrenders the foreign passport.” 
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is 28 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since 1999 as a sales
associate. She immigrated to the U.S. in 1997 from Iran and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in
2003. She considers herself a dual citizen of Iran and the U.S. and intends on renewing her passport
in the future so she can travel to Iran. Her parents and sisters are also dual citizens residing in the
U.S. She has many relatives and friends that she maintains regular and frequent contact with in Iran.
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under Guideline C for foreign preference
and Guideline B for foreign influence. Clearance is denied. 
STATEMENT OF CASE
On August 28, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) stating it was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance.  The SOR, which is in essence the1
administrative complaint, alleges security concerns under Guideline B for foreign influence and
Guideline C for foreign preference.
In a sworn statement dated September 13, 2006, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations
and admitted all the allegations under both guidelines. Applicant elected to have her case decided
on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the government’s file of relevant material
(FORM) on March 14, 2007. The FORM was mailed to Applicant on March 15, 2007, and received
on March 21, 2007. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not provide additional information. The case
was assigned to me on May 24, 2007. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 28 years old and has worked for a federal contractor as a sales associate since
1999. She is single and has a college degree. She was born in Iran and immigrated to the U.S. in
1997, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2003. Applicant considers herself a dual citizen of
Iran and the U.S. and possesses an Iranian passport that was due to expire in December 1996. She
stated in her security clearance application: “I have this passport because I am a born citizen of Iran.
I will only use this passport when I have to visit my relatives in Iran.”  Applicant was provided with2
a copy of the “Money Memo.”  Applicant stated in interrogatories that she intends to renew and/or3
Item 5 at 6.4
Item 3.5
U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Humans Right and Labor, Country Report on Human Rights6
Practices-2005, dated March 8, 2006, (Report on Human Rights Practices)at 1; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of
Consular Affairs, Consular Information Sheet: Iran Dated April 3, 2006.
U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, Background Note: Iran, Dated October 20067
(Background Note) at 7.
President of the United States, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America, dated March8
2006 (President’s National Security Strategy) at 20.
3
obtain an Iranian passport in the future.  She has not surrendered her Iranian passport. She4
affirmatively stated she is not willing to renounce her dual citizenship with Iran. She traveled to Iran
in 2002 using her Iranian passport, but at that time she was not yet a U.S. citizen and would have had
no other choice. 
Applicant’s mother, father, sister, and uncle are dual citizens of the U.S. and Iran and reside
in the U.S. Another uncle and three cousins are citizens and residents of Iran. She has one cousin
who is a citizen of Iran and resides in the United Arab Emirates; three cousins, an uncle and aunt
who are citizens and residents of Italy; a cousin and friend who are citizens of Iran and reside in the
United Kingdom; a friend who is a citizen of Iran and resides in Canada; and a friend who is a citizen
and resident of Iran. Applicant checked a box saying her personal contact or correspondence with
each person listed above was casual and infrequent, excluding her parents and sister. She described
the frequency of the contact with the listed persons, excluding her parents and sister as monthly or
a few times a year, by -email or telephone. She provided no other information about the status of her
relationship with each person and what type of personal, familial, social or emotional obligation she
has with each person. One friend and a cousin whom she contacts monthly are citizens and residents
of Iran and are students. Others are employed in various positions. She provided no information
about her contact and relationship with her parents and sister. No information was provided as to
how often her parents and sister return to Iran or what type of family, financial, or other interests they
maintain there or whether they have any contact with the Iranian government.
Applicant has no financial interests in Iran. She provides charitable financial support to
“needy children” in Iran to support their education.5
Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in which
Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political authority is vested in
a learned religious scholar.  The U.S. has not had diplomatic relations with Iran since 1980.  The6 7
President’s National Security Strategy has stated that the United States “may face no greater
challenge from a single country than from Iran.”8
The U.S. Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as:
• Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
(WMD);
• Its support for and involvement in international terrorism;
Background Note at 8; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country9
Reports on Terrorism-2005, dated April 2006, (Reports on Terrorism) at 21.
Reports on Terrorism at 171 and 173.10
Reports on Human Rights Practices.11
U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Iran, dated October 10, 2006.12
4
• Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; 
• Its dismal human rights record; and
Iran’s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq.9
The U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the most active state sponsor of terrorism.
Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups.  10
The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses against the
Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary executions, including
of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary arrest and detention, including
prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech,
press, assembly, association, movement and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion;
official corruption; violence and legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and
religious minorities, and homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.  11
The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the risks of travel
to Iran. The children of Iranian citizens are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since
Iran does not recognize dual citizenship. As a result, U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained
and harassed by the Iranian government.  12
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to be considered in evaluating
a person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Included in the guidelines are disqualifying
conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) applicable to each specific guideline. Additionally,
each security clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based on the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the factors listed
in the Directive. Specifically these are: (1) the nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances; (2) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (3) the age of the applicant; (4) the
motivation of the applicant, and the extent to which the conduct was negligent, willful, voluntary,
or undertaken with knowledge of the consequences; (5) the absence or presence of rehabilitation; and
(6) the probability that the circumstances or conduct will continue or recur in the future. Although
the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome
determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured
against this policy guidance.
ISCR Case No. 96-0277 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 11, 1997).13
ISCR Case No. 97-0016 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 31, 1997); Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.14
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).15
ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995); Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.16
ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995); Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.17
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.18
Id.19
Id.; Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ E2.2.2.20
Executive Order 10865 § 7.21
5
The sole purpose of a security clearance determination is to decide if it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an applicant.  The government13
has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of proof is something less than a14
preponderance of evidence.  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an15
applicant to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance16
decision.  17
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard indicates that18
security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable19
doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be resolved
in favor of protecting such sensitive information.  The decision to deny an individual a security20
clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an21
indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of
Defense have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of all the evidence, I find the following adjudicative guidelines most
pertinent to the evaluation of the facts in this case:
Guideline C-Foreign Preference is a security concern because when an individual acts in such
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be
prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
Guideline B-Foreign Influence is a concern because a security risk may exist when an
individual’s immediate family, including cohabitants, and other persons to whom he or she may be
bound by affection, influence, or obligations are not citizens of the United States or may be subject
to duress. These situations could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the
compromise of classified information. Contacts with citizens of other countries or financial interest
in other countries are also relevant to security determinations if they make an individual potentially
vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure.
6
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those
which would mitigate security concerns, pertaining to the adjudicative guidelines are set forth and
discussed in the conclusions below. 
CONCLUSIONS
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards. I reach the
following conclusions regarding the allegations in the SOR.
Based on all the evidence, Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition (FP DC) E2.A3.1.2.1
(The exercise of dual citizenship) and FP DC E2.A3.1.2.2 (Possession and/or use of a foreign
passport) apply. Applicant was born in Iran and became a naturalized U.S. citizen. She has in her
possession an Iranian passport that although expired, she intends on renewing and using it in the
future to travel to Iran. She was provided a copy of the “Money Memo” and has chosen to retain her
passport. She considers herself a dual citizen and intends on exercising her dual status through use
of her passport. The possession and/or use of a foreign passport is an exercise of dual citizenship.
Both of the above disqualifying conditions apply.
I have considered all the mitigating conditions and especially considered Foreign Preference
Mitigating Condition (FP MC) E2.A3.1.3.1 (Dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship
or birth in a foreign country, FP MC E2.A3.1.3.2 (Indicators of possible foreign preference (e.g.
foreign military service) occurred before obtaining United States citizenship) and FP MC E2.A3.1.3.4
(Individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship),and conclude none apply.
Applicant has in her possession her Iranian passport that she intends on renewing and using in the
future. This is an exercise of dual citizenship that is based on her affirmative actions, vice her parents
citizenship or her birth in a foreign country. She retained the passport after becoming a U.S. citizen
and intends on doing so again. Thus, both FP MC E2.A3.1.3.1 and FP MC E2.A3.1.3.2 do not apply.
Applicant is unwilling to renounce her Iranian citizenship, so this mitigating condition can not be
applied. Under the “Money Memo” Applicant’s retention of her Iranian passport and intentions of
renewing it and using it in the future precludes her from obtaining a security clearance. I find under
the above analysis she has failed to mitigate the foreign preference concerns.
Based on all the evidence, Foreign Influence Disqualifying Condition (FI DC) E2.A2.1.2.1
(An immediate family member, or a person to whom the individual has close ties of affection or
obligation, is a citizen of, or resident or present in, a foreign country) applies. Applicant parents and
sister are immediate family members who are dual citizens of Iran and the U.S. Applicant maintains
regular monthly contact with various relatives and friends in Iran, and regular but less contact with
others.
I have considered FI DC E2.A2.1.3.8 (A substantial financial interest in a country, or in any
foreign-owned or-operated business that could make the individual vulnerable to foreign influence.)
Applicant’s monetary support to “needy children” in Iran is characterized as a charitable contribution
and not a financial interests. There is no evidence she has a financial interest in the organization.
Therefore, this disqualifying condition does not apply.
7
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions and especially considered Foreign Influence
Mitigating Condition (FI MC) E2.A2.1.3.1 (A determination that the immediate family member(s)
(spouse, father, mother, sons, daughters, brothers, sisters), cohabitant, or associate(s) in question
are not agents of a foreign power or in a position to be exploited by a foreign power in a way that
could force the individual to choose between loyalty to the person(s) involved and the United States),
and FI MC E2.A2.1.3.2 (Contacts and correspondence with foreign citizens are casual and
infrequent), and I conclude they do not apply. Applicant’s immediate family to include her parents
and sister are dual citizens of Iran and the U.S. No information was provided as to what type of
relationship or contact she has with her parents and sister. No information was provided as to what
their contact is with relatives in Iran, how often they travel to that country, whether they receive
government support and other relevant information. Insufficient information was provided to
determine that they do not have connections to the Iranian government or are not in a position to be
exploited by Iran in a way that could force Applicant to choose between loyalty to her family and the
U.S. Therefore, I find FI MC E2.A2.1.3.1 does not apply. It is presumed that her ties with her
immediate family are more than casual and infrequent. However, without additional information
about her personal relationships and ties to her other relatives and friends in Iran and elsewhere, it
cannot be presumed that it is casual and infrequent. Applicant carries the burden of providing factual
information about the ties she has to these people and has failed to do so. I find FI MC E2.A2.1.3.2
does not apply.
The nature of the country in this case, Iran, is an important factor based on its past history of
exploiting its citizens and those that are legally in its country. 
In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount concern. The
objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense assessment of a person’s
life to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance. Indeed,
the adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in considering the “whole
person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by the totality of their acts, omissions,
motivations and other variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful
analysis.
I considered all the evidence provided and also considered the “whole person” concept in
evaluating Applicant’s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national interests. I find Applicant has
failed to meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns raised by the foreign preference and foreign
influence  concerns. Therefore, I am persuaded by the totality of the evidence in this case, that it is
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Accordingly,
Guideline C and Guideline B are decided against Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 Foreign Influence (Guideline B) AGAINST APPLICANT
8
Subparagraph 1.a-m Against Applicant
Paragraph 2 Foreign Preference (Guideline C) AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a-c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2. d: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied.
Carol. G. Ricciardello
Administrative Judge
