KEYWORD: Foreign Preference; Foreign Influence
DIGEST: Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Applicant was born in the
United States. Because his parents are Israeli citizens, he also has Israeli citizenship. Applicant
obtained an Israeli passport in 2004, and used it to enter Israel the same year. Applicant renewed the
passport in 2006, and it will not expire until 2014. Applicant gave his Israeli passport to his
company’s facility security officer, who certified that if Applicant requests the return of his Israeli
passport, the FSO will document the facts and circumstances surrounding the return by an entry in
the Joint Personnel Adjudication System. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised
by his action to obtain recognition of his Israeli citizenship, and his exercise of a right of Israeli
citizenship. Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-19378.h1
DATE: 06/29/2007
DATE:  June 29, 2007
In re:
---------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-19378
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
EDWARD W. LOUGHRAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Applicant was born in the
United States. Because his parents are Israeli citizens, he also has Israeli citizenship. Applicant
obtained an Israeli passport in 2004, and used it to enter Israel the same year. Applicant renewed the
passport in 2006, and it will not expire until 2014. Applicant gave his Israeli passport to his
company’s facility security officer, who certified that if Applicant requests the return of his Israeli
passport, the FSO will document the facts and circumstances surrounding the return by an entry in
the Joint Personnel Adjudication System. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised
by his action to obtain recognition of his Israeli citizenship, and his exercise of a right of Israeli
citizenship. Clearance is denied.
Pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), as1
amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program  (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant. On December 28, 2006, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons1
(SOR) detailing the basis for its decision–security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign
Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) issued
on December 29, 2005, and implemented by the Department of Defense for SORs issued after
September 1, 2006. The revised guidelines were provided to Applicant when the SOR was issued.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 31, 2007, and elected to have a hearing before
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 5, 2007. A notice of hearing was
issued on April 12, 2007, scheduling the hearing for May 2, 2007. The hearing was conducted as
scheduled to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue
a security clearance for Applicant. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 10, 2007.
RULINGS ON PROCEDURE AND EVIDENCE
The Government offered five exhibits that were marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1
through 5, and admitted without objections.
Department Counsel requested administrative notice be taken of the facts contained in
Hearing Exhibits (HE) XVI and XVII. The source documents for the facts are U.S. Department of
State, Background Note: Israel, dated February 2007 (HE I); U.S. Department of State, Consular
Information Sheet: Israel, the West Bank and Gaza, dated February 8, 2006 (HE II); U.S. Department
of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2006: Israel and the occupied territories,
dated March 6, 2007 (HE III); U.S. Department of State, Travel Warning: Israel, the West Bank and
Gaza dated January 17, 2007 (HE IV); Congressional Research Service, CRS Report for Congress,
Israel: Background and Relations with the United States, updated November 14, 2006 (HE V);
Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage - 2005 (HE VI); National Counterintelligence Center,
Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage - 2000 (HE
VII); Interagency OPSEC Support Staff, Intelligence Threat Handbook, select pages (HE VIII); U.S.
Department of State, Background Note: China, dated January 2007 (HE IX); U.S. Department of
State, Consular Information Sheet: China, dated March 19, 2007 (HE X); U.S. Department of State,
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2006: China, dated March 6, 2007 (HE XI); U.S.
House of Representatives Select Committee Report, U.S. National Strategy and Military/Commercial
Concerns with the People’s Republic of China, dated January 3, 1999 (HE XII); Interagency OPSEC
Support Staff, Intelligence Threat Handbook, select pages (HE XIII); U.S. Department of State,
Background Note: Hong Kong, dated March 2007 (HE XIV); and U.S. Department of State,
Consular Information Sheet: Hong Kong SAR, dated August 1, 2006 (HE XV).
I took administrative notice of the facts contained in HE I through VI, IX through XII, XIV
and XV, as requested in HE XVI and XVII. In accordance with ISCR Case No. 03-21434 (App. Bd.
Tr. at 40, 60-61; GE 1.2
Tr. at 38, 40, 60-61; GE 1.3
Tr. at 35-37; GE 1; AE A, B.4
Tr. at 53-54, 61-62.5
4
Feb. 20, 2007), I did not take administrative notice of the facts contained in HE VI, VII, and XIII.
Those exhibits were remarked as Government Exhibits (GE) 3 through 5, and admitted.
Applicant testified and offered three exhibits that were marked Applicant Exhibits (AE) A
through C, and admitted without objections. The record was left open to allow Applicant an
opportunity to submit additional material. He did so in a timely manner. Applicant submitted his
letter and three character letters, which were marked AE D through G, and admitted without
objections. Department Counsel’s letter forwarding the three letters is marked HE XVIII.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following
findings of fact.
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for his current
employer since 2005. He is married with two children. Applicant has a bachelor’s degree from
college.  2
Applicant’s father was born in Iraq. He is an Israeli citizen, with permanent residence status
in the United States. Applicant’s mother was born in Yemen. She was an Israeli citizen who became
a U.S. citizen. She maintained dual citizenship with Israel. Applicant has two younger brothers.
Applicant, his two brothers, his wife, and his two children were all born in the United States.
Because his parents are Israeli citizens, Israel considered Applicant an Israeli citizen.  3
Applicant’s father and brother formerly lived and worked together for a company in China
and Hong Kong. They both left the job and no longer do business or live in China or Hong Kong.4
Applicant has extended family members in Israel, such as uncles and aunts. His parents told
him about 18 months ago that they intend at some point to move to Israel. Their projected date at that
time was about two years out. Since then, their plans have changed. Applicant’s father has health
issues and is not working. Applicant believes his parents would still like to retire to Israel at some
point, but they have no plans for the foreseeable future.5
Applicant as a child with his family, and later as an adult, would visit extended family
members in Israel every few years. He traveled to Israel in 1984, 1989, 1991, 1995, 1997, 2001, and
2004. On all his trips from 1984 through 2001, Applicant traveled only with his U.S. passport. In
2004, Applicant applied for and received an Israeli passport. Applicant used that passport on his
Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2.6
Tr. at 40-42.7
Tr. at 44; AE C.8
Tr. at 51-53.9
Tr. at 55-59.10
Tr. at 64.11
AE E-G.12
5
2004 trip to Israel. The passport had an expiration date of August 2005. Applicant renewed the
passport in August 2006. The passport now has an expiration date of 2014.6
Applicant obtained the passport for convenience. When he entered Israel with his U.S.
passport, he was questioned by the Israeli authorities as to why he had not served in the Israeli
military. Applicant estimated the most time this took was about 20 minutes. Applicant could have
continued to travel to Israel on a U.S. passport and suffered only minor inconvenience.7
On April 26, 2007, Applicant gave his Israeli passport to his company’s facility security
officer (FSO). The FSO certified that if Applicant requests the return of his Israeli passport, the FSO
will document the facts and circumstances surrounding the return by an entry in the Joint Personnel
Adjudication System (JPAS).8
Applicant testified he is willing to renounce his Israeli dual citizenship. He contacted the
Israeli Consulate to discuss what would be required to renounce his citizenship and/or relinquish his
passport. He has done nothing further to follow up on his expressed willingness to renounce his
Israeli citizenship.  Applicant had planned on visiting Israel this summer. He testified if he was9
granted a clearance, and he was unable to enter Israel on his U.S. passport, he would forego any trips
to Israel.  Applicant does not intend to ever move to Israel.10 11
Character letters on Applicant’s behalf from supervisors, co-workers, and associates praise
him for his dedication, integrity, and commitment to work and family. He is described as a well
respected, honorable man who lives by his word, and a loyal citizen who takes pride in serving the
U.S. Government in the role of a contractor. They recommend him for a security clearance.12
Israel is a parliamentary democracy in the middle east. The Israeli government generally
respected the human rights of its citizens, but there are some issues with respect to its treatment of
Palestinian detainees, conditions in some detention and interrogation facilities, and discrimination
against Israel’s Arab citizens. The U.S. government issued a travel warning to U.S. citizens about
travel in Israel, the West Bank, and the Gaza Strip, dated January 17, 2007, noting its concerns about
terrorist attacks in those areas targeting U.S. citizens. Israel and the United States participate in joint
military planning and combined exercises, and have collaborated on military research and weapons
development. Commitment to Israel’s security and well being has been a cornerstone of U.S. policy
in the Middle East since Israel’s creation in 1948, and the two countries are bound closely by historic
HE I-VIII, XVI; GE 3-5.13
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).14
Id. at 527.15
Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960). 16
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).17
Id.; Directive, ¶ E2.2.2.18
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7.19
6
and cultural ties as well as mutual interests. Israel is an active collector of economic and industrial
information, including proprietary and classified information.  13
POLICIES
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  As Commander in Chief, the President has14
“the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national security and to determine
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person
access to such information.”  The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to15
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  An applicant has the ultimate burden of16
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her
security clearance. The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant17
should be allowed access to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such
sensitive information.  The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a18
determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the applicant has not
met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a
clearance.  19
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines set forth potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and
mitigating conditions (MC) under each guideline. Additionally, each security clearance decision
must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based on the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the adjudicative process factors listed in the
Directive and AG ¶ 2(a).
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those
which would mitigate security concerns, are set forth and discussed in the conclusions section below.
CONCLUSIONS
August 16, 2000 memorandum by Assistant Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications,20
and Intelligence, entitled “Guidance to DoD Central Adjudication Facilities (CAF) Clarifying the Application of the
Foreign Preference Adjudicative Guideline”; ISCR Case No. 03-10380 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006).
7
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards discussed above.
I reach the following conclusions regarding the allegations in the SOR.
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are
harmful to the interests of the United States. This raises a security concern under the foreign
preference guideline.
Based on all the evidence, Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition (FP DC) 10(a)
(exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or
through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession
of a current foreign passport) and FP DC 10(b) (action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign
citizenship by an American citizen) apply in this case. 
I have considered all the Foreign Preference Mitigating Conditions (FP MC), and I especially
considered FP MC 11(a) (dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign
country), FP MC 11(b) (the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship),
and FP MC 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority,
or otherwise invalidated). Applicant was always considered a dual citizen even though he was born
in the United States, because his parents were Israeli citizens. If Applicant had done nothing to
actively exercise his dual citizenship, FP MC 11(a) would be totally applicable. I do not give him
as much credit under FP MC 11(a), since he actively exercised his dual citizenship by obtaining and
using an Israeli passport while a U.S. citizen. Applicant has verbalized a willingness to renounce
dual citizenship, so FP MC 11(b) is applicable. He has done nothing to actually follow up on his
expressed willingness to renounce his Israeli citizenship. 
Applicant gave his Israeli passport to his FSO, which potentially invokes FP MC 11(e). Prior
to the implementation of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, it was a requirement that Applicant’s
clearance be denied or revoked unless Applicant surrendered the foreign passport to the issuing
authority.  This provision was not included in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, possibly because20
surrender of a passport to the issuing country could signal the country that this is an individual who
has or is seeking a security clearance. Since the revised guidelines are new, this disqualifying
condition has not yet been interpreted by the Appeal Board. The mitigating condition requires that
the passport be “destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.”
The passport was not destroyed, so that language does not come into play. The key phrases are
“surrendered,” “cognizant security authority,” and “or otherwise invalidated.” I accept that
“cognizant security authority” includes the FSO, so Applicant has satisfied that part of the mitigating
condition. The issue is whether Applicant’s actions constituted a “surrender,” within the meaning
of the mitigating condition. Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, Tenth Edition, defines
surrender as:
8
1a: to yield to the power, control or possession of another upon compulsion or
demand  <~ed the fort>   b: to give up completely or agree to forgo esp. in favor of
another   2a: to give (oneself) up into the power of another, esp. as a prisoner   b: to
give (oneself) over to something (as an influence) ~ vi: to give oneself up into the
power of another : YIELD   syn see RELINQUISH
I find the definition under 1b, to be the most appropriate, “to give up completely or agree to forgo
esp. in favor of another.” The last phrase in the mitigating condition, “or otherwise invalidated,”
sheds light on the interpretation of surrender. It is clear that the mitigating condition requires the
passport to be invalidated. In this case the FSO has possession of the passport, but will return it to
Applicant whenever Applicant desires. The FSO is doing little more than acting as a safety deposit
box for Applicant. The Israeli passport has not been invalidated. I do not find this constitutes a
complete surrender of the passport. FP MC 11(e) is not totally applicable. 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has divided
loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person,
group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure
or coercion by any foreign interest. This raises a security concern under the foreign influence
guideline. Adjudication under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to,
such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain
protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
I considered Foreign Influence Disqualifying Condition (FI DC) 7(a) (contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion), and FI DC 7(b) (connections to a foreign person,
group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign
person, group, or country by providing that information). 
Applicant’s father and brother no longer live or work in China. No disqualifying condition
is raised by their former presence in China. 
Applicant’s father is a citizen of Israel, but a permanent resident of the United States. His
mother is a dual citizen of Israel and the United States. Israel is an active collector of economic and
industrial information, including proprietary and classified information. I find FI DC 7(a) and FI DC
7(b) have been established. 
I considered all the Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions (FI MC), and especially FI MC
8(a) (the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely that
the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.), and FI MC 8(b) (there
is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign
9
person, group, organization, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest).
Applicant’s father is an Israeli citizen, and his mother is a dual citizen, but both live in the
U.S. His parents would like to retire in Israel at some point. They have no set plans, and may never
do so. Any movement to Israel at this point is speculative. Applicant was born in this country, and
his immediate family are all native-born U.S. citizens. I find that it is unlikely that Applicant will
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his parents or Israel, and the
interests of the United States. FI MC 8(a) is applicable. I am unable to find FI MC 8(b) because of
Applicant’s actions to obtain recognition of his Israeli citizenship, and his exercise of a right of
Israeli citizenship, by obtaining and using an Israeli passport.
Whole Person Analysis
The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk. Available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in
reaching a determination. In evaluating Applicant’s case, I have considered the adjudicative process
factors listed in the Directive and AG ¶ 2(a). I have also considered all the evidence, and every
finding of fact and conclusion discussed above. 
Applicant was born in the U.S. to Israeli citizens. His two brothers were also born in the U.S.
Applicant is married to a native-born U.S. citizen, and they have two children. His mother became
a U.S. citizen, but maintains dual citizenship with Israel. His father is still an Israeli citizen. Both
Applicant’s parents live in the U.S. While they would like to eventually move to Israel, they have
no immediate plans to move. Applicant’s character evidence described him as a well respected,
honorable man, and a loyal citizen, with dedication, integrity, and commitment to work and family.
Applicant obtained an Israeli passport in 2004, because it made it slightly easier to pass
through Israel’s immigration lines. When he did so, he obtained official recognition of his Israeli
citizenship. His renewed Israeli passport will not expire until 2014. Applicant gave his Israeli
passport to his company’s FSO, who certified that if Applicant requests the return of his Israeli
passport, the FSO will document the facts and circumstances surrounding the return by an entry in
the JPAS. This somewhat mitigates security concerns because the U.S. will know when Applicant
is utilizing the passport. It does not totally mitigate security concerns because the passport remains
valid, and Applicant can access it at any time. Applicant has verbalized a willingness to renounce
his Israeli citizenship, but has done nothing to actually follow up on that verbalization. While actual
renunciation of dual citizenship is not required to satisfy the pertinent mitigating condition, it is easy
for one to say he or she is willing to renounce dual citizenship, when one may never actually intend
to do anything about the dual citizenship. In this case, Applicant’s intentions and motivation for
retaining his Israeli passport and citizenship are unclear. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating all the evidence
in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security
concerns, but has not mitigated the security concerns based on his foreign preference.
10
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1.  Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2.  Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance
is denied.
Edward W. Loughran
Administrative Judge
