KEYWORD: Financial
DIGEST: Applicant’s failure to address his long-standing delinquent debts precludes a finding
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him access to classified information.
Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-14455.h1
DATE: 06/28/2007
DATE: June 28, 2007
In Re:
----------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-14455
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
JOSEPH TESTAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
J. Theodore Hammer, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant’s failure to address his long-standing delinquent debts precludes a finding that it
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him access to classified information. Clearance
is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On August 31, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for applicant and recommended referral to
an Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on November 11, 2006, and elected to have his
case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the
Government's written case (FORM) on or about March 2, 2007. Applicant did not file a response to
the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 46 year old employee of a defense contractor.
SOR Allegation 1a: Applicant is indebted to this creditor in the approximate amount of
$1,418.00. This credit card debt is past-due.
SOR Allegation 1b: Applicant is indebted to this creditor in the approximate amount of
$4,551.00. This credit card debt is past-due.
SOR Allegation 1c: Applicant is indebted to this creditor in the approximate amount of
$3,733.00. This credit card debt is past-due.
SOR Allegation 1d: Applicant is indebted to this creditor in the approximate amount of
$2,305.00. The credit card debt is past-due and was placed for collection.
SOR Allegation 1e: Applicant is indebted to this creditor in the approximate amount of
$2,529.00. This credit card debt is past-due.
SOR Allegation 1f: In February 2006, applicant told an investigator that he had stopped
making payments on his “credit debts” in September 2002. He further stated that he would initiate
contact with each of his creditors by April 2006 in order to address the debts.
Applicant believes that if he initiates contact with his creditors, his accounts may be1
“reactivated,” which may result in additional fees and interest. He further believes that he can
avoid this risk if he is in a position to resolve his accounts in full when he initiates contact. 
3
SOR Allegation 1g: In his July 2006 response to interrogatories sent to him by DOHA,
applicant stated it was not in his best interests to contact the creditors referred to in SOR Allegations
1.a. through 1.e. until he was prepared to resolve the accounts in full.  He further stated “I will assure1
you that it is my intention to pay all this debt over the next 18 months.”
In his response to the SOR, applicant stated he intends to pay off one of his delinquent debts
in November, another one in January, and then continuing paying them off one by one until all five
are paid.
CONCLUSIONS
The evidence establishes that applicant has five debts, totaling $14,536.00, that have been
past-due for many years. Applicant’s failure to honor his financial obligations  reflects adversely on
his judgment and reliability, and suggests he cannot be relied upon to safeguard classified
information. Disqualifying Conditions E2.A6.1.2.1 (a history of not meeting financial obligations)
and E2.A6.1.2.3 (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) are applicable.
Once the Government established a prima facie case under Guideline F, the burden shifted
to applicant to show he has reformed. Applicant failed to meet his burden. Although on at least two
occasions he stated he intended to begin addressing the five credit card debts, he offered no credible
evidence that he (1) has followed through with his stated intention and taken any meaningful action
to address any of them, (2) is in a position to significantly reduce this past-due indebtedness anytime
soon, or (2) is unlikely to experience additional financial difficulties. Applicant does not qualify for
any Mitigating Condition, and Guideline F is found against him.
FORMAL FINDINGS
PARAGRAPH 1: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for applicant.
____________________________
4
Joseph Testan
Administrative Judge
