KEYWORD: Drugs; Alcohol
DIGEST: Applicant has used marijuana and psilocybin mushrooms for many years until as recently
as 2005. Additionally, she has had a history of alcohol abuse that has continued as recently as March
2006, and she continues to regularly consume alcohol. No credible, independent evidence was
offered to prove Applicant’s rehabilitation.  Mitigation has not been shown. Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-13216.h1
DATE: 06/15/2007
DATE: June 15, 2007
In Re:
---------------------------
SSN: -------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-13216
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MARTIN H. MOGUL
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant has used marijuana and psilocybin mushrooms for many years until as recently as
2005. Additionally, she has had a history of alcohol abuse that has continued as recently as March
2006, and she continues to regularly consume alcohol. No credible, independent evidence was
offered to prove Applicant’s rehabilitation.  Mitigation has not been shown. Clearance is denied.
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On March 8, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 (as amended) and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Exhibit 1)  to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant
and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be
denied or revoked.
Applicant  filed a notarized response, dated March 28, 2007, to the allegations set forth in
the SOR, (Exhibit 3). She requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a
hearing. 
On April 12, 2007,  Department Counsel prepared the Department's written case. A complete
copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, and she was given the
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant
filed a response to the FORM which was received on May 16, 2007. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on May 24, 2007.
Department Counsel offered 10 documentary exhibits (Exhibits 1-10), and Applicant offered
one documentary exhibit, a one page response to the FORM (Exhibit A). All exhibits have been
admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
In the SOR, the Government alleges that a security risk may exist under Adjudicative
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and  Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of the Directive. The
SOR contains four allegations, 1.a., through 1.d., under Guideline H and one allegation, 2.a., under
Guideline G. Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, with a partial denial under 1.d. The
admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including Applicant's
Answer to the SOR, the FORM, and the admitted documents, and upon due consideration of that
evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 26 years old. She is employed as an interior designer by a defense contractor,
and she seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense sector.
She is not married and has no children (Exhibit 4).
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance because
3
she has abused illegal substances. 
Applicant has admitted using marijuana approximately 100 times during the period from
March 2000 through April 2005. She engaged in the illegal purchase of the marijuana that she used.
Applicant also used psilocybin mushrooms from March 2000 through April 2005. Finally, she used
the United States  postal service to mail marijuana that she purchased outside of the U.S. (Exhibits
1, 3, A).
She claims that since May 2005, when she graduated college, she no longer uses illegal
substances ans she does not intend to use them in the future (Exhibits 3, A).   
Paragraph 2 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption). 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance
because she abuses alcohol to excess.
Applicant has admitted consuming alcohol to the point of impaired judgement from the age
of 20 through March 2006 (Exhibits 3, 6). 
She claims that she has now modified her drinking behavior, and although she now drinks
two to three glasses of wine or cocktails per week, she does not drink to the point of impaired
judgement and does not intend to abuse alcohol in the future (Exhibits 3, A). 
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. Accordingly, the Department of
Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992 Directive, has set forth policy factors which must be given
"binding" consideration in making security clearance determinations. These factors should be
followed in every case according to the pertinent guideline. However, the factors are neither
automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can they supersede the Administrative
Judge's reliance on his own common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature and
the ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision. Because each security clearance case presents
its own unique facts and circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm
of human experience, or apply equally in every case.
As set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, "In evaluating the relevance of
an individual's conduct, the [Administrative Judge] should consider the following factors [General
Factors]:
a. The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation
c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior changes
4
g. The motivation for the conduct
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The eligibility guidelines established in the DoD Directive identify personal characteristics
and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question of whether it is "clearly consistent
with the national interest" to grant an Applicant's request for access to classified information.
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to civilian
workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours a day.
The Government is therefore appropriately concerned where available information indicates that an
Applicant for clearance may be involved in acts of alcohol abuse and criminal conduct that
demonstrates poor judgement, untrustworthiness or unreliability on the Applicant's part.
The DoD Directive states, "Each adjudication is to be an overall common sense
determination based upon consideration and assessment of all available information, both favorable
and unfavorable, with particular emphasis placed on the seriousness, recency, frequency, and
motivation for the individual's conduct; the extent to which conduct was negligent, willful,
voluntary, or undertaken with the knowledge of the circumstances or consequences involved; and,
to the extent that it can be estimated, the probability that conduct will or will not continue in the
future." The Administrative Judge can only draw those inferences or conclusions that have a
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record. The Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature. Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, "Any determination under this order...shall be
a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant concerned."
CONCLUSIONS
It is the Government's responsibility to present substantial evidence to support the finding
of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant's conduct and the continued holding of a
security clearance. If such a case has been established, the burden then shifts to the Applicant to go
forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome or
outweigh the Government's case. The Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all appropriate legal
precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly above, I conclude the following
with respect to the allegation set forth in the SOR:
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial evidence that
Applicant has used illegal drugs (Guideline H) and that she used alcohol to excess (Guideline G).
Applicant, on the other hand, has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or
mitigation which is sufficient to overcome the Government's case against her. 
5
Since this matter is being decided without a hearing, my evaluation is necessarily limited to
the contents of the various documents that are found in the case file. Applicant has submitted
documents, in which she avers that she will no longer use illegal drugs or consume alcohol to excess.
However,  when I consider the recency and frequency of her marijuana usage and her alcohol abuse,
combined with the fact that no independent evidence was offered to prove Applicant’s rehabilitation,
I find that it is too soon to determine that Applicant’s lifestyle and behavior have changed
sufficiently to establish that she would not fall into the pattern of drug use and alcohol abuse in the
future.
(Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case. Applicant's improper
and illegal drug abuse, including the use of marijuana, is of concern, especially in light of her desire
to have access to the nation's secrets.  Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to her illegal substance
abuse clearly falls within Drug Involvement Disqualifying Condition  DC25 (a), any drug abuse, and
DC (c), illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution.
Based on the recency and frequency of the marijuana usage and lack of  independent evidence
of rehabilitation, as discussed above,  I cannot conclude that Applicant’s conduct can apply to any
of the Mitigating Conditions (MC) at this time.
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial evidence that
Applicant used illegal drugs for many years under Guideline H. Applicant, has not introduced
sufficient, credible evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation.  Accordingly, Paragraph 1,
Guideline H, is concluded against  Applicant.
(Guideline G -Alcohol Consumption) 
Applicant has consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication for a period of approximately
six years , as recently as March 2006.  While she has averred that she will not overuse alcohol in the
future, she continues to imbibe alcoholic beverages on a regular basis, as described above.  
The Government established that DC 22 (c) applies, Applicant has engaged in habitual or
binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment.  Applicant has not demonstrated
credible evidence to support a conclusion that she has reformed her habit and no longer consumes
alcohol to excess. Therefore, I cannot conclude that any MC is applicable to Guideline G. Paragraph
2 is found against Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Paragraph 1. Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against  Applicant 
6
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against  Applicant 
Paragraph 2. Guideline G: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
