KEYWORD: Foreign Influence
DIGEST: Applicant is a native born, United States citizen. His mother, father, three sisters, and two
of his children were born in the United States and are U.S. citizens.  Applicant’s wife’s family,
including her mother, father, three sisters, and one brother are citizens and residents of Taiwan.
None of these family members, belong to, participate in, or are active with any government agency
of Taiwan.  They are not in a position to be exploited by Taiwan in a way that could force Applicant
to choose between loyalty to these family members and his loyalty to the United States.  Applicant’s
strong attachment to the United States makes it highly unlikely that he would respond favorably to
any efforts to act against United States interests.  Mitigation has been shown. Clearance is granted.
 
CASENO: 06-21931.h1
DATE: 06/06/2007
DATE: June 6, 2007
In Re:
--------------------------
SSN: ------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-21931
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MARTIN H. MOGUL
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
William F. Savarino, Esq.
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a native born, United States citizen. His mother, father, three sisters, and two
of his children were born in the United States and are U.S. citizens.  Applicant’s wife’s family,
including her mother, father, three sisters, and one brother are citizens and residents of Taiwan.
None of these family members, belong to, participate in, or are active with any government agency
of Taiwan.  They are not in a position to be exploited by Taiwan in a way that could force Applicant
to choose between loyalty to these family members and his loyalty to the United States.  Applicant’s
strong attachment to the United States makes it highly unlikely that he would respond favorably to
any efforts to act against United States interests.  Mitigation has been shown. Clearance is granted.
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On November 27, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 (as amended by Executive Orders 10909, 11328 and 12829) and Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992 (as amended by Change 4), issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant. DOHA recommended referral to
an Administrative Judge to conduct proceedings and determine whether clearance should be granted
or denied. The SOR was based on Foreign Influence (Guideline B) concerns because of the foreign
residency and/or citizenship of close family members.
Applicant filed a notarized response, dated December 8, 2006, to the allegations set forth in
the SOR, and requested a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge. On February 8, 2007, the
case was initially assigned to another Administrative Judge to conduct a hearing and issue a written
decision, but on February 20, 2007, the case was reassigned to this Administrative Judge. Pursuant
to formal  Notice of Hearing, dated March 21, 2007, a hearing was held on March 29, 2007. 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 13 documentary exhibits (Government Exhibits
1-13) and no witnesses were called. Applicant  offered nine documentary exhibits (Exhibits A-I) and
offered his own testimony and that of four other witnesses. The transcript (Tr) was received on April
13, 2007. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
In the SOR, the Government alleges that a security risk may exist under Adjudicative
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Directive. The SOR contains five allegations, 1.a., through
1.e., under Guideline B. Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. The admitted
allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including Applicant's
Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant and the witnesses, and
upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
3
Applicant is 47 years old. He is employed as a Principal Systems Engineer by a United States
defense contractor, and he seeks to retain a security clearance that he has held without interruption
since 1978. 
Applicant was born in the United States and is a U. S. citizen. He served in the United States
Navy from 1977 to 1981, and he received an Honorable Discharge. Applicant’s mother, father, three
sisters, and one brother-in-law are also citizens and residents of the United States.
Applicant’s wife of 14 years was born in Taiwan and is still a citizen of Taiwan.  She became
a permanent resident in the United States in 1993, but because she moved back to Taiwan with her
husband for eight years, and has now been back for less than 3 years, she has not yet qualified to
apply for United States citizenship.  She intends to apply for U.S. citizenship when she is eligible.
She received a Master’s Degree in United States law  from a U. S. university. Applicant and his wife
have three children; two were born in the United States and one in Taiwan, but they are all United
States citizens.
Guideline B (Foreign Influence)
Applicant’s wife’s family, including her mother, father, three sisters, and one brother are
citizens and residents of Taiwan. They all work together as owners and operators of two restaurants
in Taiwan. None of these family members, belong to, participate in, or are active with any national
government agency of Taiwan. His wife remains very close to her family, and travels to Taiwan
every summer with her children to visit them.  She communicates with some members of her family
on a regular basis, averaging three or four times a week. Applicant talks to his wife’s family
approximately every two months, and he has seen them for a week in 2005 and 2006.
From 1996 to 2004, Applicant and his wife resided in Taiwan. Applicant worked on a
Department of Defense contract; specifically he was an operations and maintenance person for a
training system sold with the approval of  the United States Government  to the Taiwanese Air Force.
During that period he continued to maintain his U. S. security clearance, and he also had a Taiwanese
security clearance. He traveled back to the United States each year that he lived in Taiwan.
During the period he worked in Taiwan, Applicant made some friendships with three
Taiwanese Air Force personnel, now retired. He continues contact with them on a casual basis, by
email every other month.  
Applicant does not have any financial interest in Taiwan. All of his significant financial
holdings are in the United States. His wife, as one of five siblings, has a potential interest in the two
restaurants in Taiwan, but the value is unknown. 
Mitigation
Four individuals testified on Applicant’s behalf. All of them work for the same company as
Applicant, and all have known him for many years. They all spoke extremely positively about
Applicant as an honest, trustworthy, and hardworking individual.
4
Current Status of Taiwan
Since Applicant's wife’s family members are citizens and residents of Taiwan, and he has had
other contacts there as well, it is important to consider the status of Taiwan at this time.
Taiwan has an elected democratic government. It has the 17  largest economy in the world,th
and it is a leading producer of high-technology goods. It engages in industrial and economic
espionage. Proprietary information technology is high on the Taiwanese list of targeted information
to be acquired by their agents from foreign governments and businesses. There are 23 million
Taiwanese citizens. Their per capita income in 2005 was $15,000, cited by their president in a speech
that he presented as economic progress under his administration. Although the United States now
recognizes Taiwan as part of the PRC as “one-China” it continues to maintain strong unofficial
relations with Taiwan.
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines that must be carefully
considered in evaluating an individual's security eligibility and making the overall common sense
determination required. The Administrative Judge must take into account the conditions raising or
mitigating security concerns in each area applicable to the facts and circumstances presented.
Although the presence or absence of a particular condition for or against clearance is not
determinative, the specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be
measured against this policy guidance, as the guidelines reflect consideration of those factors of
seriousness, recency, motivation, etc. 
The adjudication process is based on the whole person concept. All available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, is to be taken into account in reaching a decision as
to whether a person is an acceptable security risk.
Each adjudicative decision must also include an assessment of: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, and the extent of
knowledgeable participation; (3) how recent and frequent the behavior was; (4) the individual's age
and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6) the presence or
absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence (See Directive, Section E2.2.1. of Enclosure 2).  
BURDEN OF PROOF
Initially, the Government must prove controverted facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons.
If the Government meets that burden, the burden of persuasion then shifts to the applicant to
establish his security suitability through evidence of refutation, extenuation or mitigation sufficient
to demonstrate that, despite the existence of disqualifying conduct, it is nevertheless clearly
5
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue the security clearance. Assessment of an
applicant's fitness for access to classified information requires evaluation of the whole person, and
consideration of such factors as the recency and frequency of the disqualifying conduct, the
likelihood of recurrence, and evidence of rehabilitation.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the U.S. Government that is predicated upon trust and confidence. Where facts proven by the
Government raise doubts about an applicant's judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness, the applicant
has a heavy burden of persuasion to demonstrate that he or she is nonetheless security worthy. As
noted by the United States Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531
(1988), "the clearly consistent standard indicates that security-clearance determinations should err,
if they must, on the side of denials."
CONCLUSIONS
Under Guideline B, a security risk may exist when an individual's immediate family,
including cohabitants, and other persons to whom he is bound by affection, influence or obligation,
are not citizens of the United States or may be subject to duress. Based on the evidence of record,
the Government has established an initial  reason to deny Applicant a security clearance because of
Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
Applicant‘s wife’s mother, father, three sisters and brother are citizens and residents of
Taiwan. The Taiwanese citizenship and residency of Applicant's family create the potential for
foreign influence that could result in the compromise of classified information because it makes
Applicant potentially vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure. The possession of such ties
raises a security concern sufficient to require Applicant to present evidence in rebuttal, extenuation,
or mitigation sufficient to meet his burden of persuasion that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him. This Applicant has done.
  The evidence of Applicant’s wife’s family, who are citizens and residents of Taiwan, comes
within Disqualifying Condition (DC) 7(a) contact with foreign family members, who are citizens and
residents in a foreign country, if that contact creates heightened risk of foreign exploitation,  pressure
or coercion. 
The primary factors in mitigation that I have considered include: Applicant is a native-born
United States citizen; all his blood relatives, including his mother, father, three sisters, and two
children were born in the United States and are U.S. citizens; his third child was born in Taiwan but
is also a United States citizen; Applicant served honorably in the United States Navy for four years,
and he has held a security clearance since 1978; there is no government involvement of Applicant’s
wife’s family in Taiwan; finally, Applicant expressed strong feelings concerning the United States.
While Applicant’s wife is still a citizen of Taiwan, she plans to apply for United States citizenship
when eligible. After considering all of these factors, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated any
previous security concerns, thereby demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security
to grant him a security clearance.
6
Based on the nature of the overall record and the totality of the evidence,  I have determined
that Applicant’s wife’s family in Taiwan does not constitute an unacceptable security risk, and
Mitigating Condition (MC) 8 (b) applies, there is no conflict of interest because Applicant has such
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that he can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
 
        After considering all of the evidence of record on these issues, I conclude that the mitigating
evidence substantially outweighs the evidence supporting the SOR and even in the unlikely event
pressure was exerted upon Applicant to compromise classified information, he would resist it and
would  report the incident to the proper authorities. 
 
        On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has overcome the Government's evidence opposing
his request for a security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.: For  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.: For  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.: For  Applicant 
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
